Case Number: 20013850.01
Case Title:  RAINER, WESLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Rainer Wesley-20013850.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
WESLEY RAINER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
          File No. 20013850.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
  
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  :        Head Notes:     1402.20, 1402.40, 2700,  
 
 
  : 
2907, 3202 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Wesley Rainer, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against John Deere Dubuque Works, self-insured employer, and 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa (SIF).  This case came before the undersigned for an 
arbitration hearing on October 26, 2022.  The case proceeded to a live video hearing via 
Zoom.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted, and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, Defendant Employer Exhibits A through F, and Defendant Second Injury 
Fund Exhibits AA and BB.  All exhibits were received without objection. 
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at hearing.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  All parties 
served their post-hearing briefs on January 6, 2023, at which time this case was 
deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Mar-31  14:44:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
employment, on October 23, 2019; 
 
2. Whether claimant’s left arm injury is barred under Iowa Code section 85.23;  
 
3. The nature and extent of permanent disability;  
 
4. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded;  
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27; 
 
6. Whether claimant has established a compensable claim against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa, including whether claimant has established a qualifying 
first injury to the right hand and left leg; 
 
7. If so, the extent of functional loss to the first qualifying injury(ies); 
 
8. The commencement date of SIF benefits, if any are awarded;  
 
9. The extent of claimant's entitlement, if any, to benefits from the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa;  
 
10. The extent of defendant SIF’s entitlement to a credit under Iowa Code section 
85.64; and  
 
11. Whether costs should be assessed against any party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
On the date of hearing, Wesley Rainer was a 34-year-old individual residing in 
Dubuque, Iowa. (Hearing Transcript, page 9)  Rainer graduated from South Shore High 
School in Chicago, Illinois in 2006. (Hr. Tr., p. 10)  He would go on to study business 
management, marketing, and criminal justice at Malcolm X Community College from 
2006 to 2009, and at Northeast Iowa Community College (NICC) from 2010 to 2011. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 10-11)  He did not obtain a degree from either institution; however, he did 
obtain a welding certificate from NICC in 2019. (Hr. Tr., p. 11) 
 
During high school, Rainer worked as a customer service representative for At 
Your Services.  In this role, claimant scanned tickets and escorted people to their seats 
at Chicago Bulls and Chicago White Sox games. (See Hr. Tr., p.13)  After graduating 
high school, claimant worked as a parking attendant and valet driver for Inner Parking. 
(See Hr. Tr., pp.13-14)   

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
In approximately 2011, Rainer moved to Dubuque, Iowa and accepted a position 
with McDonald’s.  At first, Rainer received customer orders and worked in the kitchen.  
He eventually became a manager-in-training. (Hr. Tr., p. 14)  Rainer alleges he 
sustained a qualifying injury to his right hand and thumb while working at McDonald’s. 
 
Immediately prior to working for the defendant employer, Rainer was employed 
at Nordstrom. (Hr. Tr., p. 15)  Rainer started out loading and unloading freight in the 
outbound department.  He would eventually become an assistant manager. (See Hr. 
Tr., pp. 15, 69)  Rainer alleges he sustained a qualifying injury to his left knee while 
working at Nordstrom on September 27, 2018.  This injury was the subject of a prior 
arbitration decision, Rainer v. Nordstrom, File No. 5068419 (Arb. December 8, 2021). 
Rainer began working as a full-time welder for the defendant employer on July 8, 
2019. (See Exhibit BB)   Rainer’s job duties included lifting, carrying, and tack-welding 
pieces of metal.  He also utilized a hammer and/or mallet to strike the various metal 
parts. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 16-19)  Rainer testified the parts he worked with weighed 
between 40 and 100 pounds. (Hr. Tr., p. 17) 
On October 23, 2019, Rainer was working as a welder, loading an idler guide into 
a robot.  When he attempted to undo a magnet that was attached to a fixture, Rainer 
experienced a “pop” and immediate swelling in his right wrist. (See Hr. Tr., p. 28; JE1, p. 
31)  Shortly thereafter, Rainer presented to John Deere’s on-site occupational health 
clinic with his supervisor, Todd Latham. (JE1, p. 32)  Rainer reported, “I locked in the 
magnet to the fixture using a twisting motion, then when I went to lift the fixture with the 
hoist I felt this sudden pain in my right wrist/forearm extending to the right elbow.” (Id.)  
He described difficulty twisting and rotating his right wrist and forearm. (Id.)   
Amanda Addison, NP restricted claimant from lifting more than five pounds.  She 
also instructed Rainer to avoid repetitive lifting. (JE1, p. 29)  The defendant employer 
subsequently assigned Rainer to light duty work for a period of six weeks. (See Hr. Tr., 
p. 28)  Rainer testified that after the six weeks he returned to his normal job and 
developed elbow pain within one week. (Hr. Tr., p. 28)  Around this time, Rainer was 
“bumped” to a new workstation by another employee with more seniority.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 
19-20)  Due to the issues he was experiencing in his right wrist and elbow, Rainer 
started using his left arm more than his right. (Hr. Tr., pp. 28-29)  Rainer asserts he 
developed symptoms in his left arm while compensating for the right arm injury. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 30) 
In the matter at hand, claimant is asserting he sustained injuries to the right 
elbow, right wrist, and left arm on October 23, 2019.  The defendant employer stipulates 
that Rainer sustained a right elbow injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment, on October 23, 2019. (Hearing Report)  However, the defendant employer 
disputes whether any other condition is causally related to the October 23, 2019, date of 
injury.   
Rainer first reported work-related left elbow pain at his December 4, 2019, 
appointment with occupational health services. (JE1, p. 26)  In response to his claim of 
work-relatedness, Ms. Addison told Rainer that he would need to fill out additional 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
paperwork to claim a left arm injury. (See JE1, p. 26)  Rainer was informed that a nurse 
would notify him when to come in and fill out the appropriate paperwork. (JE1, p. 26)   
By December 11, 2019, Rainer was reporting that his left elbow pain was worse 
than his right elbow pain. (JE1, p. 24)  He also described tightness and pain over his left 
acromioclavicular joint area. (Id.)  Rainer continued to complain of left elbow pain at his 
follow-up appointments on December 18, 2019, and January 2, 2020. (JE1, pp. 22-24) 
When conservative care failed to relieve Rainer’s symptoms, Ms. Addison 
referred him for an orthopedic evaluation with Todd Johnston, M.D. (JE1, p. 23)  
Notably, it appears defendant only referred claimant to Dr. Johnston for right elbow 
pain. (See JE3, pp. 39, 51)   
Rainer presented for an initial evaluation with Dr. Johnston on January 9, 2020. 
(JE3, p. 39)  During the appointment, Rainer described his job duties and the October 
23, 2019, work injury.  The medical record provides: 
He is a welder. The weight of the torch is about 2-3 pounds but he gets into 
awkward positions. The pain started the end of October. Taking a part out 
and felt a sharp pain at the ulnar aspect of the wrist that shot up to his elbow.  
Using a magnetic clamp.  The wrist was getting better but the elbow was 
getting worse.  The wrist is still not 100% per patient.  The pain is achy at 
the wrist.  Numbness and tingling is a small part of this.  Patient complains 
more of the achy pain. 
Patient states he is new to clamps and the specific tools at this current job.  
He is doing repeated forceful work with instruments. 
(JE3, p. 41)  Rainer relayed that both elbows were bothering him, but he considered the 
right elbow pain to be worse. (JE3, p. 39)  While the focus of the examination was on 
the right elbow, Rainer also described tingling in his fingers, bilaterally. (Id.)  Dr. 
Johnston assessed Rainer with biceps tendinitis and synovial plica syndrome. (JE3, p. 
41)  To address the pain, Dr. Johnston administered an intra-articular cortisone injection 
to the right elbow and assigned temporary lifting restrictions. (JE3, p. 42)  Dr. Johnston 
also noted that Rainer “had some Extensor Carpi Ulnaris tendinitis of the wrist that 
appears to be resolved at this time.” (JE3, p. 41)   
On January 16, 2020, Rainer returned to Ms. Addison and reported feeling a “jolt” 
up in his right elbow while using a hammer. (JE1, pp. 20-21)  Ms. Addison subsequently 
restricted Rainer from using a hammer. (Id.)  At hearing, Rainer testified that he started 
hammering with his left hand following the October 23, 2019, work injury. (See Hr. Tr., 
p. 30) 
Rainer reported only temporary relief from the injection at his February 14, 2020, 
follow-up appointment with Dr. Johnston. (JE3, p. 44)  He continued to complain of 
lateral and medial elbow pain, numbness in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd digits of the right hand, 
and stiffness of the elbow upon waking. (Id.)  On examination, Rainer had a positive 
Tinel’s sign, and a positive carpal tunnel compression test on the right. (JE3, p. 45)  Dr. 
Johnston diagnosed claimant with lateral epicondylitis of the right elbow and carpal 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
tunnel syndrome.  Dr. Johnston explained that claimant’s symptoms are related to an 
overuse syndrome of the extensor tendons of the wrist and, over time, the damage to 
the tendon can become permanent. (JE3, p. 46)  Dr. Johnston recommended and 
administered a wrist injection to help determine whether the inflammation was reversible 
or if claimant would need surgical intervention in the future. (Id.)  Dr. Johnston also 
administered a repeat injection to the right elbow. (Id.) 
At the same appointment, Rainer reported similar symptoms in his left wrist and 
elbow, “due to trying to modify activity by using left side to minimize aggravating the 
right sided complaints.” (JE3, p. 46)  In response, Dr. Johnston recommended he utilize 
wrist and elbow splints. (JE3, pp. 45-46) 
On March 19, 2020, Rainer returned to Dr. Johnston. (JE3, p. 48)  After 
discussing both the right elbow and right wrist in the history of present illness section, 
Dr. Johnston noted, “This is a work comp injury.” (Id.)  Again, Rainer demonstrated a 
positive Tinel’s sign and a positive carpal tunnel compression test on the right. (Id.)  Dr. 
Johnston discussed with Rainer how the goal over the past few visits had been to try to 
relieve his pain without surgical intervention.  Dr. Johnston felt that they were making 
progress with the right elbow; however, the right wrist was not improving with non-
surgical treatment.  As a result, Dr. Johnston recommended a right carpal tunnel 
release. (JE3, p. 49) 
Despite the fact Rainer’s right elbow condition was improving, Dr. Johnston 
opined that it would be wise to operate on the right elbow and right wrist conditions at 
the same time, as the right elbow condition would likely need surgery down the road. 
(JE3, p. 49)  Following the discussion, Dr. Johnston ordered an EMG of the right wrist 
for further evaluation and returned Rainer to full duty work to see how the elbow would 
respond to increased activity. (Id.) 
Following Dr. Johnston’s recommendations, Dietmar Grentz, M.D., requested a 
causation opinion on Rainer’s carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE3, p. 51)   
Initially, Rainer was scheduled to return to Dr. Johnston’s office on April 16, 
2020; however, the defendant employer had not concluded its investigation into whether 
the right carpal tunnel syndrome was causally related to the original work injury prior to 
the scheduled appointment.  As such, the April 16, 2020, appointment was cancelled. 
(JE3, p. 50; see JE1, p. 13)   
Rainer was laid off effective May 4, 2020, due to the Covid-19 pandemic. (See 
JE1, p. 15) 
In a report, dated May 14, 2020, Dr. Johnston responded to Dr. Grentz’s letter 
and opined that Rainer’s neurologic complaints were not caused by “his twisting injury” 
on October 23, 2019. (JE3, p. 52)  Notably, Dr. Johnston explained that surgery was 
necessary to address claimant’s right elbow epicondylitis, and any surgery to the elbow, 
“would significantly exacerbate his carpal tunnel symptoms and thus make it directly 
related to his treatment for the work injury.” (Id.)  Given the potential for significant 
exacerbation, Dr. Johnston strongly recommended that claimant undergo a carpal 
tunnel release at the time of the right elbow surgery.  (Id.) 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
Based on Dr. Johnston’s opinion, the defendant employer denied causation for 
the right carpal tunnel syndrome and any additional treatment pertaining to the same. 
(JE3, p. 153)   
Dr. Grentz next examined Rainer on May 18, 2020. (See JE1, pp. 12-14)  At the 
appointment, Rainer reported that his right lateral elbow pain had resolved, but the 
medial elbow pain still occurred with movement. (JE1, p. 12)  He also reported 
intermittent numbness in his 2nd, 3rd, and 4th digits of the right hand. (Id.)  Overall, 
Rainer considered himself 75 to 80 percent better. (Id.)  Following the appointment, Dr. 
Grentz produced a second letter to Dr. Johnston noting claimant’s improvement since 
March 2020 and inquiring as to whether Dr. Johnston still believed that right elbow 
surgery was necessary. (See JE1, pp. 13-14) 
Dr. Johnston re-examined claimant and addressed Dr. Grentz’s second letter on 
May 20, 2020.  In the medical record, Dr. Johnston indicated that claimant’s medial 
elbow pain would subside with rest; however, he noted it could take anywhere from six 
to twelve weeks. (JE3, p. 55)  He reiterated that claimant would still be at high risk of 
having his elbow pain return once he returned to work, and he may eventually require 
surgery. (JE3, p. 56)  Nevertheless, Dr. Johnston opined that surgery was no longer 
appropriate due to claimant’s improvement. (JE3, p. 57) 
At the end of the May 20, 2020, medical record, Dr. Johnston provided a 
summary of his recent opinions. (JE3, p. 56)  With respect to claimant’s right wrist, Dr. 
Johnston reiterated that the neurologic complaints were not caused by the acute injury 
on October 23, 2019.  However, Dr. Johnston also opined that the numbness and 
tingling in claimant’s hands may be due to the repetitive motions he performed at work, 
such as swinging a hammer. (JE3, p. 55)  Next, Dr. Johnston opined the medial pain in 
claimant’s elbow seemed to be from repetitive valgus stress, which he felt was related 
to his work duties.  He further opined that the condition was fairly benign and should 
resolve without much complication.  Lastly, Dr. Johnston opined that claimant’s lateral 
elbow pain had resolved and surgery would not be helpful at that point in time.  That 
being said, Dr. Johnston expressed concern that claimant’s pain could reappear once 
he returned to full-duty work.  As such, Dr. Johnston recommended claimant for a short 
trial of work hardening to occur between June 2, 2020, through July 6, 2020. (JE3, p. 
56; see Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Rainer returned to Dr. Johnston on July 16, 2020, reporting an increase in his 
symptoms since participating in work hardening. (JE3, p. 59) Despite the increase in 
symptoms, Dr. Johnston opined that outside of surgery, he did not have any additional 
treatment to recommend for claimant.  He noted that surgery would be helpful but was 
not necessary at that time. (JE3, p. 60)  Lastly, Dr. Johnston opined that if and when 
claimant returned to work and experienced a flare-up in his symptoms, claimant’s case 
would need to be reopened and surgery would be necessary. (JE3, p. 61) 
While claimant never returned to his normal, full-duty position, he nevertheless 
experienced a flare-up in his symptoms in August of 2020.  On August 12, 2020, Rainer 
returned to occupational health services and discussed his then current condition with 
Ms. Addison. (JE1, pp. 9-10)  Rainer reported tingling in his fingertips, “suggestive of 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
Possible Carpal tunnel[.]” (JE1, p. 10)  Rainer believed the condition was due to his 
work activities, “from a job that he was switched to after his current injury right wrist and 
elbow pain started, in which he says he had to do a lot of hammering.” (Id.)  Ms. 
Addison’s notes provide that Rainer reported his symptoms at various medical 
appointments, but he did not make an official workers’ compensation claim. (Id.) 
Rainer underwent physical therapy from August 18, 2020, through November 4, 
2020, for his right elbow. (See Ex. 1, p. 4)  Unfortunately, physical therapy increased 
claimant’s pain. (See JE3, p. 63) 
When Rainer returned to Dr. Johnston on October 12, 2020, he reported 8 out of 
10 pain in his right elbow. (JE3, p. 62)  He further reported that he could not handle any 
extended arm gripping due to the same. (Id.)  Dr. Johnston informed Rainer that his only 
option left was surgery. (Id.)   
Dr. Johnston performed a right tennis elbow release on November 10, 2020. 
(JE3, p. 65; Ex. 2, p. 13)  Between November 10, 2020, and May 20, 2021, Rainer 
presented to several follow-up appointments with Dr. Johnston.  On January 25, 2021, 
Rainer reported pain on resisted wrist extension.  For the first time since surgery, Dr. 
Johnston assessed carpal tunnel syndrome of the right wrist. (JE3, p. 69)  On March 29, 
2021, Rainer described intermittent tingling in all fingers except his thumb. (JE3, p. 73)  
His right grip strength was 80 percent when compared to the left, and Dr. Johnston 
noted substantial weakness. (See JE3, pp. 74-75) 
After a period of recovery, Dr. Johnston placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement as of May 20, 2021, and recommended permanent restrictions of no lifting 
or pulling with an overhand or back-handed grip, and no use of power tools that 
weighed over 20 pounds. (JE3, p. 78)  Based on a loss of grip strength, Dr. Johnston 
assigned seven percent right upper extremity impairment, or four percent whole person 
impairment. (JE3, p. 79) 
For the first time since being laid off in May of 2020, Rainer returned to work with 
permanent restrictions on May 21, 2021. (See JE1, p. 8)  Unfortunately, the permanent 
restrictions prevented Rainer from returning to his welding position.  Rainer testified that 
he was supposed to return to work as a forklift operator; however, the defendant 
assigned him to work in the supermarket area as a “picker” instead. (See Ex. B, p. 4; 
JE1, p. 6; Hr. Tr., p. 22)  As a picker, claimant stacked small nuts and bolts into totes 
and then placed said totes on a designated shelf. (Ex. B, p. 4; Hr. Tr., p. 23)  Rainer 
testified he used his left hand to pick up an average of 40 to 80 totes per day. (See JE1, 
p. 6; Ex. B, p. 4)  Claimant asserts these job duties caused him to experience pain in his 
hands and wrists.   
Notably, as long as he was not using an overhand grip, Rainer did not have any 
restrictions in place that would have prevented him from lifting the totes with his right 
hand. (See JE3, p. 78)  Dr. Johnston also told Rainer it was “safe” for him to use his 
right arm moving forward. (JE3, p. 77) According to Rainer, a representative from UAW 
or the “Shop Committee” told him not to use his right hand. (See JE1, p. 6; Ex. B, p. 4) 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
In any event, Rainer presented to occupational health services on June 28, 2021, 
complaining of left wrist pain that had been present since June 10, 2021. (JE1, p. 1; Ex. 
B, p. 4)  He described the pain as “constant achiness, some popping and a ‘pinching’ 
pain at its worst.” (JE1, p. 6)  He explained that due to his right wrist restrictions, he had 
only been using his left hand to pick up totes.  Claimant also reported that he woke up 
on June 21, 2021, and was unable to make a fist. (Id.; see Ex. B, p. 4)  Given his 
symptoms, Rainer elected to take the week of June 21, 2021, off from work. (JE1, p. 6)  
Edwin Chelli, M.D. assessed left wrist pain and ordered Active Release Technique. (Id.) 
On June 29, 2021, Rainer presented to Josh Nagle, D.C., with complaints of 
continuous aching, numbing, tightness, and tingling in the left wrist. (JE2, p. 35)  He 
described using his left hand more than usual at work as he had a restriction on using 
his right wrist. (Id.)  Dr. Nagle assessed myositis of the left hand and performed ART. 
(JE2, p. 36) 
After reviewing claimant’s medical records and an incident investigation report 
conducted by safety analyst Dan Johnson, Dr. Chelli concluded that claimant’s work 
was not a substantial contributing factor to his left hand and wrist complaints. (See Ex. 
B, p. 2; JE1, p. 3)  According to the defendant employer, Dr. Chelli reached his 
conclusion for the following reasons: 
1. Mr. Rainer has only worked nine days on the allegedly offending job between 
June 1, 2021 and June 28, 2021. 
 
2. Mr. Rainer has been doing break-in training during all of June so the pace of his 
work was slow. 
 
3. Mr. Rainer had a helper on some of the days in June. 
 
4. Mr. Rainer has a hot dog stand where he works from 3:30 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on 
Tuesday through Saturday. 
 
5. Mr. Rainer mentioned that when he woke up on June 21, 2021 his left hand and 
wrist problems were more severe, but he had not worked since Thursday, June 
17, 2021. 
(Ex. B, p. 2)  As such, the defendant employer formally denied liability for the alleged 
left upper extremity injury on July 8, 2021. (Ex. B, pp. 2-3) 
In response to the opinions of Dr. Johnston and Dr. Chelli, Rainer sought and 
obtained an independent medical examination with Robin Sassman, M.D. (See Ex. 2)  
The examination occurred on August 1, 2022. (Ex. 2, p. 9)  As part of the IME, Dr. 
Sassman also performed a records review.  She issued her report on September 28, 
2022. (Id.)   
As part of her IME, Dr. Sassman was asked to address causation with respect to 
all alleged injuries.  Based on the mechanism of injury, a lack of prior symptoms, and a 
lack of injury history, Dr. Sassman opined that the October 23, 2019, work injury was a 
direct and causal factor in the right wrist and elbow symptoms. (Ex. 2, p. 17)   

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
Dr. Sassman’s causation opinion is consistent with claimant’s credible testimony 
and the initial medical records.  Rainer credibly testified he did not have any issues with 
his right wrist prior to October 23, 2019. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  However, since the date of 
injury, Rainer has consistently described the presence of pain and/or numbness in his 
right wrist.  When describing his injury to the medical staff at occupational health 
services, Rainer specifically described a “pop” and immediate pain in his right wrist.  
(See JE1, pp. 12-32)  Following the work injury, claimant reported pain that originated in 
his wrist and shot up to his elbow. (See JE3, p. 39)  At his initial orthopedic evaluation 
with Dr. Johnston, claimant reported numbness in his wrist as well as tingling in his 
fingers. (JE3, pp. 39, 41)  Dr. Johnston diagnosed claimant with carpal tunnel syndrome 
of the right wrist on February 14, 2020. (JE3, p. 45) 
Defendant relies on the opinions of Dr. Johnston to dispute causation between 
the October 23, 2019, work injury and the diagnosis of right carpal tunnel syndrome.   
When comparing the competing medical opinions, I note that Dr. Johnston’s 
causation opinion is not accompanied by any meaningful explanation.  This is troubling 
when considering Dr. Johnston’s opinions have been inconsistent.   
At the February 14, 2020, appointment, Dr. Johnston diagnosed claimant with 
right carpal tunnel syndrome and administered an injection to treat the same.  He 
explained that the condition was related to an overuse syndrome of the extensor 
tendons and, over time, the damage to the tendon can become permanent. (JE3, p. 46)  
On March 19, 2020, after discussing the condition of both the right elbow and right wrist 
injuries in the history of present illness section, Dr. Johnston noted, “This is a work 
comp injury.” (JE3, p. 48)  Following his examination, Dr. Johnston concluded that 
Rainer’s right elbow condition was improving with conservative treatment and, as a 
result, did not require surgical intervention.  Conversely, Dr. Johnston noted that 
claimant’s right wrist condition was not improving and recommended surgical 
intervention for the same. (JE3, p. 51)  Dr. Johnston then hypothesized that claimant’s 
elbow would likely flare up once he returned to full-duty work and require surgical 
intervention.  Given the likelihood that claimant’s elbow would someday require surgical 
intervention, Dr. Johnston told claimant it would be a good idea to operate on both 
conditions at the same time. 
Then, in his May 14, 2020, letter, Dr. Johnston reached the opposite conclusion, 
noting, “My chief concern in assessing his carpal tunnel is that I believe he has now 
reached the point where conservative measures for his lateral epicondylitis have failed 
and I am going to recommend surgery.” (JE3, p. 52)  He further provided, “My strong 
opinion, at this point, is that when he undergoes surgery for his elbow he should have 
carpal tunnel release, regardless of causation, given the potential for significant 
exacerbation in the post-surgical period.” (Id.)   
Without reexamining claimant between March 19, 2020, and May 14, 2020, Dr. 
Johnston changed his opinion regarding which condition required surgical intervention 
at that time.  Dr. Johnston would go on to change his opinion once more following an 
updated letter from Dr. Grentz, dated May 18, 2020, and a follow-up examination on 
May 20, 2020. (See JE3, p. 57) 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
Additionally, while Dr. Johnston opined that the neurologic complaints were not 
caused by the acute, “twisting injury” on October 23, 2019, he also opined that the 
numbness and tingling in claimant’s hands may be due to the repetitive motions he 
performed at work, such as swinging a hammer. (JE3, p. 55)   
In comparison, Dr. Sassman clearly expressed her opinion that the October 23, 
2019, incident was a direct and causal factor in bringing about claimant’s right wrist and 
elbow symptoms.  Dr. Sassman’s opinion is consistent with the medical records in 
evidence demonstrating claimant developed right wrist symptoms immediately following 
the October 23, 2019, work injury.  I find that the greater weight of the evidence 
indicates Rainer sustained an injury to his right wrist on October 23, 2019. 
Like Dr. Johnston, Dr. Sassman assigned permanent impairment to the right 
upper extremity based on a loss of grip strength. (Id.)  Dr. Sassman estimated 
claimant’s loss of grip strength at 19 percent. (Ex. 2, pp. 17-18)  Utilizing Table 16-34 on 
page 509 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
this loss of grip strength equates to 10 percent upper extremity impairment.  Dr. 
Sassman assigned an additional 1 percent impairment for loss of flexion, and 1 percent 
impairment for sensory deficit related to the surgical scar in the distribution of the ulnar 
nerve. (Id.) 
Dr. Sassman briefly addressed the differences between the impairment ratings in 
this case. (Id.)  According to Dr. Sassman, Dr. Johnston only assigned impairment for 
loss of grip strength and not for loss of range of motion in the right wrist or right elbow, 
or numbness over the surgical scar.  Because of these differences, Dr. Sassman 
argued that her impairment rating was more consistent with the AMA Guides and 
reflective of Rainer’s status as of August 1, 2022. (Id.)  I agree and accept Dr. 
Sassman’s impairment rating as the most accurate and convincing in the evidentiary 
record.   
Rainer is asserting he sustained the left arm injury as sequela of the stipulated 
October 23, 2019, work injury.  In this respect, claimant asserts the left arm symptoms 
worsened over time while compensating for the right arm injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 30) 
With respect to the alleged left arm injury, Dr. Sassman opined: 
Regarding the left elbow, he has symptoms of ulnar neuropathy on the left.  
He indicated that these symptoms began after the right upper extremity 
injury when he was using the right arm more, especially with lifting 40-80 
totes per day.  Therefore, I would consider the left upper extremity 
symptoms to be a sequela of the original injury. 
(Ex. 2, p. 17)  Again, Dr. Sassman’s opinion is consistent with claimant’s credible 
testimony and the contemporaneous medical records.   
Immediately following the work injury, occupational health services restricted 
claimant from lifting anything weighing more than five pounds with his right hand.  They 
further instructed claimant to avoid repetitive lifting. (JE1, p. 29)  Then, shortly after the 
stipulated work injury, defendant employer reassigned claimant from working on “center 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
body and Idler guides” to the next station over, called “marriage bar.” (Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20)  
In the marriage bar position, claimant welded center bodies and idler guides together. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 20)  Claimant testified that he compensated for his right arm injury by using 
his left arm more frequently during this time period.   (Hr. Tr., pp. 28-29)   
The medical records in evidence reveal Rainer first reported left elbow pain at his 
December 4, 2019, appointment with occupational health. (JE1, p. 26)  By December 
11, 2019, Rainer was reporting that his left elbow pain was worse than his right. (JE1, p. 
24)  He would go on to report left elbow pain at his follow-up appointments in January, 
February, March, April, and May of 2020.  (JE1, pp. 9-23)  He also described his left 
arm symptoms when presenting to Dr. Johnston. (See JE3, p. 46)   
Rainer was laid off, or off work during a period of recovery, between May 2020 
and May 2021. (See Hr. Tr., p. 22)  When he returned to work on May 21, 2021, he did 
so with permanent restrictions for the right arm. These restrictions prevented him from 
working as a welder.  As such, defendant assigned claimant work that involved sorting 
parts and stacking shelves. (Hr. Tr., p. 22)  After one month of working in this position, 
claimant presented to occupational health services and reported left arm symptoms that 
were similar to the symptoms he described prior to the May 4, 2020, layoff.  
Of the two expert reports to address causation for the left arm injury, I do not find 
Dr. Chelli’s opinion to be convincing.  I reach this conclusion for several reasons.  First, 
the evidentiary record does not actually contain the causation opinion discussed in the 
defendant employer’s July 8, 2021, letter.  Second, the alleged opinion only addresses 
whether claimant’s work between June 1, 2021, and June 28, 2021, was a substantial 
contributing factor in bringing about his left arm complaints.  It does not address the 
October 23, 2019, injury, or the potential impact of the work claimant performed 
between October 23, 2019, and May 4, 2020.   
For the sake of argument, if the undersigned accepts that the left arm injury had 
to occur between June 1, 2021, and June 28, 2021, Dr. Chelli’s opinion would still not 
be convincing as it fails to address the most basic question of whether the act of lifting 
and carrying 20-pound totes, 40-80 times per shift, with the left arm only could cause or 
contribute to claimant’s left arm condition. 
 
Although Dr. Sassman did not provide a great deal of analysis to support her 
causation opinion, her opinion is nevertheless based on claimant’s credible reporting 
and her review of the medical records in evidence.  Importantly, Dr. Sassman’s opinion 
is not limited to the work claimant performed between May 21, 2021, and June 28, 
2021.  Having found claimant to be a credible witness, I accept Dr. Sassman’s 
causation opinion as the most accurate and convincing in the evidentiary record.  I 
further find that the greater weight of the evidence indicates Rainer sustained a sequela 
injury to the left arm because of his inability and/or reluctance to use his right arm 
following the October 23, 2019, work injury. 
 
Dr. Sassman opined that Rainer has not reached MMI for the right wrist and left 
upper extremity conditions.  After expressing concern for a TFCC or SL ligament tear, 
Dr. Sassman recommended an MRI of the right wrist to determine if any ligament injury 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
has occurred. (Ex. 2, p. 20)  She also recommended an EMG of the left upper extremity 
to further evaluate the potential left ulnar neuropathy at the elbow. (Id.) 
 
The evidentiary record supports a finding that claimant is not at maximum 
medical improvement as it relates to the right wrist and left arm conditions.  I find Dr. 
Sassman’s report, including her conclusion that claimant is not at MMI, to be the most 
convincing of the medical reports.  Because Rainer is not at MMI, the issue of 
permanency is not ripe for adjudication. 
 
On the hearing report, the defendant employer asserted that, pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.23, claimant is barred from recovery for the left upper extremity injury.  
However, the defendant employer makes no argument regarding the same in its post-
hearing brief.  As such, I find the defendant employer failed to carry its burden of 
proving claimant failed to give notice regarding the left upper extremity injury.    
 
Rainer requests ongoing medical treatment for his right wrist and left elbow 
conditions.  Having found claimant carried his burden of proving both injuries are 
causally related to the October 23, 2019, work injury, I further find that claimant is 
entitled to ongoing medical treatment for the same.   
 
For Second Injury Fund purposes, Rainer has alleged an initial qualifying injury to 
the right hand occurred on June 24, 2011, while working for McDonald’s.  Rainer 
testified he sustained a laceration to the base of his right thumb when he reached into a 
dish rack and encountered an upward facing knife. (Hr. Tr., pp. 26-27; see Ex. 3, p. 28)  
Claimant presented to the emergency department at Mercy Medical Center with 
complaints of sensory decrease on the ulnar thumb and weakness in flexion.  The 
laceration was irrigated, closed with sutures, bandaged, and splinted. (See Hr. Tr., p. 
27)  
Brian Adams, M.D., performed a nerve exploration and repair on June 30, 2011. 
(See Hr. Tr., p. 66; Ex. 3, p. 29; Ex. 4, p. 40)  Dr. Adams repaired the radial digital nerve 
and the flexor pollicis longus tendon. (See Ex. 3, p. 29; Ex. 4, p. 40)  He was eventually 
released without any restrictions. (See Hr. Tr., p. 66)  Rainer did not seek any additional 
treatment for his right thumb after August 2011.   
At hearing, Rainer testified to ongoing issues with his right thumb.  He asserts 
that he has had to change the way he lifts and/or holds certain items due to a loss of 
range of motion. (See Hr. Tr., p. 46)   
Rainer sought an independent medical examination from Mark Taylor, M.D. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 66)  Based on range of motion deficits, Dr. Taylor assigned three percent (3%) 
impairment to the right upper extremity as a result of the June 30, 2011, injury.   
 
Rainer has also alleged a qualifying injury to the left knee that occurred on 
September 27, 2018, while working for Nordstrom. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 27, 66)  On the date 
of injury, Rainer was attempting to pick up some boxes that had fallen to the floor.  
When he stood up from a squatting position, he felt a “pop” and immediate pain in his 
left knee.  Diagnostic imaging revealed tearing of the posterior horn and body of the 
medial meniscus. (See Hr. Tr., p. 27; Ex. 3, p. 28)  Rainer’s left knee required a partial 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
meniscectomy.  He reached maximum medical improvement and was released without 
restrictions on February 8, 2019. (See Ex. 4, p. 40)  Claimant’s surgeon, Scott 
Schemmel, M.D., assigned two percent left lower extremity impairment as a result of the 
September 27, 2018, left knee injury. (See Ex. 4, p. 40)  Dr. Taylor agreed with the 
impairment rating assigned by Dr. Schemmel. (Ex. 4, p. 42) 
Claimant filed a workers’ compensation claim following the September 27, 2018, 
injury, seeking benefits from Nordstrom and the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. (Ex. 3)  He 
alleged the June 24, 2011, right hand and thumb injury as a first qualifying injury.  The 
case came on for hearing before the undersigned on April 23, 2021.  In the arbitration 
decision, dated December 8, 2021, the undersigned accepted Dr. Taylor’s three percent 
impairment rating to the right hand and Dr. Schemmel’s seven percent impairment 
rating to the left knee.  The findings were affirmed on appeal to the commissioner.  
At hearing, Rainer testified his left knee continues to “pop” and lock up. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 47)  To address the ongoing complaints, Rainer uses ice packs and over-the-counter 
pain medication. (Hr. Tr., p. 71) 
 
I find claimant has carried his burden of proving a first qualifying injury for 
Second Injury Fund purposes.  Having found claimant sustained permanent impairment 
as a result of the right elbow injury occurring on October 23, 2019, I similarly find 
claimant carried his burden of proving a second qualifying injury for Second Injury Fund 
purposes.  However, the Fund correctly asserts Rainer has not yet reached MMI for the 
October 23, 2019, work injury and, as such, he is not entitled to any payments from the 
Fund at this time.  It is currently unknown whether the injuries to the right wrist and the 
sequela injury to the left upper extremity will result in permanent impairment.  As such, 
the issues of permanency, the extent of credit to which the Second Injury Fund of Iowa 
is entitled, and the extent of industrial disability, if any, is not ripe for adjudication.   
Costs will be assessed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained injuries, which 
arose out of and in the course of his employment, to his right wrist and left arm. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp., v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers' compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma. The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes of 
nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body. Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence. Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable. Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however. St. Luke's 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury. Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
An employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury if the employee 
sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability that is a proximate 
result of the original injury. Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 5029834 (Appeal 
February 15, 2012).  The Iowa Supreme Court held long ago that “where an accident 
occurs to an employee in the usual course of his employment, the employer is liable for 
all consequences that naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Oldham v. 
Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 266 N.W. 480, 482 (1936). 
A sequela can be an after effect or secondary effect of an injury. Lewis v. Dee 
Zee Manufacturing, File No. 797154, (Arb. September 11, 1989).  A sequela can take 
the form of a secondary effect on the claimant's body stemming from the original injury. 
For example, where a leg injury causing shortening of the leg in turn alters the 
claimant's gait, causing mechanical back pain, the back condition can be found to be 
a sequela of the leg injury. Fridlington v. 3M, File No. 788758, (Arb. November 15, 
1991). 
Following review of the entirety of the evidentiary record, and after giving 
significant consideration to the medical opinions in evidence, I determined claimant 
carried his burden of proving the right wrist and left arm conditions are causally related 
to, or sequela of, the October 23, 2019, work injury.   
Claimant is seeking alternate medical care consisting of ongoing treatment of his 
right wrist and left arm conditions.  More specifically, claimant is requesting a referral to 
an orthopedic specialist for his right and left arm complaints, an MRI of the right wrist, 
and an EMG of the left wrist.  Defendant employer denied liability for these two 
conditions and is offering no treatment for the conditions at this time.   

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Iowa Code section 85.27. Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Having found claimant carried his burden of proving the right wrist and left arm 
conditions are causally related to, or sequela of, the October 23, 2019, work injury, I 
further find claimant is entitled to ongoing medical care to address the same. Iowa Code 
section 85.27.   
The next issue in this case is whether claimant has reached MMI for his right 
wrist and left arm conditions. The Iowa Supreme Court has described MMI as 
“stabilization of the condition or at least a finding that the condition is ‘not likely to remit 
in the future despite medical treatment.”’ Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 
779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (citation omitted). 
In the matter at hand, no physician has placed claimant at MMI with respect to 
the right wrist or left arm conditions.  As a result, I found claimant has not reached MMI 
for either condition.  I therefore conclude claimant's claim for permanent disability is not 
yet ripe for determination.  I find that recommendations for treatment exist and that such 
treatment should be undertaken before a determination of claimant's permanent 
disability occurs. 
The question then becomes whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability 
benefits at this time. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has specifically noted that a claimant's healing period 
terminates whenever the first of three factors in Iowa Code section 85.34(1) is met. 
Evenson v. Winnebago Industries. Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2016). The factors are 
whether (1) “the employee has returned to work,” (2) “it is medically indicated that 
significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated” (MMI), or (3) “the employee is 
medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar to the employment in 
which the employee was engaged at the time of injury.” Iowa Code § 85.34(1). 
It is well settled in Iowa that a healing period may be intermittent. Waldinger 
Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 
1986). Healing period may terminate and then begin again. Willis v. Lehigh Portland 
Cement Co., I-2 Iowa Ind. Comm'r Decisons 485 (Review Reopening 1984); Clemens v. 
Iowa Veterans Home, I-1 Iowa Industrial Comm'r Decisions 35 (Review Reopening 
1984); Riesselman v. Carroll Health Center, III Iowa Ind. Comm'r Report 209 (App. 
1982); Junge v. Century Engineering Corp., II Iowa Industrial Comm'r Report 219 (App. 
1981). In multiple healing period scenarios, permanent partial disability is due and 
payable after the end of the first healing period and this is the time interest on unpaid 
benefits begins. Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
 
Claimant returned to work for the defendant employer in May 2021.  Claimant's 
full-time status as of the date of the evidentiary hearing does not qualify for temporary 
total, temporary partial, or healing period benefits.  He is in a unique position where he 
is not at MMI, but he is also not entitled to a running award of temporary benefits at this 
time. 
Rainer seeks an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  Iowa 
Code section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met. First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye. Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury. Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury. Iowa 
Code section 85.64 
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability. See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
In this case, Rainer alleges he sustained first qualifying injuries to his right hand 
on June 24, 2011, and to his left knee on September 27, 2018.  Rainer relies upon the 
expert medical opinions of Dr. Taylor to support his contentions and to establish 
permanent functional impairment of the right hand and left knee.  It has previously been 
established that claimant suffered a three percent functional loss of use of his right hand 
and a two percent functional loss of use of his left knee. Rainer v. Nordstrom & Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa, File No. 5068419 (Arb. December 8, 2021).  As such, I found 
claimant carried his burden of proving he sustained first qualifying injuries.   
Having found claimant also carried his burden of proving permanent disability to 
the right elbow as a result of the October 23, 2019, work injury, I concluded claimant 
carried his burden of proving a second qualifying injury for purposes of his claim against 
the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  Iowa Code section 85.64. 
However, the Fund correctly points out that the extent of claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent disability benefits related to the October 23, 2019 injury, cannot be 
determined at this time as claimant has not reached MMI for all conditions stemming 
from the October 23, 2019, work injury.  Assessing claimant's industrial disability for 
some but not all of his work-related conditions could result in piecemeal litigation with 
confusing and potentially conflicting results.  As such, I find Rainer’s claim against the 
Fund is not yet ripe for determination.   
Finally, claimant seeks an award of costs.  Claimant seeks the cost of his filing 
fee, totaling $103.00. (Ex. 5)  Costs are awarded at the discretion of the agency. Iowa 
Code section 86.40.   
The Second Injury Fund Act does not provide for costs to be paid by the Fund. 
Iowa Code section 85.64. Additionally, subsection 2 of Iowa Code section 85.66, which 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 17 
 
codifies the creation of the Fund, specifically states, in pertinent part “[M]oneys collected 
in the second injury fund shall be disbursed only for the purposes stated in this 
subchapter, and shall not at any time be appropriated or diverted to any other use or 
purpose.” The plain language of Iowa Code section 85.66 does not allow for the 
assessment of costs against the Fund. Houseman v. Second Injury Fund, File No. 
5052139 (Arb. Aug. 8, 2016): see Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, at 845 (Iowa 2015) (declaring an agency's authority to tax 
costs cannot go beyond the scope of the powers delegated in the governing statute). 
Claimant brought a successful petition in arbitration.  I conclude it is appropriate 
to assess costs in some amount.  Exercising my discretion, I conclude that it is 
appropriate to assess claimant's filing fee of $103.00 to the defendant employer.  No 
costs will be assessed against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant employer shall provide claimant ongoing medical care for his right 
arm, right wrist, and left arm conditions. 
Defendant employer shall pay the future medical expenses of claimant 
necessitated by the work injury. 
Defendant employer shall reimburse claimant's costs in the amount of one 
hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
Defendant employer shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __31st _ day of March, 2023. 
 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            MICHAEL J. LUNN  
 
 
 
 
 
                                DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
Dirk Hamel (via WCES) 
Meredith Cooney (via WCES) 
 
 

RAINER V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 18 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
