Case Number: 22013997.01
Case Title:  SOTO, LUIS V. KLOECKNER METALS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Soto Luis - 22013997.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LUIS SOTO, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
    File No.   22013997.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
KLOECKNER METALS,   
  : 
              ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
TRAVELERS INDEMNITY COMPANY   : 
OF CONNECTICUT, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  Head Notes:  1400, 1800, 1802, 1803, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
   1701. 2500 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Luis Soto, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Kloeckner Metals (“Kloeckner”) and their insurer, 
Travelers Indemnity Company of Connecticut.  Rocco Motto appeared on behalf of the 
claimant.  Julie Burger appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on October 8, 2025, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-6, and 
Defendants’ Exhibit A-C.  The exhibits were admitted into the record without objection.   
 
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Chris Quinlin was appointed the official 
reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The matter was considered fully 
submitted following briefing by the parties on November 7, 2025.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Nov-19  12:08:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 2 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, and in the course of, 
his employment on October 17, 2022. 
 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
4. That, if the defendants are liable for the alleged injury, the claimant is entitled 
to temporary total disability, temporary partial disability, and/or healing period 
benefits from February 13, 2023, to August 24, 2023.1 
 
5. That the claimant was off of work from February 13, 2023, to August 24, 2023. 
 
6. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the disability is 
to be evaluated as a scheduled member disability to the right leg. 
 
7. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is August 24, 
2023. 
  
8. That the claimant’s gross earnings were one thousand two hundred three and 
00/100 dollars ($1,203.00) per week, that the claimant was married and 
entitled to three exemptions, providing a weekly rate of compensation of seven 
hundred eighty-seven and 57/100 dollars ($787.57).   
 
9. That, with regard to certain disputed medical expenses: 
 
a. The fees or prices charged by the providers are fair and reasonable. 
b. That the treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c. The medical providers would testify as to the reasonableness of their 
fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed expenses and defendants 
were not offering contrary evidence. 
d. That, although the causal connection of the expenses to the work injury 
could not be stipulated, the listed expenses were at least causally 
connected to the medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury 
was based. 
  
10. That, prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid 4.143 weeks of compensation 
at the stipulated weekly rate for temporary partial disability from October 18, 
2022, to November 16, 2022.   
  
 
1 During the hearing, the parties indicated that the claimant was off of work during the time periods in 
question; however, the defendants assert that the claimant had only a temporary aggravation of his pre-
existing knee issues, and that he was off of work from February 13, 2023, to August 24, 2023, due to a 
knee replacement that was unrelated to the work injury in question. 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 3 
11. That the defendants are entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(3) 
for payment of sick pay or disability income in the amount of seven thousand 
four hundred fifty and 20/100 dollars ($7,450.20).   
 
12. That certain costs in Claimant’s Exhibit 6 were paid. 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses. 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
2. The extent of permanent disability benefits, should any be awarded. 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to a reimbursement of certain medical 
expenses.2 
 
4. With regard to the disputed medical expenses: 
 
a. Whether the listed expenses were causally connected to the work 
injury. 
b. Whether the requested expenses were authorized by defendant. 
  
5. Whether the claimant’s costs for the claimant’s independent medical 
examination (“IME”) were reasonable.   
  
6. Whether the claimant should be awarded a specific taxation of costs, as 
itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Luis Soto, Jr., the claimant, was 64 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He attended school through the eleventh grade before dropping out.  
(Testimony).  He later earned a GED.  (Testimony).  He then enlisted in the U.S. Army, 
where he served from 1981 to 1988.  (Testimony).  During his time in the Army, he may 
have attended one semester of college classes.  (Testimony).  At some point, he 
obtained a certification for small engine repair and a CDL.  (Testimony).   
 
2 The hearing report notes that “[a]ll medical care was paid under group health.”   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 4 
Mr. Soto is employed by Kloeckner, and has been for “a little over 20 years.”  
(Testimony).  His title is “professional driver.”  (Testimony).  As a driver, he is 
responsible for chaining and unchaining loads, hooking and unhooking trailers, assisting 
with unloading materials, and driving.  (Testimony; Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1).  At times, he 
had to climb a ladder.  (Testimony).   
The claimant testified that he did not sustain any injury to his right leg or right 
knee prior to October 17, 2022, nor did he experience any pain in these body parts.  
(Testimony).   
On October 17, 2022, Mr. Soto arrived at a customer location.  (Testimony).  He 
testified that, on that day, there were particularly strong sustained winds of 45 to 55 
miles per hour with gusts to 65 to 85 miles per hour.  (Testimony).  Mr. Soto attempted 
to exit his truck; however, the strong winds buffeted his truck, holding the door shut.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Soto pushed on the door in an attempt to exit his vehicle when the 
winds calmed for a moment.  (Testimony).  This caused the door to swing open.  
(Testimony).  At that time, Mr. Soto caught his right heel on the sill of the truck door 
while the left side of his body fell towards the ground.  (Testimony).  He ended up doing 
the splits.  (Testimony).  He then grabbed a “cubby of the door,” at which time he felt 
pain throughout his right knee.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Soto reported his injury to Kloeckner the next day.  (Testimony).  He delayed 
his reporting because he initially thought it was a simple sprain.  (Testimony).  He was 
told by “Mike” to seek care with UnityPoint.  (Testimony).   
 
On October 21, 2022, Mr. Soto visited UnityPoint Occupational Health Therapy.  
(Joint Exhibit 1:1).  He recounted his fall from the truck on October 17, 2022, and noted 
falling eight or more times since injuring his right knee.  (JE 1:1).  He also described a 
catching sensation in his right knee.  (JE 1:1).   
 
Mr. Soto returned to UnityPoint Occupational Health Therapy on October 25, 
2022, for continued therapy on his right knee.  (JE 1:2).  He felt that his right knee 
motion improved, but still experienced difficulty getting out of bed and walking.  (JE 1:2).  
He had constant pain of 2 out of 10, that rose to 10 out of 10 at its worst.  (JE 1:2).   
 
On October 28, 2022, Mr. Soto continued his visits with UnityPoint Occupational 
Health.  (JE 1:3-5).  Mr. Soto described ongoing popping sensations in his right knee.  
(JE 1:3).  He wore a brace while at home, and told the provider that his knee “locked up” 
while in the waiting room ahead of his appointment.  (JE 1:3-4).  Upon examination, the 
provider found pain in the lateral right knee with range of motion and palpation.  (JE 
1:4).  Despite this pain, Mr. Soto displayed normal range of motion.  (JE 1:4).  The 
provider diagnosed Mr. Soto with pain in his right knee, and documented that Mr. Soto 
was due to have an MRI in the next week.  (JE 1:4).  The provider recommended 
restricted duty including varying sitting, standing, and walking, depending on his comfort 
level, and no climbing, crawling, kneeling, or squatting.  (JE 1:6).   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 5 
 
The claimant returned to visit UnityPoint Occupational Health on November 7, 
2022.  (JE 1:9-12).  He rated his pain 7 out of 10, and noted that his pain worsened by 
the end of the day.  (JE 1:9).  A previously planned MRI was postponed due to a 
mechanical issue with the MRI machine.  (JE 1:10).  He told the provider that his knee 
locked up for some time.  (JE 1:10).  Despite an ability to ambulate around the 
examination room with no issues, he requested crutches. (JE 1:10).  He continued to 
wear a brace, as well.  (JE 1:10).  Mr. Soto continued to complain of pain with motion 
and palpation to the right knee.  (JE 1:10).  Mr. Soto was given an injection of Toradol 
into his right knee.  (JE 1:10-11).  The provider kept Mr. Soto on restrictions including 
the ability to vary sitting, standing, and walking at his comfort level, and no climbing, 
crawling, kneeling, or squatting.  (JE 1:12).  Finally, the provider noted that Mr. Soto 
could begin taking Tylenol Arthritis in order to alleviate pain in his right knee.  (JE 1:12).   
 
Mr. Soto had an MRI of his right knee on November 9, 2022.  (JE 2:17-18).  The 
MRI showed severe degenerative changes to the right knee, including a popliteal cyst.  
(JE 2:17).  The MRI also showed complex tearing of the medial meniscus, a tear of the 
anterior horn of the lateral meniscus, significant chondromalacia, and a loose fragment 
in the medial compartment.  (JE 2:17-18).   
 
On November 14, 2022, Mr. Soto returned to UnityPoint Occupational Health for 
continued follow-up of his right knee pain.  (JE 1:13-16).  Mr. Soto rated his right knee 
pain 5 out of 10.  (JE 1:13).  He felt that physical therapy provided some improvement in 
flexibility.  (JE 1:13).  Mr. Soto continued to use crutches to walk.  (JE 1:13).  He 
expressed concern about a potential surgery, as it would take him off of work.  (JE 
1:14).  The provider recounted the results of a recent MRI, and recommended continued 
physical therapy.  (JE 1:14-15).  His previously provided restrictions were reiterated.  
(JE 1:16).   
 
Matthew Bollier, M.D., examined Mr. Soto on November 18, 2022.  (JE 3:22-28).  
Dr. Bollier began the medical record with a review of certain medical treatment 
undertaken by Mr. Soto since his work injury including the November 9, 2022, MRI 
report.  (JE 3:22).  Mr. Soto told Dr. Bollier that he continued to experience significant 
pain in his right knee.  (JE 3:22).  Dr. Bollier observed that Mr. Soto ambulated using 
crutches, and that he could not fully straighten or bend his right knee due to pain.  (JE 
3:22).    Mr. Soto recounted his work restrictions to Dr. Bollier.  (JE 3:23).  Upon 
examination of Mr. Soto, Dr. Bollier observed him to have passive range of motion from 
10 degrees to 115 degrees.  (JE 3:24).  He also displayed tenderness to palpation along 
the medial and lateral joint lines.  (JE 3:24).   
 
Dr. Bollier diagnosed Mr. Soto with “right knee arthritis pain flare in the setting of 
underlying pre-existing degenerative arthritis.”  (JE 3:24).  Dr. Bollier then opined that 
the work injury did not cause or aggravate the claimant’s degenerative knee condition.  
(JE 3:24).  Dr. Bollier noted that, “[c]artilage wear, joint space loss, the presence of 
bone spurs and chondromalacia was seen on the MRI and plain radiographs.  MRI 
showed degenerative chronic meniscus tearing.  All of these findings were caused by 
long-standing wear and tear over many years.  The arthritis is a pre-existing 
degenerative condition.” (JE 3:24).  Even though Mr. Soto had subjective complaints 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 6 
after the incident, Dr. Bollier found no objective evidence that the work incident caused 
or aggravated Mr. Soto’s degenerative condition.  (JE 3:24).  Dr. Bollier opined that Mr. 
Soto had a “pain flare of the underlying arthritis.”  (JE 3:24).  To treat this, he 
recommended an injection of a corticosteroid.  (JE 3:25).  He also noted that Mr. Soto 
may require additional injections, and a bilateral knee replacement in the future; 
however, these would be unrelated to the October 17, 2022, work injury.  (JE 3:25).  Dr. 
Bollier provided Mr. Soto with the recommended injection, and placed him at maximum 
medical improvement as of the conclusion of his appointment.  (JE 3:25).  As such, Dr. 
Bollier recommended no work restrictions or follow-up care related to the work incident.  
(JE 3:25).  Finally, Dr. Bollier opined that Mr. Soto had no impairment pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (JE 3:25).   
Mr. Soto acknowledged on cross-examination that Dr. Bollier told him that he had 
arthritis in his right knee.  (Testimony).  Mr. Soto noted that he never visited with Dr. 
Bollier again.  (Testimony).  He testified that he was unsure as to whether Dr. Bollier 
released him from care.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Soto went on leave on November 30, 2022.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A:7).   
 
Because of his own uncertainty, Mr. Soto sought out his own medical care with 
Dr. Brian Silvia on December 28, 2022.  (Testimony; JE 4:29-31).   Dr. Silvia met with 
Mr. Soto and noted the previous treatment including the MRI which showed “advanced 
degenerative changes including meniscal tearing and dilution of cartilage within the 
medial compartment however no acute changes such as insufficiency fracture or 
avulsions.”  (JE 4:29).  Upon examining Mr. Soto, Dr. Silvia found him to have “a 
marked effusion about his right knee.”  (JE 4:30).  Mr. Soto told Dr. Silvia that he had 
lifelong deformities in his knees, but that they worsened on the right.  (JE 4:30).  Dr. 
Silvia observed Mr. Soto to have range of motion from 15 degrees to 90 degrees.  (JE 
4:30).  Dr. Silvia recommended a total knee replacement of the claimant’s right knee; 
however, due to the risk of infection following Dr. Bollier’s injection, the surgery needed 
to be delayed.  (Testimony; JE 4:30).   
 
Mr. Soto had to wait a time before his total knee replacement proceeded due to 
certain issues stemming from his diabetes.3  (Testimony).  He had a preoperative 
examination on January 27, 2023.  (JE 4:32-33).  The examiner approved Mr. Soto for a 
right total knee arthroplasty.  (JE 4:32-33).   
 
On January 27, 2023, Mr. Soto had a CT scan of his right knee.  (JE 4:34-35).  
The CT scan showed “[s]evere degenerative changes with near complete medial 
compartment joint space loss, subchondral sclerosis, and marginal osteophytes.”  (JE 
4:35).  The CT scan also showed intra-articular bodies and a Baker’s cyst.  (JE 4:35).   
 
3 According to Dr. Silvia’s note, the delay in surgery was due to the risk of “perioperative infection,” and not 
Mr. Soto’s diabetes.  However, there is some mention in later records of Mr. Soto needing to control his 
A1C levels. 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 7 
 
On March 29, 2023, Dr. Jared Freiburger issued a note indicating that Mr. Soto 
was released to return to work with no restrictions.  (CE 3:30).  Mr. Soto returned from 
leave on April 3, 2023.  (DE A:8).   
 
Mr. Soto returned to a family medicine physician in order to check his blood 
sugar on May 5, 2023.  (JE 4:36-37).  He noted working hard on getting his blood sugar 
down and also that he continued to have issues in his right knee.  (JE 4:36).   
 
Mr. Soto visited with Dr. Silvia again on May 17, 2023 ahead of a possible right 
total knee replacement.  (JE 4:42-43).  Dr. Silvia again noted a diagnosis of 
osteoarthritis in the right knee.  (JE 4:43).  Mr. Soto continued to have significant right 
knee pain after failing conservative care.  (JE 4:42).  He elected to proceed with total 
knee replacement.  (JE 4:42).  Dr. Silvia noted that Mr. Soto needed a CT scan ahead 
of the surgery.  (JE 4:42).  Dr. Silvia issued a work note on this date indicating that Mr. 
Soto was expected to be off of work for twelve weeks following his surgery scheduled 
for May 30, 2023.  (CE 3:31).   
 
On May 18, 2023, Mr. Soto had another x-ray of his right knee.  (JE 4:34).  This 
showed tricompartmental osteoarthritis of the right knee, which was most severe in the 
medial compartment.  (JE 4:34).  He also had bilateral SI joint osteoarthritis.  (JE 4:34).   
 
Mr. Soto reported to Mercy Medical Center on May 30, 2023, in order to have a 
total knee replacement of his right knee due to right knee osteoarthritis.  (JE 5:55-57).  
Mr. Soto tolerated the procedure well.  (JE 5:57).  X-rays following the procedure 
showed his replaced knee.  (JE 5:85).  Following his surgery, he had an initial physical 
therapy and occupational therapy evaluation.  (JE 5:68-84).   
 
On June 12, 2023, Mr. Soto began postoperative physical therapy.  (JE 4:44-47).  
He experienced muscle and nerve pain in his quadriceps and medial calf.  (JE 4:44).  
Therapy was completed and Mr. Soto was provided with instructions for self-care and 
home management.  (JE 4:47).   
 
Mr. Soto returned for postsurgical follow-up care on July 13, 2023.  (JE 4:48-49).  
His knee was stable to stressing, and he displayed full extension with flexion to 115 
degrees.  (JE 4:48).  Mr. Soto was noted to be doing “very well.”  (JE 4:49).  He was 
advised to continue physical therapy and his home exercise plan.  (JE 4:49).   
 
On August 10, 2023, Mr. Soto completed his thirteenth physical therapy 
appointment following his knee replacement.  (JE 4:50-52).  The therapist found Mr. 
Soto to be “doing extremely well overall…” with only occasional minimal pain.  (JE 
4:52).  In fact, most of the time, he had no pain.  (JE 4:52).  He experienced some 
stiffness, but his knee loosened up following exercise.  (JE 4:52).  The therapist 
observed that Mr. Soto ambulated with a normal gait.  (JE 4:52).  While working, Mr. 
Soto could get into and out of his truck with no problems.  (JE 4:52).  According to the 
therapist, Mr. Soto met all of his goals for physical therapy.  (JE 4:52).  Mr. Soto was 
comfortable continuing a long-term home exercise plan on his own.  (JE 4:52).   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 8 
 
Dr. Silvia examined Mr. Soto again on August 24, 2023.  (JE 4:53-54).  Dr. Silvia 
opined that Mr. Soto was doing “very well,” and that Mr. Soto was pleased with the 
results of his surgery.  (JE 4:53).  Mr. Soto told Dr. Silvia that he began riding his 
mountain bike again and rode for over ten miles with no issues.  (JE 4:53).  Mr. Soto 
displayed full extension, and flexion beyond 120 degrees.  (JE 4:53).  Dr. Silvia released 
Mr. Soto to return to work with no restrictions.  (JE 4:54; CE 3:32).  He returned to work 
on September 5, 2023.  (DE A:13).   
Mr. Soto visited with family medicine again on September 22, 2023, to check his 
diabetes.  (JE 4:39-41).  There is no mention of knee pain during this visit.  (JE 4:39-
41).   
 
Mr. Soto testified that his right knee pain and condition improved following 
surgery and physical therapy.  (Testimony).   
 
Dr. Silvia wrote a letter to claimant’s counsel on August 19, 2024, outlining Mr. 
Soto’s course of treatment and his opinions.  (JE 6:88-89).  Dr. Silvia noted that Mr. 
Soto had “clinically advanced osteoarthritis with significant symptoms of pain and 
reduced daily function due to his knee pain”.  (JE 6:89).  Mr. Soto required a right total 
knee replacement due to the aforementioned issues.  (JE 6:89).  According to Dr. Silvia, 
Mr. Soto had an excellent prognosis, and he achieved maximum medical improvement 
with “no further functional impairment…” or work restrictions.  (JE 6:89).  Dr. Silvia 
opined that Mr. Soto had “pre-existing asymptomatic osteoarthritis of the right knee and 
the event on October 17th would not have been expected to cause or structurally effect 
his objective clinical/imaging findings of the right knee.”  (JE 6:89).  Dr. Silvia agreed 
with Dr. Bollier’s opinion that the arthritis was a pre-existing condition, but then noted 
that Mr. Soto’s right knee “could have been aggravated following the event described on 
October 17, 2022.”  (JE 6:89).  He continued: 
Mr. Soto’s indication for total knee replacement surgery was severe knee 
pain limiting daily activities in the setting of osteoarthritis which was not 
successfully treated by non-surgical means.  Mr. Soto would not have been 
a candidate for surgery based on the imaging alone if he had not also been 
severely symptomatic clinically. 
(JE 6:89).  Dr. Silvia concluded that “…the injury that occurred at work was a factor in 
aggravating Mr. Soto’s symptoms…”  (JE 6:89).   
 
On October 29, 2024, at the arrangement of claimant’s counsel, Mr. Soto 
attended an independent medical examination (“IME”) with Robert Rondinelli, M.D., 
Ph.D., C.I.M.E., F.A.A.P.M.&R.  (CE 2:2-12).  Dr. Rondinelli is board certified in physical 
medicine and rehabilitation.  (CE 2:26).  He is the owner of Pinnacle IME Services, LLC, 
and a staff physician specializing in rehabilitation services with UnityPoint Health-Des 
Moines.  (CE 2:25).   
 
Dr. Rondinelli began his report by reviewing Mr. Soto’s job duties with Kloeckner.  
(CE 2:3).  His report noted a previous work injury to Mr. Soto on December 24, 2014, 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 9 
when Mr. Soto fell from a truck and developed neck pain.  (CE 2:3).  It then noted a 
June 24, 2021, work injury wherein Mr. Soto sustained a left thigh abrasion and 
contusion after a fall at work.  (CE 2:3).  Mr. Soto then noted a March 21, 2022, work 
injury wherein he sustained a right hand injury after a fall.  (CE 2:3).   
 
The report continued by outlining the history of Mr. Soto’s injury and medical 
treatment at issue in this case.  (CE 2:3-5).  Dr. Rondinelli also performed a medical 
records review that was attached to the IME report.  (CE 2:13-23).  Mr. Soto noted that 
he injured his left knee following a “second trauma to his left ankle approximately three 
months ago.”  (CE 2:6).  Prior to that left ankle and knee issue, Mr. Soto was walking 
two miles per day.  (CE 2:6).  Mr. Soto told Dr. Rondinelli that he was less flexible than 
he was prior to his work injury, and that he avoided kneeling.  (CE 2:6).   
 
Dr. Rondinelli continued his report by outlining the results of the “Lower Extremity 
Functional Scale” survey that he conducted on Mr. Soto.  (CE 2:6).  Mr. Soto scored 56 
out of 80, which yielded an index of 70 percent.  (CE 2:6).  According to Dr. Rondinelli 
this indicated that Mr. Soto retained 70 percent of his maximal functional baseline.  (CE 
2:6).  Dr. Rondinelli noted, “[s]tated alternatively, Luis perceives that he now has a 30 
[percent] disability with respect to his performance of ADLs and work activity following 
his lower extremity injury.”  (CE 2:6).   
 
The report continued by recounting the results of Dr. Rondinelli’s physical 
examination of Mr. Soto.  (CE 2:7-8).  Manual muscle testing of Mr. Soto’s lower 
extremities was within full functional limits.  (CE 2:7).  Dr. Rondinelli did not observe any 
atrophy or swelling in Mr. Soto’s lower extremities.  (CE 2:7).  Mr. Soto showed some 
effusion and warmth in his left leg, but none in his right leg.  (CE 2:7).  Mr. Soto had 180 
degrees of maximum extension with his right knee.  (CE 2:8).  Mr. Soto displayed no 
gait issues, but had a “step-to” issue with ascending or descending stairs due to a fear 
of falling.  (CE 2:8).   
 
Dr. Rondinelli then provided his opinions on Mr. Soto’s condition following his 
work injury.  (CE 2:8-12).  Dr. Rondinelli diagnosed Mr. Soto with primary osteoarthritis 
of the right knee, “including advanced cartilage wear, joint space loss, presence of bone 
spurs, and chondromalacia, and chronic meniscal tearing…”  (CE 2:8).  He also 
diagnosed Mr. Soto with a history of right knee trauma “(twisting injury)” when he exited 
his truck on October 17, 2022.  (CE 2:8).  Dr. Rondinelli continued by opining that Mr. 
Soto had primary osteoarthritis affecting both of his knees “which was largely 
asymptomatic and non-disabling up until the time of injury...” and that the osteoarthritis 
was not related to the work injury itself.  (CE 2:8).  However, Dr. Rondinelli opined that 
Mr. Soto’s pre-existing osteoarthritis was “aggravated and became symptomatic and 
disabling…” following his October 17, 2022, incident, and that Mr. Soto never returned 
to his preinjury level until after his total knee replacement.  (CE 2:9).  Dr. Rondinelli 
further opined that Mr. Soto had a material aggravation of his underlying osteoarthritis 
from his fall on October 17, 2022.  (CE 2:9).  The doctor was critical of Dr. Bollier’s 
opinion, stating, “I believe that Dr. Bollier has blurred the distinction between a 
temporary exacerbation (with eventual resolution and recovery of function) and a 
permanent aggravation with altered/accelerated decline of function without functional 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 10 
return to baseline.”  (CE 2:9).  He continued in the report to opine that, “Mr. Soto’s right 
knee trauma with persisting symptoms of pain, weakness, and instability prior to surgery 
was proximately and directly causally associated with his incident of injury in this case.  
Ultimately, it was also causally associated with the work he was doing for Kloeckner at 
the time the injury occurred.”  (CE 2:10).  Dr. Rondinelli also concluded that Mr. Soto’s 
right total knee replacement was caused by the October 17, 2022, work incident.  (CE 
2:10).   
 
Dr. Rondinelli recommended no additional medical care for Mr. Soto’s right knee.  
(CE 2:10).  He placed Mr. Soto at MMI as of August 19, 2024.  (CE 2:10).  Dr. Rondinelli 
continued his report by discussing Mr. Soto’s permanent impairment pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (CE 2:11).  Dr. 
Rondinelli referenced Tables 17-33 and 17-35 from Chapter 17 of the Guides in arriving 
at a permanent impairment rating.  (CE 2:11).  He outlined measurements of the range 
of motion, stability, and other measurements that he used in arriving at a total score of 
96 pursuant to the Guides.  (CE 2:11).  In looking at Table 17-33 of the Guides, Dr. 
Rondinelli noted that Mr. Soto had a “good result.”  (CE 2:11).  This resulted in a 37 
percent lower extremity impairment, or a 15 percent whole person impairment.  (CE 
2:11).  Dr. Rondinelli then opined that Mr. Soto’s perception of a 30 percent residual 
disability and his “residual gait deviation on steps and stairs” should result in a 15 
percent whole person impairment.  (CE 2:11).   
 
Dr. Rondinelli concluded his report by outlining permanent work restrictions he 
felt should apply to Mr. Soto.  (CE 2:11).  The work restrictions recommended by Dr. 
Rondinelli were: 
- 
Mr. Soto should avoid sustained and prolonged standing or walking in 
excess of 1 hour without a 10-minute rest break[.] 
- 
Mr. Soto should avoid any running, jogging or hopping with his affected 
right leg. 
- 
Mr. Soto should avoid kneeling at work and elsewhere. 
- 
Mr. Soto should limit to occasional ascending and descending steps and 
stairs and use a safety railing whenever necessary. 
- 
Mr. Soto should avoid climbing atop of his trailer. 
(CE 2:11).   
 
In August of 2024, Mr. Soto began experiencing problems with his left knee.  
(Testimony).  He noted that he hyperextended his left toe, which resulted in his 
placement in a restrictive boot.  (Testimony).  After wearing the boot, Mr. Soto began to 
have issues with his left knee.  (Testimony).  He returned to Dr. Silvia’s office, where he 
was diagnosed with arthritis in his left knee.  (Testimony).  He eventually had a left knee 
replacement on November 26, 2024.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Soto recalled seeing Dr. Rondinelli for about two hours.  (Testimony).   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 11 
 
Mr. Soto noted that at the end of the day he has sensitivity on his knee cap.  
(Testimony).  He also struggles with kneeling.  (Testimony).  At the time of the hearing, 
he continued working for Kloeckner with no restrictions.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Permanent Disability 
 
The claimant alleges that he suffered a permanent impairment to his right knee 
following a fall on October 17, 2022.  The parties agree that Mr. Soto’s injury arose out 
of, and in the course of his employment; however, they dispute whether the right knee 
injury was a cause of permanent disability.  If the injury is a cause of permanent 
disability, the parties have a dispute as to the extent of permanent disability benefits to 
which the claimant may be entitled.  The defendants’ position is that the claimant had a 
preexisting right knee arthritis, and that he merely sustained a temporary aggravation of 
his preexisting right knee arthritis.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 12 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or lighted up so that it results in disability, the 
claimant is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 
115 N.W.2d 812, 815 (1962); Yaeger v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 
374-75, 112 N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
On October 17, 2022, Mr. Soto was working for Kloeckner as a professional 
driver.  He was operating at a customer location on an especially windy day.  As he 
attempted to force the door of his truck open against the wind, he fell from his truck.  He 
testified that he caught his right heel on the sill of the truck door as he fell.  He ended up 
doing the splits with his legs.  He felt pain throughout his right knee.  He waited until the 
next day to report his right knee pain, as he initially thought it was simply a sprain.  At 
the direction of Kloeckner, Mr. Soto began treatment for his right knee at UnityPoint 
Occupational Health.  He described pain in his right knee, including a catching 
sensation.  He also wore a brace on his right knee.  He undertook a course of physical 
therapy.   
Eventually, Mr. Soto had an MRI, which showed a popliteal cyst, a complex 
tearing of the medial meniscus, a tear of the anterior horn of the lateral meniscus, 
significant chondromalacia, and a loose fragment in the medial compartment.  Following 
the MRI, Mr. Soto continued to use crutches and a brace to walk.   
Kloeckner then sent Mr. Soto to Dr. Bollier for an evaluation on November 18, 
2022.  Dr. Bollier reviewed the results of the MRI and performed a physical examination 
of Mr. Soto.  He found him to have passive range of motion from 10 degrees to 115 
degrees.  He also had tenderness to palpation along the medial and lateral joint lines.  
Dr. Bollier diagnosed Mr. Soto with a right knee arthritis pain flare in the setting of 
underlying pre-existing degenerative arthritis.  He opined that Mr. Soto’s work injury did 
not cause or aggravate his degenerative knee condition, as there was no objective 
evidence to indicate anything other than a “pain flare of the underlying arthritis.”  Dr. 
Bollier acknowledged that Mr. Soto had subjective complaints, but seemed to dismiss 
those.   
Dr. Bollier went on to recommend an injection to treat Mr. Soto’s right knee 
issues, and opined that Mr. Soto would likely require additional injections and a bilateral 
knee replacement in the future.  However, these would be unrelated to the October 17, 
2022, work injury.  Due to his opinions, Dr. Bollier recommended no ongoing work 
restrictions and opined that Mr. Soto had no permanent impairment based upon the 
Guides.  Based upon Dr. Bollier’s opinions, the defendants denied further care for Mr. 
Soto.  However, there is no denial letter or email in evidence. 
Since Mr. Soto was uncertain as to the status of his medical care, he sought 
treatment with Dr. Silvia.  Dr. Silvia provided Mr. Soto with treatment, and after a time 
recommended a total knee replacement for Mr. Soto.  This knee replacement was 
delayed for some time due to the injection provided by Dr. Bollier as well as Mr. Soto’s 
underlying diabetes.   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 13 
Dr. Silvia performed a right total knee replacement on Mr. Soto on May 30, 2023.  
Following the surgery, Mr. Soto participated in physical therapy.  While recovering from 
his surgery, Mr. Soto was kept off of work.  He eventually was released to work with no 
restrictions on August 24, 2023.  Mr. Soto returned to work on September 5, 2023.  Mr. 
Soto testified that the surgery helped improve his right knee pain, and that he now only 
had soreness at the end of the workday.  His only limitation was with kneeling while on 
the job.   
In response to a request from claimant’s counsel, Dr. Silvia drafted a letter 
outlining his opinions concerning Mr. Soto’s right knee condition.  Dr. Silvia noted his 
diagnosis that Mr. Soto had “clinically advanced osteoarthritis with significant symptoms 
of pain and reduced daily function due to his knee pain.”  He opined further that Mr. 
Soto had no further functional impairment or work restrictions due to his right knee 
replacement.  Dr. Silvia continued, noting that Mr. Soto had “pre-existing asymptomatic 
osteoarthritis of the right knee and the event on October 17th would not have been 
expected to cause or structurally effect his objective/clinical findings of the right knee.”  
Dr. Silvia opined that Mr. Soto’s right knee “could have been aggravated following the 
event described on October 17, 2022…” and that Mr. Soto would not have been a 
surgical candidate based solely on the results of the MRI.  In other words, the presence 
of other subjective symptoms helped necessitate the right knee replacement.  Dr. Silvia 
concluded that the October 17, 2022, work injury was “…a factor…” in aggravating Mr. 
Soto’s right knee symptoms.   
Mr. Soto then had an IME with Dr. Rondinelli at the arrangement of claimant’s 
counsel on October 29, 2024.  Dr. Rondinelli is board certified in physical medicine and 
rehabilitation.  Dr. Rondinelli reviewed a number of medical records and examined Mr. 
Soto.  Dr. Rondinelli then issued a report outlining his opinions.  Namely, Dr. Rondinelli 
opined that Mr. Soto had pre-existing osteoarthritis in his right knee, and that the 
October 17, 2022, work incident materially aggravated this condition.  Dr. Rondinelli 
noted that Mr. Soto’s osteoarthritis was “…largely asymptomatic and non-disabling up 
until the time of the injury…”  but that he then began to experience symptoms following 
the October 17, 2022, work incident.  Dr. Rondinelli was critical of Dr. Bollier’s report, 
indicating that Dr. Bollier, “…blurred the distinction between a temporary exacerbation 
(with eventual resolution and recovery of function) and a permanent aggravation with 
altered/accelerated decline of function without functional return to baseline.”  Dr. 
Rondinelli directly related the causation of Mr. Soto’s right knee issues and right knee 
replacement to the October 17, 2022, work incident.  Dr. Rondinelli also concluded that 
Mr. Soto’s right knee injury and subsequent surgery resulted in permanent impairment 
to the claimant’s right knee based upon the foregoing opinions. 
The claimant points to the opinions of Drs. Silvia and Rondinelli in support of their 
position that the October 17, 2022, work incident materially aggravated Mr. Soto’s pre-
existing osteoarthritis in his right knee.  The defendants point to the opinions of Dr. 
Bollier in support of their position that the claimant only sustained a temporary 
aggravation or “flare” of his pre-existing right knee osteoarthritis.   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 14 
In reviewing the evidence, I note that the opinions of Dr. Silvia alone would not 
be enough for the claimant to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that his right 
knee osteoarthritis was materially aggravated or “lit up” by the October 17, 2022, work 
incident.  Dr. Silvia notes that the knee injury was “…a factor…” and that Mr. Soto’s right 
knee “could have been aggravated…”  Simply being “a factor” would not be sufficient to 
meet the standard to prove causation.  However, the opinions of Dr. Silvia do not exist 
in a vacuum.  In fact, parts of Dr. Silvia’s opinions bolster those provided by Dr. 
Rondinelli.  For instance, Dr. Silvia notes that Mr. Soto would not have needed a right 
knee surgery solely based upon the objective evidence seen on imaging.  He also notes 
that Mr. Soto’s right knee osteoarthritis “could have been aggravated…” by the October 
17, 2022, work incident.   
Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions are especially strong in this case in noting that the 
October 17, 2022, work incident materially aggravated Mr. Soto’s right knee 
osteoarthritis.  Dr. Rondinelli noted, correctly, that Mr. Soto had no symptoms until the 
October 17, 2022, fall.  Following the fall, Mr. Soto made immediate complaints of right 
knee pain.  The pain did not improve over time.  Dr. Rondinelli’s criticism of Dr. Bollier’s 
report is apt, as he noted that “…Dr. Bollier has blurred the distinction between a 
temporary exacerbation (with eventual resolution and recovery of function) and a 
permanent aggravation with altered/accelerated decline of function without functional 
return to baseline.”  Mr. Soto’s condition did not make marked improvement over time, 
as noted in the medical records and from Mr. Soto’s testimony.   
I would note that Mr. Soto testified on his behalf in this matter.  I found Mr. Soto 
to be credible, with no reason to doubt or question his testimony.  Mr. Soto indicated 
that he did not have knee issues or pain prior to the October 17, 2022, work incident.  
There also is no objective evidence that he experienced right knee issues prior to the 
work incident.   
Between Mr. Soto’s testimony and the opinions of Drs. Silvia and Rondinelli, I 
find that the claimant has proven, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the October 
17, 2022, work injury materially aggravated his underlying right knee osteoarthritis, 
resulting in the necessity for a total right knee replacement.  As a result of the October 
17, 2022, work injury, and subsequent surgery, Mr. Soto sustained permanent disability 
to his right lower extremity.   
The question then becomes the extent of the claimant’s permanent impairment.  
The parties stipulated that if the injury was found to be a cause of permanent 
impairment, the claimant’s injury should be compensated as scheduled member 
disability to the right lower extremity.  This means that permanent partial disability 
compensation would be awarded based upon Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p), which 
provides: “[f]or all cases of permanent partial disability compensation shall be paid as 
follows … (p) The loss of two-thirds of that part of a leg between the hip joint and the 
knee joint shall equal the loss of a leg, and the compensation therefor shall be weekly 
compensation during two hundred twenty weeks.”  See Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w) provides further that: 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 15 
If it is determined that an injury has produced a disability less than that 
specifically described in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’, compensation shall be 
paid during the lesser number of weeks of disability determined, as will not 
exceed a total amount equal to the same percentage proportion of said 
scheduled maximum compensation.    
See Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  Additionally, Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) 
provides that “…the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, 
published by the American medical association, as adopted by the workers’ 
compensation commissioner by rule…”  Pursuant to the statutory instruction, the 
Agency has adopted the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 2.4.   
 
In this case, the only provider to give a permanent impairment rating is Dr. 
Rondinelli.  Dr. Rondinelli used the Guides to arrive at a permanent impairment rating 
for Mr. Soto’s right lower extremity.  Specifically, Dr. Rondinelli cited to Tables 17-33 
and 17-35 from the Guides.  He noted specific measurements of range of motion, 
stability, and other items he considered in arriving at a total score of 96.  He opined that 
Table 17-33 of the Guides provided that Mr. Soto had a “good result” following his right 
knee replacement.  As a result of this, Dr. Rondinelli assigned Mr. Soto with a 37 
percent impairment to the lower extremity.   
 
There are no other impairment ratings in the record to consider, as Dr. Bollier’s 
opinion was that Mr. Soto’s October 17, 2022, work incident was not a cause of 
permanent disability.  I previously dispensed with that argument above.  Considering the 
evidence in the record, I find Dr. Rondinelli’s impairment rating to be most persuasive in 
this matter.  Thus, Mr. Soto is awarded 81.4 weeks of benefits at the stipulated rate of 
compensation (37 percent x 220 weeks = 81.4 weeks).  The parties stipulated that the 
commencement date for benefits is August 24, 2023, thus benefits shall commence as 
of that date.   
Temporary Disability Benefits 
 
The parties indicated that the claimant was entitled to temporary disability 
benefits from February 13, 2023, to August 24, 2023, if the defendants were liable for 
the alleged injury.  It was unclear at the time of the hearing what the potential dispute 
was as to this issue.  As the defendants note more clearly in their posthearing brief, they 
acknowledge that Mr. Soto would be entitled to healing period benefits from February 
13, 2023, to August 24, 2023, if the October 17, 2022, work injury was a cause of 
permanent disability.  Considering my findings above, the claimant is entitled to healing 
period benefits from February 13, 2023, to August 24, 2023. 
Medical Expenses 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for certain medical expenses incurred 
following the denial by Kloeckner.  The parties stipulated that, outside of a small out of 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 16 
pocket expense, the medical expenses were paid by “group health,” which was later 
noted to be the Central States Health and Welfare Fund (“Fund”).  See Defendants’ 
Posthearing Brief, pg. 8.   
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by Iowa Code section 
17A.14.  The agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge 
may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in the 
courts are not controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of evidence on which 
reasonably prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of serious affairs.  Health 
care is a serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 855-56, 124 N.W.2d 
548, 553 (1963).  
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27, claimant is entitled to payment of reasonable 
medical expenses incurred for treatment of a work injury.  Claimant is entitled to an 
order of reimbursement if he/she has paid those expenses.  Otherwise, claimant is 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 17 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider.  See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).   
In cases where the employer’s medical plan covers the medical expenses, 
claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment costs; 
otherwise, the defendants are ordered to make payments directly to the provider.  See 
Krohn, 420 N.W.2d at 463.  Where medical payments are made from a plan to which 
the employer did not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment.  Midwest 
Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 868 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that 
the commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical 
expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of 
any employer contribution.”).  See also Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 
(Iowa App. 2015)(Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323.   
The employee has the burden of proof to show medical charges are reasonable 
and necessary, and must produce evidence to that effect.  Poindexter v. Grant’s Carpet 
Service, I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Decisions, No. 1, at 195 (1984); McClellan v. 
Iowa S. Util., 91-92, IAWC, 266-272 (App. 1992).    
The employee has the burden of proof in showing that treatment is related to the 
injury.  Auxier v. Woodward State Hospital School, 266 N.W.2d 139 (Iowa 1978), 
Watson v. Hanes Motor Company , No. 1 Industrial Comm’r report 356, 358 (1980) 
(claimant failed to prove medical charges were related to the injury where medical 
records contained nothing related to that injury)  See also Bass v Vieth Construction 
Corp., File No 5044430 (App. May 27, 2016)(Claimant failed to prove causal connection 
between injury and claimed medical expenses); Becirevic v Trinity Health, File No. 
5063498 (Arb. December 28, 2018) (Claimant failed to recover on unsupported medical 
bills). 
Nothing in Iowa Code section 85.27 prohibits an injured employee from selecting 
his or her own medical care at his or her own expense following an injury.  Bell Bros. 
Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 205 (Iowa 2010).  In order to 
recover the reasonable expenses of the care, the employee must still prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that unauthorized care was reasonable and beneficial.  
Id.  The Court in Bell Bros. concluded that unauthorized medical care is beneficial if it 
provides a “more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by 
the care authorized by the employer.”  Id.   
The issue is whether the claimant (or his insurer) is entitled to reimbursement for 
certain medical expenses.  Additionally, there are disputes as to whether the listed 
expenses were causally connected to the work injury, and whether the requested 
expenses were authorized by the defendants.  Following Dr. Bollier’s report in 
November of 2022, the defendants denied further care for Mr. Soto’s right knee 
condition.  Thus, he sought care with Dr. Silvia, which included imaging, surgery, and 
physical therapy.   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 18 
Based upon the opinions of Dr. Rondinelli and Dr. Silvia, I find that the care 
sought by Mr. Soto was causally connected to the October 17, 2022, work injury.  
Additionally, it is obvious from reading the medical records and reviewing Mr. Soto’s 
testimony that the unauthorized care which he sought was reasonable and more 
beneficial than the lack of care offered by Kloeckner.  An example of this is the 
improvement shown by Mr. Soto following his right knee replacement surgery and 
subsequent physical therapy.  An additional example is the fact that Mr. Soto can now 
work with no restrictions, whereas prior to the surgery, he was working light duty for 
some time.   
It appears from the claimant’s exhibits that the medical billing covered by the 
Fund totals thirty-three thousand two hundred thirty-nine and 24/100 dollars 
($33,239.24).  If any amount of these expenses is unrelated to treatment for the 
claimant’s right knee, they should be excluded.  Without seeing the out-of-pocket 
expenses alleged by the claimant, I decline to award the claimant the claimed five 
hundred three and 84/100 dollars ($503.84) in “out-of-pocket expenses.”  In future 
cases, claimant’s counsel would do well to submit the actual billing, or at least a 
summary, so that this figure could be considered. 
Credit Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.38(2) 
Iowa Code section 85.38(2)(a) states: 
In the event the employee with a disability shall receive any benefits, 
including medical, surgical, or hospital benefits, under any group plan 
covering nonoccupational disability contributed to wholly or partially by the 
employer, which benefits should not have been paid or payable if any rights 
of recovery existed under this chapter … then the amounts so paid to the 
employee from the group plan shall be credited to or against any 
compensation payments, including medical, surgical or hospital made or to 
be made  under this chapter . . .  The amounts so credited shall be deducted 
from the payments made under these chapters.  Any nonoccupational plan 
shall be reimbursed in the amount deducted.   
The defendants assert an entitlement to this credit seemingly for payments made 
to the claimant as short-term disability.  For justification of their assertion, they point to 
the claimant’s deposition testimony.   
Since the defendants are asserting entitlement to this credit, it is their burden to 
prove entitlement.  The claimant testified during his deposition to receiving “short-term 
disability benefits.”  While the claimant testified that he received benefits, the amount 
and source of these benefits are unclear.  The defendants did not submit any evidence 
showing short term disability payments.  They also did not submit any plan or policy 
showing coverage for short-term disability for this period in time.  This lack of evidence 
is fatal to the defendants’ claim for a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2).   
 

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 19 
IME Reimbursement Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for an IME performed by Dr. Rondinelli, 
amounting to five thousand two hundred twenty-five and 00/100 dollars 
($5,225.00).  The defendants contend that the claimant is not entitled to reimbursement 
of Dr. Rondinelli’s IME fees. 
 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.     
 
. . .    
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.     
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).     
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  “The 
reasonableness of the fee for an IME ‘is to be based on the typical fee charged in the 
locale where the examination is performed.’”  Lattner Mfg. Co. v. Rife, 2. N.W.3d 859, 
867 (Iowa 2024)(citing Mid. Am. Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2023)).  
Additional facts to be considered for reasonableness should include the time spent with 
the claimant, the time spent on the report, and the time spent reviewing the claimant’s 
records.  Mid. Am. Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 852 (citing Pexa v. Auto Owners 
Ins., 686 N.W.2d 150, 156 (Iowa 2004)).   
An opinion finding a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment 
rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. 2021).     

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 20 
 
It is well accepted Iowa law that a claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for 
one IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, Inc., 763 
N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009).   
 
On November 18, 2022, Dr. Bollier issued a report outlining his opinions, 
including that Mr. Soto had no permanent impairment pursuant to the Guides.  He also 
opined that the October 17, 2022, incident was not a cause of permanent impairment.  
In response, the claimant obtained a report from Dr. Rondinelli outlining his opinions on 
the claimant’s right knee injury.  The defendants argue that the claimant is not entitled to 
a reimbursement as Dr. Silvia was not requested to issue an impairment rating.  The 
defendants seem to ignore the court’s ruling in Kern, wherein it was held that a finding 
of a lack of causation was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating.  As noted 
herein, Dr. Bollier opined that the October 17, 2022, incident was not a cause of 
permanent impairment.  Based upon the holding in Kern, this triggered the defendants’ 
duty to reimburse the claimant for the reasonable costs of Dr. Rondinelli’s IME. 
 
The question then becomes whether Dr. Rondinelli’s IME costs were reasonable.  
Dr. Rondinelli is based in the Des Moines area.  Dr. Rondinelli spent three hours 
reviewing Mr. Soto’s chart, 1.75 hours performing a history and physical, 3.75 hours 
performing “editing/research/format/print”, and 1 hour proofing his report.  Dr. Rondinelli 
charged five hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($550.00) per hour.  Dr. Rondinelli’s total 
fee was five thousand two hundred twenty-five and 00/100 dollars ($5,225.00).  Dr. 
Rondinelli was only tasked with performing an IME on one body part.  Additionally, there 
are not many medical records in this case.  A fee of over five thousand dollars for Dr. 
Rondinelli’s IME is unreasonable based upon my experience and review of other IMEs 
from the Des Moines area.  I find instead that a reimbursement of three thousand five 
hundred and 00/100 ($3,500.00) is reasonable for this specific IME. 
Costs 
The claimant seeks an award of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 10A.328.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) 
provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 21 
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 
(Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination itself, can be 
taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court reasoned, “a 
physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used as evidence 
in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses associated 
with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, just as they 
do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting additionally that “[i]n 
the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the underlying medical 
treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or deposition”).  The 
commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses incurred by vocational 
experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 5055494 (App. Dec., 
December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 5056587 (App. 
Dec., September 27, 2019).   
 
The claimant seeks one thousand three hundred forty-four and 00/100 dollars 
($1,344.00) in costs for a “narrative report.”  This presumably is the cost of Dr. Silvia’s 
report.  However, there is no invoice in the record so that I can evaluate the breakdown 
of Dr. Silvia’s fee.  Additionally, the description of “narrative report” is unclear, forcing 
me to assume or presume to what this line-item applies.  I decline to award costs for 
this item. 
 
The claimant also seeks one hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($128.75) 
in costs for the filing fee.  In my discretion, I award the claimant the costs of the filing fee 
of one hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($128.75).   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
That the claimant’s October 17, 2022, right knee injury was a cause of 
permanent disability. 
 
That the defendants shall pay the claimant 81.4 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated rate, commencing on August 24, 2023.   
 
That the defendants shall pay the claimant healing period benefits from February 
13, 2023, to August 24, 2023.   
 
That the defendants shall reimburse the Central States Health and Welfare Fund 
in the amount of thirty-three thousand two hundred thirty-nine and 24/100 dollars 
($33,239.24) for medical benefits. 
 
That the defendants did not prove entitlement to credits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.38(2).   
 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant three thousand five hundred 
and 00/100 dollars ($3,500.00) for the costs of Dr. Rondinelli’s IME.   

SOTO V. KLOECKNER METALS 
Page 22 
 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred twenty-eight and 
75/100 dollars ($128.75) for costs incurred.   
That the defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___19TH ___ day of November, 2025. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Rocco Motto   
(via WCES) 
Julie Burger   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
