Case Number: 24002650.01
Case Title:  DYER, PAUL V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Dyer Paul-24002650.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PAUL DYER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 24002650.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
UNITED PARCEL SERVICE, 
  : 
    ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
 
  :                           DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LIBERTY MUTUAL INS. CORP.,  
  : 
 
 
  : 
             Head Note:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE   
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Paul Dyer. Claimant 
appeared telephonically and through his attorney, Jenna Cruise. Defendants appeared 
through their attorney, Colin Lane.  
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on June 17, 2025. The 
proceedings were digitally recorded. That recording constitutes the official record of this 
proceeding. Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023 Order, the undersigned has 
been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. His wife, Charity Dyer, also testified. Both 
parties filed motions to exceed the 10-page limitation on exhibits, and given neither 
party objected, the motions were granted. The record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, consisting of 13 pages, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G, consisting of 
18 pages.  
ISSUE 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care consisting of: 
1. Authorization and payment for a SAVI Dual Migraine Therapy Device. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-17  14:00:42     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DYER V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE 
Page 2 
 
 
2. Authorization for in-person mental health counseling. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence in the record, finds: 
Claimant sustained a work-related injury on February 29, 2024. (See Petition; 
Claimant’s Testimony) He sustained injuries including to his head and brain, and is left 
with chronic migraine headaches and some cognitive deficits. Defendants have 
accepted liability for the injuries.  
Claimant has received authorized medical treatment from Chia-Chun Chiang, 
M.D., at the Mayo Clinic’s Department of Neurology. In March of 2025, he had a 
comprehensive visit in the neurology department to address his chronic migraine 
symptoms. (Claimant’s Exhibits 3-4) In addition to Dr. Chiang, he also saw Thomas 
Bergquist, Ph.D., for a neuropsychological consultation. (Cl. Ex. 4) 
First, with respect to claimant’s migraines, he testified that he takes several 
medications for his migraines, and has tried a device called “HeadaTerm,” which is 
essentially a TENS unit that is worn on the forehead and provides electrical shocks. He 
testified that it felt like bee stings, and the device actually amplified his migraines rather 
than helping. It was provided through a different treatment provider he saw at the 
University of Iowa. Claimant’s wife also testified that the HeadaTerm device did not help 
claimant, and if it is not used at precisely the right time, it causes a spike in the migraine 
pain. 
Both claimant and his wife testified that they discussed several neuromodulation 
treatment devices for claimant’s chronic migraines with Dr. Chiang. Her record indicates 
that claimant was interested in the SAVI Dual eNeura, which provides transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS). (Cl. Ex. 3) Her record indicates it is an FDA approved 
central neuromodulation therapy that was developed to treat acute attacks and prevent 
future migraines. The device delivers “single low frequency electromagnetic fields that 
pass through bone and tissue.” Dr. Chiang wrote a prescription for the eNeura SAVI 
device on March 24, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
On March 25, 2025, claimant received an email from eNeura regarding his 
prescription. The email outlines the cost of the device and notes that eNeura is unable 
to “verify benefits/check coverage, process claims, or make/receive payments” as they 
are an out-of-network provider for many insurance plans. 
Liberty Mutual referred the prescription for the eNeura device to Optum, an 
outside vendor. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 1) It is unclear when Optum was retained to secure the 
device, but on April 30, 2025, the Optum representative emailed the insurance adjustor 
regarding the device. (Defendants’ Exhibit D, p. 5) The email notes that Optum had 
never processed the particular eNeura device before, but had processed Cefaly 
devices, which are for purchase. The eNeura device is an ongoing subscription that is 
charged to a credit card on file monthly. The first order is a minimum of three months. 

DYER V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE 
Page 3 
 
 
The Optum representative asked if they would be able to provide the Cefaly device 
instead, or if Liberty would want to purchase the eNeura device. 
The adjuster replied on May 3, 2025, asking how much it would cost to purchase 
the eNeura device rather than renting it. (Def. Ex. D, p. 4) She followed up on May 6. 
(Def. Ex. D, p. 3) On May 7, Optum replied they were waiting on a call from a 
manufacturer about pricing. That same day, Kara Shorb from eNeura emailed the 
Optum representative with additional details about the device, and noted that eNeura is 
the sole manufacturer of the device, and they do not offer the ability to purchase the 
device. (Def. Ex. C) She explained that they assume all costs of repair as the sole 
manufacturer, and if a patient purchased the device, there would be no way to facilitate 
a repair. There is no mention of payment via credit card in the email, but it states that 
the initial three months can be paid at once or in monthly installments. 
On May 9, the Optum representative advised that eNeura does not offer a 
purchase option, and they require a monthly fee on a credit card for leasing the device. 
(Def. Ex. D, p. 2) She advised that Optum was unable to do a credit card payment, and 
offered to forward the contact information to the adjuster to work with eNeura directly. 
She noted that another option would be to ask the prescribing provider if another 
comparable device could be purchased. The adjuster replied and said “Yes, please 
reach out to Enerua [sic] directly.”  
On May 20, 2025, the Optum representative emailed the adjuster again, and 
indicated she had been trying to assist with the referral, but per her leadership she was 
unable to process. (Def. Ex. D, p. 1) She provided email information obtained from the 
manufacturer, and noted that it had been determined “not a billable service” through 
Optum. 
On May 21, 2025, the claims adjuster emailed Barb Schweiss at the Mayo Clinic, 
and noted that the order for the neuromodulation device was authorized. (Def. Ex. B) 
The adjuster said they had tried to dispense through one of Liberty’s vendors, but were 
unable to do so. Barb replied later that day and said she advised the doctor that they 
could dispense the neuromodulation device for claimant because Liberty was not able 
to get one, noting “Hopefully they can get that for the patient soon.”  
Claimant filed the petition for alternate medical care on June 5, 2025. On June 
11, 2025, the adjuster emailed Barb again asking about the status of the 
neuromodulation device, as claimant had not yet received one. (Def. Ex. F, p. 5) Barb 
replied later that day and indicated claimant’s chart did not show any device had been 
sent to him, so she sent another message to the doctor to get one ordered from one of 
their vendors. On June 13, 2025, the adjuster contacted Barb again seeking an update. 
(Def. Ex. F, p. 4) Barb replied on June 16, 2025, and advised that the device must be 
dispensed directly from eNeura. She noted that Mayo Clinic could not dispense the 
item, and eNeura was waiting for authorization from Liberty Mutual to dispense it. She 
attached a letter from Dr. Chiang, dated June 16, 2025, that confirmed that Mayo Clinic 
does not sell any device like the eNeura device, and it must be obtained through 
eNeura. (Def. Ex. G, p. 3)  

DYER V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE 
Page 4 
 
 
Later on June 16, defense counsel replied to Barb and explained that Optum had 
been working on obtaining the device on behalf of Liberty, and the issue with the 
requirement of a credit card purchase. (Def. Ex. F, p. 3) She asked if there was a 
comparable device that would work that could be purchased. Barb replied that she 
would check with the doctor. Later that day defense counsel asked specifically why the 
prescription had to be for the eNeura device, when there were other neuromodulation 
devices available for purchase, giving the Cefaly device as an example. (Def. Ex. F, p. 
1) Barb replied later that day with a response from Dr. Chiang that states: 
When I discussed the options of neuromodulation devices with the 
patient during our appointment, they are most interested in eNeura, and 
thus I sent the prescription for that. If there is significant difficulty obtaining 
eNeura, then I think Cefaly would be a reasonable alternative as well. It 
does not require a prescription.  
(Def. Ex. G, p. 1) 
Upon receipt of the last email from Barb, defense counsel emailed claimant’s 
attorney and indicated Liberty would purchase the Cefaly device for claimant. (Def. Ex. 
F, p. 1) Claimant’s attorney then emailed Kara Shorb at eNeura and asked if they would 
be able to invoice workers’ compensation on a monthly basis if the device was 
approved, as opposed to requiring a credit card for payment. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 2) Kara 
replied at 11:41 p.m. on June 16, 2025, and said they can accept payment via credit 
card or via check. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 1) She noted the initial prescription is for three months, 
and they can invoice but not monthly; rather, patients who are invoiced pay in three-
month increments. She also explained that they require payment up front prior to 
sending the device as they have had issues obtaining workers’ compensation payments 
in the past.  
At hearing, both claimant and his wife testified that their understanding based on 
their conversation with Dr. Chiang is that the Cefaly device is the same or similar to the 
HeadaTerm device that claimant has already tried. Claimant testified that he specifically 
wanted to try the eNeura device because it does not use electrical shocks, which make 
the migraines worse. His wife testified her understanding that the Cefaly device is 
essentially a TENS unit, while the eNeura device is a TMS device, which is different. 
Both recognize that Dr. Chiang stated the Cefaly would be a reasonable alternative “if 
there is significant difficulty” obtaining the eNeura device, but both believe the Cefaly 
device will not work given claimant’s prior experience with the HeadaTerm device. 
Claimant’s attorney argued that Liberty Mutual has not made a reasonable effort 
to obtain the eNeura device, as there is no evidence anyone from Liberty actually 
contacted eNeura directly to ask about billing options. Given that claimant’s attorney 
was able to email eNeura directly and received a response about billing in less than 
three hours, I agree. Dr. Chiang opined the Cefaly would be a reasonable alternative “if 
there is significant difficulty” in obtaining the eNeura device. However, eNeura has now 
clarified that they do accept payment by check, and are able to invoice in three-month 
increments. As such, there should not be any difficulty in obtaining the device since the 

DYER V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE 
Page 5 
 
 
only issue was the inability to pay via credit card. Therefore, I find claimant is entitled to 
alternate medical care with respect to the SAVI Dual Migraine Therapy Device. 
Moving on to the counseling, claimant saw Dr. Bergquist on March 27, 2025. (Cl. 
Ex. 4, p. 1) Dr. Bergquist opined that claimant needs a skilled mental health provider, 
preferably one who is accustomed to dealing with persons with chronic symptoms such 
as chronic pain. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 3) He wrote a prescription, dated April 11, 2025, for 
“mental health counseling for Brain Injury by provider with BI experience.” (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 
4) 
Defense counsel represented that the counseling was authorized on June 2, 
2025. There is an email from Gail McGaughy at On With Life, where claimant receives 
treatment, indicating that the cost for virtual counseling is the same as the cost for in-
person counseling. (Def. Ex. A) The adjuster replied on June 4, 2025, indicating that 6 
virtual sessions were authorized. 
Both claimant and his wife testified that due to his injury, he has difficulty with 
communication via telephone. They both agreed he does better in-person, and would 
prefer to have in-person counseling. His wife testified that it is difficult to keep him 
focused, and it is easier to get him back on track in-person. Claimant’s wife testified that 
when On With Life called her to schedule the virtual counseling, she said she would get 
back to them because claimant had an appointment with Dr. Bergquist coming up and 
she wanted clarification regarding in-person versus virtual counseling.  
At that appointment, she testified that Dr. Bergquist agreed it would be better for 
claimant to have in-person counseling at this time, although in the future he may be able 
to move to a virtual format. This was confirmed via email from Kari Bottemiller at Mayo 
Clinic, dated June 12, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 6) The updated order states claimant should be 
referred for ongoing in-person counseling. Some of the words are cut-off in the exhibit, 
but it states “appointments are not appropriate at this time-sessions must be conducted 
in person.” It is assumed the cut-off portion of that sentence should say “virtual 
appointments” or something similar. In any event, it is clear that the order for counseling 
has been clarified and updated to reflect that the authorized counseling must be in-
person at this time. As such, claimant is also entitled to alternate care with respect to 
the in-person mental health counseling.  
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the 
right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and 
be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 

DYER V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE 
Page 6 
 
 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.” Id. 
Similarly, an application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained 
because claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere 
dissatisfaction with the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for 
alternate medical care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered 
promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly 
inconvenient for the claimant. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Thus, by challenging the 
employer’s choice of treatment and seeking alternate care, claimant assumes the 
burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 14(f)(5); 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.   
The commissioner is justified in ordering alternate care when employer - 
authorized care has not been effective and evidence shows that such care is “inferior or 
less extensive” care than other available care requested by the employee. Long, 528 
N.W.2d at 124; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 437.    
Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition and 
defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, June 17, 1986).   
Ultimately, determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. In this case, claimant has met his burden to 
prove that the care offered by defendants is unreasonable. Defendants have offered to 
purchase a neuromodulation device that is not the same as the one initially prescribed 
by the authorized treating physician. The doctor did say the alternative Cefaly device 
would be a reasonable alternative, but that was only if there is “significant difficulty” in 
obtaining the eNeura device. Based on the evidence in the record, the difficulty and 
delay in obtaining the eNeura device was largely due to poor communication. It has now 
been clarified that eNeura will accept payment via check, and will provide billing via 
three-month invoicing. As such, there should be no “significant difficulty” in obtaining the 
eNeura device, and claimant has met his burden to prove offering an alternative device 
is unreasonable. Additionally, the fact that claimant has already tried a similar device 
with no success makes the Cefaly an inferior treatment option. As such, claimant is 
entitled to alternate medical care with respect to the SAVI Dual neuromodulation device. 

DYER V. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE 
Page 7 
 
 
Claimant has also met his burden to prove the care offered by defendants is 
unreasonable with respect to the mental health counseling. Claimant and his wife both 
provided testimony explaining his difficulties with virtual/telephone communication at 
this time. While the original order from Dr. Bergquist did not specify whether the 
counseling was to be in-person, the order has since been updated to reflect the 
sessions “must be conducted in person.” (Cl. Ex. 6) Defendants are not entitled to 
interfere with the medical judgment of the authorized treating physician. As such, 
claimant is entitled to alternate medical care with respect to the mental health 
counseling as well.  
The evidence demonstrates that defendants are not meeting their obligation to 
provide reasonable care for the work-related injury. As such, claimant is entitled to 
alternate care. The petition is granted. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
The claimant's petition for alternate medical care is granted. 
Defendants shall immediately authorize and pay for the eNeura SAVI Dual 
Migraine Therapy Device, as prescribed by Dr. Chiang on March 24, 2025. 
Defendants shall immediately authorize and pay for in-person mental health 
counseling as initially prescribed by Dr. Bergquist and clarified in the updated Mayo 
Clinic order dated June 12, 2025. 
Failure to comply with this order may result in the termination of defendants’ 
ability to direct care for the work injury. 
Signed and filed this ____17th ___ day of June, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jenna Cruise (via WCES) 
 
Lara Plaisance (via WCES) 
 
