Case Number: 21008615.01
Case Title:  WILLIAMS, MATTHEW V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Williams Matthew-21008615.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MATTHEW WILLIAMS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 21008615.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  ARBITRATION DECISION    
SPEE DEE DELIVERY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
CNA INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
    Head Note Nos:  1108; 1803; 2500; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
          4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  :            
_____________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Matthew Williams, filed a petition for arbitration on August 9, 2022, 
and seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Spee Dee Delivery Services, employer, 
and CNA Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by 
Nick Platt.  The defendants were represented by Meredith Ashley. 
The matter came on for hearing on September 12, 2023, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The record in 
the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 10; and 
defense exhibits A through C and E through I.  Defendants’ Exhibit D was excluded in a 
separate ruling on September 11, 2023.  At hearing, defendants preserved this issue for 
appeal.  (Transcript, pages 10-11)  The claimant testified at hearing.  Kira Stover served 
as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on October 20, 2023. 
ISSUES 
The parties have stipulated that claimant worked for defendant employer and 
sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of his employment on May 18, 
2021.  The defendants dispute that this injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability.  Claimant is seeking temporary benefits from May 18, 2021, through July 12, 
2022, as well as permanent disability benefits which he alleges would commence July 
13, 2022.  Defendants deny responsibility for any temporary or permanent disability 
benefits.  The parties have stipulated to all elements comprising the rate of 
compensation and contend the appropriate rate, if necessary, is $637.89 per week.  
Affirmative defenses are waived.  Claimant is seeking medical expenses set forth in 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Apr-16  11:04:27     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 2 
 
 
Claimant's Exhibit 9.  These expenses are denied as not causally connected to the work 
injury.  Claimant is also seeking an IME under Section 85.39 and alternate medical 
care.  The defendants seek a credit for payment of 49.71 weeks of TPD paid, although 
the entitlement to this credit is disputed.  Claimant seeks a penalty for the unreasonable 
delay or denial of benefits.  Claimant seeks costs in Claimant’s Exhibit 10. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Matthew Williams was 37 years old as of the date of hearing.  He 
resides in Polk City, Iowa, with his wife and daughter.  I find his testimony to be credible.  
His testimony is generally consistent with other portions of the record, including 
contemporaneous medical notes.  There was nothing about his demeanor which caused 
me any concern for his truthfulness.  In fact, the opposite is true.  His answers were 
straightforward, usually short and responsive. 
Mr. Williams is a high school graduate.  He took machinist classes at 
Elizabethtown Community College in Kentucky.  He obtained a certificate as a screen 
print operator through Fischbach USA.  Mr. Williams worked for Fischbach for 
approximately 10 years working on machines prior to moving to Iowa.  He testified the 
job was fast-paced and fairly heavy.  (Tr., p. 20)  He moved to Iowa and began working 
for Accumold as a mold setter and machine operator.  He worked some temp jobs for a 
period of time until he obtained employment with Spee Dee Delivery in approximately 
2020.  He worked as a route driver.  He described his job in some detail at hearing.  
(Tr., pp. 25-27)  He testified that he would drive upwards of 400 miles per day, making 
up to 60 stops.  He was required to perform heavy lifting at times. 
The record reflects that Mr. Williams generally has been in good health.  He 
testified that in 2020, however, he was in a motor vehicle accident which resulted in a 
significant laceration to his head and left leg.  He testified that he had about 70 staples 
and 60 stitches.  (Tr., p. 28)  He testified that he returned to work approximately 3 
weeks after the accident without any restrictions and has never had any difficulty 
performing his job.  (Tr., pp. 28-30)  None of the medical records related to this accident 
are in evidence.  Defendants contend he injured his back in this accident but have 
presented no evidence for this assertion.  In addition, Mr. Williams testified that he has 
had occasional chiropractic visits from time to time for his neck, back and hips.  The 
chiropractor “would adjust my neck and my back mostly in the middle, and then he 
would reset my hips back square from being in the van, so much driving.”  (Tr., p. 66)  
He testified that he was not having any particular problems with this at the time of his 
stipulated work injury.  Given Mr. Williams’ credible testimony and the paucity of 
contrary evidence, I find that he did not have any type of permanent condition in his low 
back prior to the work injury. 
The parties have stipulated that Mr. Williams sustained an injury which arose out 
of and in the course of his employment on May 18, 2021.  Mr. Williams described the 
injury as follows: 
I was on my delivery route in Boone, Iowa.  I stopped at the nursing home 
to do a delivery.  And it had been raining, and as I stepped out of my van, 
there was a hole that was full of water, and I didn’t see it, and I stepped in 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 3 
 
 
it with my right foot, and it took pretty much all of my body weight onto my 
right foot, and I fell into the van door to try not to fall down. 
(Tr., p. 30)  He reported the injury right away.  The following day he went to Concentra 
where x-rays were taken which were negative for fracture.  He was treated for right foot 
and ankle pain, given a walking boot, medications, and a physical therapy referral.  
(Joint Exhibit 1, pages 1-2)  He was also given fairly significant work restrictions.  (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 4)  He started physical therapy and followed up with Concentra on a couple of 
occasions before being referred to Bryan Trout, DPM, at Iowa Ortho. 
Dr. Trout evaluated Mr. Williams on June 17, 2021, and documented the 
following:  “He rolled his ankle in a hole while in a parking lot.  He has been treating with 
physical therapy with improvements of the ankle pain but the foot remains painful.  He 
now locates his pain at the dorsal midfoot and plantar foot.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 55)  Mr. 
Williams testified he was in the walking boot for the entire summer, and it helped with 
his symptoms.1  He also testified that he started to develop pain in his hips and back 
within the first month of wearing the boot.  (Tr., pp. 32-33; 73)  Low back and pelvic pain 
was documented by a chiropractor in July 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 120)  He continued to 
treat with Dr. Trout throughout the summer and mentioned the “back and hip pain” to 
him in September 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 64)  By this time the diagnosis was “nondisplaced 
fracture of the cuboid bone of right foot, subsequent encounter for fracture with routine 
healing.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 65)  Dr. Trout started a formal course of physical therapy, and 
had the claimant transition to supportive shoe wear (away from the CAM walker) and 
eventually custom orthotics.  Having reviewed all of the records in evidence, I would 
characterize the healing process as slow. 
He continued to treat with Dr. Trout through the remainder of 2021.  In November 
2021, Dr. Trout documented pain radiating from his back into the lower leg.  On January 
11, 2022, Dr. Trout referred Mr. Williams to a pain management physician to evaluate 
the back and hip pain.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 70-74)  Mr. Williams was evaluated by Thomas 
Klein, D.O., on February 3, 2022.  Dr. Klein performed a full workup and examination.  
Dr. Klein documented the following: 
Patient is here today for evaluation of low back pain.  He was sent here 
today by Dr. Trout.  He states he was in a boot for a long period of time for 
his RIGHT ankle which he thinks lead [sic] to his back pain.  His foot injury 
occurred May 2021 when he stepped in a hole.  He has tried physical 
therapy and etodolac without much relief.  He identifies his pain in his 
buttock and in the RIGHT hip.  At worst he rates his pain as a 9/10 and at 
worst a 7/10 today his pain is 8/10. 
 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 76)  Dr. Klein diagnosed bilateral sacroiliac (SI) joint pain as well as bursitis 
of the right hip.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 78)  Dr. Klein recommended he continue the home 
                                                 
1 The defendants repeatedly contend that Mr. Williams was only in a boot for a very short period 
of time.  (Def. Brief)  It is unclear what evidence the defendants are relying upon for this proposition.  He 
testified that he was in some type of a walking boot from the very beginning of his treatment.  (Tr., pp. 32-
33)  He wore it for the entire summer up through September 2021.  I find his testimony to be credible. 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 4 
 
 
exercise program, using over-the-counter topical analgesics 3-4 times per day.  He also 
recommended SI joint injections for pain relief.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 78) 
Mr. Williams continued to treat with Dr. Klein with injections through May 19, 
2022.  At his last visit with Dr. Klein, significant low back pain was documented.  
“Patient is here today for re-evaluation of low back pain.  This is a Worker’s 
Compensation Case.  He states previous injection for right greater tronchanteric bursa 
injection helped 50% and the SIJ helped 40%.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 87)  A functional capacity 
evaluation (FCE) was then performed by Athletico on July 5, 2022.  The FCE placed 
him in the medium work category.  It recommended he not lift from floor level, avoid 
squatting and change positions frequently.  (Defendants’ Exhibit B)  On July 12, 2022, 
Dr. Trout reviewed the FCE and released Mr. Williams with the FCE restrictions.  This 
was undoubtedly an evaluation of his permanent disability.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 92)  He is 
allowed to lift 25 to 35 pounds.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 93)   “Patient became verbally aggressive 
and used several profanities towards myself, back office staff, and front desk staff.”  (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 90)  The office note documents Mr. Williams was angry because he did not feel 
his back and hip complaints had been addressed.  It is entirely unclear in this record 
why no impairment rating was performed at this time.  In spite of this, it is evident that 
his final visit with Dr. Trout was, in fact, an “evaluation of permanent disability” as 
defined in Iowa Code Section 85.39(2). 
Mr. Williams testified that he took his permanent restrictions to his employer.  He 
testified the employer was unable to accommodate his permanent restrictions.  He 
testified that he was placed in a position as a package scanner, which was more in line 
with his restrictions.  (Tr., p. 38)  He was able to sit in this position; however, there were 
times when the line would back up and cause product to fall off the line.  In addition, the 
position resulted in a pay cut of approximately $4.50 per hour and he was only 
scheduled for four-hour shifts.  (Tr., pp. 40-41)  On September 12, 2022, Mr. Williams 
resigned via email.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 7)  I find Mr. Williams felt he had no alternative 
but to quit his job. 
In August 2022, Mr. Williams sought treatment from his primary care physician.  
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 199)  He was eventually referred to a pain management specialist and had 
undergone another series of injections which have done very little to help with his 
symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 206)  He continues to treat up through the time of hearing and 
takes pain medications.  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 249-250) 
Following his separation from Spee Dee, Mr. Williams testified that he started 
working at Home Doctor in Woodward, Iowa.  He works as a finish carpenter and does 
very little lifting.  He earns $19.00 per hour on a part-time basis restoring furniture.  (Tr., 
pp. 43, 68)  He is able to do this work and avoid tasks outside of his capabilities.  He 
also performs some side projects restoring furniture.  He testified he is working with 
Iowa Vocational Rehabilitation and has sought financial aid to further his education.  
(Tr., pp. 43-47)  He is considering taking medical coding courses. 
Mr. Williams testified that he continues to have symptoms in his right foot, low 
back and hip.  (Tr., pp. 50-51) 
Two physicians have provided expert medical opinions relevant to this claim.  

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 5 
 
 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., performed an independent medical examination on January 11, 
2023, and prepared a report dated August 7, 2023.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  Dr. Bansal reviewed 
appropriate records, thoroughly summarizing the same, and performed a thorough 
examination.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-12)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed the following: 
RIGHT ANKLE/FOOT: 
 
Nondisplaced fracture of the right foot cuboid bone. 
BACK: 
Right-sided sacroiliitis. 
RIGHT HIP: 
Referred pain from the back. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13)  All these diagnoses closely mirrored the diagnoses of the treating 
physicians, Dr. Trout and Dr. Klein.  Dr. Bansal opined that these conditions are 
causally related to his admitted work injury and provided logical medical analysis for his 
opinions.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 13-14)  Dr. Bansal then assigned a 4 percent rating for the right 
lower extremity and a 5 percent whole body rating for the low back condition.  (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 15)  He agreed with the FCE restrictions, however, added a recommendation of no 
“frequent bending or twisting, and no kneeling.  No prolonged standing or walking 
greater than one hour at a time.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14)  He agreed MMI was attained on July 
12, 2022.  I find Dr. Bansal’s expert opinions to be highly compelling in this record.  His 
opinions are, in fact, highly consistent with those of the authorized treating physicians. 
The defendants retained a physician, Robert Broghammer, M.D., to perform a 
records review.  (Def. Ex. A)  Dr. Broghammer prepared a report containing numerous 
expert opinions which is dated August 11, 2023.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  Prior to hearing, 
claimant objected to this report contending that Dr. Broghammer’s report was not timely 
served, and that the physician was not timely designated under agency rules.  Following 
a prehearing conference, this objection was overruled.  In his brief, claimant renewed 
the objection.  (Cl. Brief, p. 5)  I have reconsidered my ruling, but the ruling remains 
unchanged.  I find Dr. Broghammer’s report was, in fact, timely served.  And while it 
does not appear in this record that he was timely designated, I do not find that this 
resulted in any prejudice to the claimant. 
Dr. Broghammer did review a number of appropriate records.  (Def. Ex. A, pp. 2-
10)  Dr. Broghammer never met with Mr. Williams.  He never took any history from Mr. 
Williams.  Most importantly, he never examined Mr. Williams.  Dr. Broghammer 
provided the following opinion regarding diagnosis: 
I would assess Mr. Williams as having grade 1 anterolisthesis at L3 on L4, 
sacralization of L5, chronic pain likely related to 1 and 2, bilateral hip pain 
of unknown etiology, bilateral knee pain of unknown etiology, right ankle 
sprain due to May 18, 2021, work injury, right foot cuboid fracture due to 
May 18, 2021, work injury. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 11)  He opined that the only conditions causally related to the work injury 
were the ankle sprain and cuboid fracture.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 11)  He placed Mr. Williams 
at MMI for these conditions on January 11, 2022.  Regarding the back and hips, he 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 6 
 
 
opined the following:  “While symptoms may develop as a result of walking funny, these 
do not rise to the level of an injury in my medical opinion and any treatment beyond the 
three-month time frame for the subjective complaints is … excessive and unwarranted 
under the Auspices of Workers' Compensation System.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 12)  He 
assigned no impairment. 
In this record, I do not find these expert opinions to be compelling or credible.  
These opinions are inconsistent with the diagnoses and treatment from the defendants’ 
authorized treating physicians.  It is unclear what information Dr. Broghammer received 
from the defendants to render these opinions.  It is also unclear what legal standard for 
medical causation he used to reach his conclusions.  Moreover, Dr. Broghammer did 
not have the benefit of ever speaking with Mr. Williams, or even examining his condition 
in order to reach his conclusions which are, as stated above, not consistent with the 
other treating physicians who examined Mr. Williams.  All of Dr. Broghammer’s opinions 
are rejected. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is what conditions resulted from claimant’s 
stipulated May 18, 2021, work injury?  Claimant contends that he sustained a fracture in 
his foot, which never fully recovered, as well as permanent damage to his low back as a 
sequela.  The defendants contend that claimant merely suffered a temporary injury to 
his right foot and ankle which ultimately, fully healed. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
An employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury if the employee 
sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability that is a proximate 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 7 
 
 
result of the original injury. Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 5029834 (Appeal 
February 15, 2012). 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court held long ago that “where an accident occurs to an 
employee in the usual course of his employment, the employer is liable for all 
consequences that naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Oldham v. 
Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 266 N.W. 480, 482 (1936). 
 
A sequela can be an after effect or secondary effect of an injury. Lewis v. Dee 
Zee Manufacturing, File No. 797154, (Arb. September 11, 1989). One form of sequela 
of a work injury is an adverse effect from medical treatment for the original injury. Where 
treatment rendered with respect to a compensable injury itself causes further injury, the 
subsequent injury is also compensable. Young v. United Fire & Casualty Co., 256 Iowa 
813, 129 N.W.2d 75 (1964). For example, the death of a claimant who died on the 
operating table during surgery for a work injury may be compensable, since the injury 
caused the need for surgery. Breeden v. Firestone Tire, File No. 966020, (Arb. February 
27, 1992). As another example, a claimant who fell as a result of dizziness from 
medication he was taking to treat a work injury is to be compensated for both the 
original injury and the resulting fall as a sequela of the first injury. Hamilton v. Combined 
Ins. Co. of America, File Nos. 854465, 877068, (Arb. February 21, 1991). 
 
A sequela can also take the form of a secondary effect on the claimant's body 
stemming from the original injury. For example, where a leg injury causing shortening of 
the leg in turn alters the claimant's gait, causing mechanical back pain, the back 
condition can be found to be a sequela of the leg injury. Fridlington v. 3M, File No. 
788758, (Arb. November 15, 1991). 
 
A sequela can also take the form of a later injury that is caused by the original 
injury. For example, where a leg injury leads to the claimant's knee giving out in a 
grocery store, the resulting fall is compensable as a sequela of the leg injury. Taylor v. 
Oscar Mayer & Co., Ill Iowa Ind. Comm. Rep. 257, 258 (1982). 
 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that claimant has proven that he 
sustained a right foot and ankle injury on May 18, 2021.  The greater weight of evidence 
supports the finding that this condition resulted in a sequela injury to his low back.  This 
is based upon the expert opinions of Dr. Bansal, which is bolstered substantially by 
claimant’s own credible testimony and the contemporaneous medical notes of the 
defendants’ authorized treating physicians, Dr. Trout and Dr. Klein, for the reasons set 
forth above. 
In addition, while neither Dr. Trout nor Dr. Klein specifically opined that the low 
back condition (sacroiliitis) was causally connected to his work injury, they both treated 
the condition as though it was.  They documented his complaints and provided no 
adverse opinions.  They both billed workers’ compensation and provided the treatment 
under his workers’ compensation policy.  In fact, both physicians repeatedly indicated 
on their restriction forms that the conditions for which they provided treatment fell within 
the parameters of “Work Comp.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 103-115)  While paying for treatment 
certainly does not constitute an admission of liability, it should be noted that these were 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 8 
 
 
the defendants’ authorized physicians.  The time to perform a reasonable investigation 
regarding the causation of these conditions would logically be when the treatment was 
sought.  Based upon this record, there is no evidence that the defendants ever asked 
these physicians to provide an opinion as to whether the low back condition of 
sacroiliitis was a sequela of the right leg injury.  Thus, while my decision on medical 
causation is primarily based upon the compelling expert opinion of Dr. Bansal, it is 
bolstered and reinforced by the contemporaneous notes of the authorized treating 
physicians, as well as Mr. Williams’ credible testimony regarding the development of his 
symptoms. 
 
Having found that the claimant has met his burden of proof on medical causation, 
I now turn to the issue of temporary partial disability.  Mr. Williams claims he is owed 
TPD from May 18, 2021, through the MMI date of July 12, 2022.  The defendants deny 
this; however, seek a credit for payment of TPD during this timeframe.  (See Hearing 
Report, paragraphs 3(a), 4, and 9) 
 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Section 85.33(2) 
 
If an employee is entitled to temporary partial benefits under subsection 3 of this 
section, the employer for whom the employee was working at the time of injury shall pay 
to the employee weekly compensation benefits, as provided in section 85.32, for and 
during the period of temporary partial disability.  The temporary partial benefit shall be 
sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the difference between the employee's weekly 
earnings at the time of injury, computed in compliance with section 85.36, and the 
employee's actual gross weekly income from employment during the period of 
temporary partial disability.  If at the time of injury an employee is paid on the basis of 
the output of the employee, with a minimum guarantee pursuant to a written 
employment agreement, the minimum guarantee shall be used as the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of injury.  However, the weekly compensation benefits shall 
not exceed the payments to which the employee would be entitled under section 85.36 
or section 85.37, or under subsection 1 of this section.  Iowa Code Section 85.33(4) 
(2019). 
 
It appears that claimant was paid TPD appropriately during the periods he was 
on light-duty and recuperating from his work injury.  It is somewhat unclear to me 
whether Mr. Williams is claiming he is entitled to any unpaid temporary benefits.  
Claimant has failed to prove that he is owed any temporary disability benefits beyond 
this. 
 
The next issue is claimant’s entitlement to permanency benefits, including the 
nature and extent of disability. 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 9 
 
 
 
Having found that Mr. Williams sustained disability to his right foot/leg, as well as 
his low back, I conclude that his disability must be assessed under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v), which states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those described or 
referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u”, the compensation shall be paid 
during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability 
bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed 
when the injury occurred. A determination of the reduction in the 
employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall take into 
account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the number 
of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee 
would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is eligible for 
compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is offered work for 
which the employee receives or would receive the same or greater salary, 
wages, or earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury, 
the employee shall be compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the 
employee’s earning capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, 
if an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work with the same employer and is compensated based only 
upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury as 
provided in this paragraph and is terminated from employment by that 
employer, the award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this 
chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings 
by the employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee’s 
earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability 
 
I find that Mr. Williams was unable to work in a position which paid the same or 
greater than his pre-injury earnings; consequently, his disability should be, and is, 
evaluated for an assessment of his loss of earning capacity. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 10 
 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
 
Considering all of the relevant factors of industrial disability, I find that Mr. 
Williams has sustained a moderate loss of earning capacity as a result of his right 
foot/leg and low back conditions.  He is 37 years old with a high school education.  His 
entire work history is manual labor.  While he is reasonably well skilled, his skills 
undoubtedly involve the use of physical labor.  His condition itself did not result in 
significantly high impairment ratings.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15)  His work restrictions, however, 
are best described by Dr. Trout and Dr. Bansal as follows: 
 
Avoid floor to waist lifting and repetitive squatting; 
 
May lift up to 25 pounds occasionally from 12 inches to waist level; 
 
Waist to shoulder 35 pounds occasionally; 
 
Push/pull 40 pounds of force occasionally; 
 
No frequent bending or twisting; no kneeling; 
 
No prolonged standing or walking greater than 1 hour at a time. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 115; Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) These specific restrictions are significantly disabling 
to Mr. Williams who has a manual labor work history as a machinist and delivery driver. 
 
The employer correctly identified that these were significant medical restrictions 
and did not allow Mr. Williams to return to his delivery job where he had to lift significant 
weights.  He was provided a lighter, lower paying job, where he was allowed to sit. 
The record reflects Mr. Williams is highly motivated to work.  He has secured 
reasonable part-time employment and is taking reasonable efforts to gain skills 
necessary to work in less physically demanding occupations.  Having considered all of 
the appropriate factors of industrial disability, I find that Mr. Williams has sustained a 50 
percent loss of earning capacity as a result of his work injury.  I conclude this entitles 
him to receive 250 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at the stipulated 
weekly rate commencing on July 13, 2022. 
 
The next issue is medical expenses both past and future. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 
After being released by the authorized treating physician for his work injuries, Mr. 
Williams sought treatment with his primary care physician.  He seeks reimbursement or 
repayment of the expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 9.  None of the treatment he 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 11 
 
 
received has been beneficial.  I find that Mr. Williams has failed to meet his burden 
under the beneficial care rule.  Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 196, 204-05 (Iowa 2010).  These expenses are denied.  He is, however, entitled 
to future medical care.  Given the present record, however, there is no evidence that 
there is any care which will improve his condition.  He is entitled to return to the 
authorized treating physicians to determine whether there is any further treatment to 
improve his work-related conditions. 
 
The next issue is payment of IME expenses.  Claimant seeks payment of Dr. 
Bansal’s IME in the amount of $3,661.00.  Defendants contend that the defendants did 
not secure a rating before Dr. Bansal’s report.  The defendants did not challenge the 
reasonableness of Dr. Bansal’s charges.  (Def. Brief, pp. 15-16) 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
 
Having reviewed the evidence in the file, I find that Dr. Trout performed an 
evaluation of permanent disability on or about July 12, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 90-93)  
While Dr. Trout did not provide a rating at this time, it appears in this record that he was 
never asked to provide a rating.  He did, however, opine that Mr. Williams was at MMI 
and needed permanent restrictions.  This undoubtedly qualifies as “an evaluation of 
permanent disability” under Section 85.39(2).  Defendants are responsible for the IME 
expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 9 in the amount of $3,661.00.  In essence, the 
defendants’ defense is that they failed to properly process this claim.  They argue that 
since no permanent rating was given (because they never asked for it) Mr. Williams is 
not entitled to an evaluation.  This is not the law. 
 
The final issue is penalty. 
“Because penalty benefits are a creature of statute, our discussion begins with 
an examination of the statutory parameters for such benefits.” Keystone Nursing Care 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 12 
 
 
Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 307 (Iowa 2005). Under Iowa Code section 
10A.315(4)(a)2 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
This provision “codifies, in the workers’ compensation insurance context, the 
common law rule that insurers with good faith disputes over the legal or factual validity 
of claims can challenge them, if their arguments for doing so present fairly debatable 
issues.” Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993) (citing Dirks v. Farm 
Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 465 N.W.2d 857, 861 (Iowa 1991) and Dolan v. Aid Ins. Co., 431 
N.W.2d 790, 794 (Iowa 1988)). “The purpose or goal of the statute is both punishment 
and deterrence.” Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 237 (Iowa 
1996). 
The legislature established in Iowa Code section 10A.315(4)(b) a burden-shifting 
framework for determining whether penalty benefits must be awarded in a workers’ 
compensation case. See 2009 Iowa Acts ch. 179, § 110 (codified at Iowa 
Code § 10A.315(4)(b)); see also Pettengill v. Am. Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 
N.W.2d 740, 746–47 (Iowa App. 2015) as amended (Feb. 16, 2016) (discussing the 
burden-shifting required by the two-factor statutory test). The employee bears the 
burden to establish a prima facie case for penalty benefits. See Iowa Code § 
10A.315(4)(b). To do so, the employee must demonstrate a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of workers’ compensation benefits. Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(b)(1). If the 
employee fails to prove a denial, delay, or termination, there can be no award of penalty 
benefits and the analysis stops. See id. at § 10A.315(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 
N.W.2d at 747. However, if the employee makes the requisite showing, the burden of 
proof shifts to the employer. See id. at § 10A.315(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d 
at 747. 
To avoid an award of penalty benefits, the employer must “prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits.” 
Iowa Code§ 10A.315(4)(b)(2). An excuse must meet all of the following criteria to be “a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse” under the statute: 
                                                 
2 Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) was previously codified as Iowa code section 86.13(4).  No 
substantive changes were made to the statute when transferred from section 86.13 to section 10A.315.  
References to the current location of this statute are substituted to avoid confusion.  
 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 13 
 
 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were 
the actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of 
benefits. 
Id. § 10A.315(4)(c). 
This paragraph creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to 
follow in showing it had a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for 
the termination of benefits. Iowa Code § [10A.315](4)(c)(1)-(3). First, the 
employer's excuse for the termination must have been preceded by an 
investigation. Id. § [10A.315](4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the 
investigation were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” relied on by 
the employer in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.” Id. § [10A.315](4)(c)(3) 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747 (emphasis in original). “An employer cannot unilaterally 
decide to terminate an employee's benefits without adhering to Iowa Code section 
[10A.315]; to allow otherwise would contradict the language of that section.” Id. 
“A ‘reasonable basis’ for denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly 
debatable.’” Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307 (quoting Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996)). A claim may be fairly 
debatable because of a good faith legal or factual dispute. See Covia, 507 N.W.2d at 
416 (finding a jurisdictional issue fairly debatable because there were “viable arguments 
in favor of either party”).  “[T]he reasonableness of the employer’s denial or termination 
of benefits does not turn on whether the employer was right. The issue is whether there 
was a reasonable basis for the employer’s position that no benefits were owing.” 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307–08. 
If the employer establishes a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse,” no 
penalty benefits are awarded. However, if the employer fails to meet its burden of proof, 
penalty benefits must be awarded. The following factors are used in determining the 
amount of penalty benefits: 
  The length of the delay; 
  The number of the delays; 
  The information available to the employer regarding the employee's injuries and 
wages; and 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 14 
 
 
  The prior penalties imposed against the employer under section [10A.315].  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
Mr. Williams reached MMI on July 12, 2022.  At that time there was an 
examination of permanent disability.  At that time, it was clear that Mr. Williams had 
permanent medical restrictions and would be unable to return to his regular job.  The 
defendants, however, failed to request any type of impairment rating.  In fact, they never 
sought any type of rating until just prior to hearing in a records review from Dr. 
Broghammer.   
More importantly, in this record, the defendants never communicated anything 
contemporaneously to the claimant about payment of permanency. There is no 
contemporaneous explanation at all for their actions.  Instead, they waited until just prior 
to hearing and had a records review by a physician who never examined him.  
Permanency benefits were due on July 13, 2022.  The failure of the defendants to 
request a rating at that time does not change this fact.  I find that, at a minimum, Mr. 
Williams was entitled to his impairment rating at that time which would have entitled him 
to at least 30 weeks of benefits within the weeks after July 13, 2022.  Defendants did 
not make any payments to the claimant for permanent partial disability.  I therefore 
assess a penalty of $9,000.00 to deter defendants from engaging in such claims 
handling practices in the future. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendants shall pay the claimant two hundred fifty (250) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the rate of six hundred thirty-seven and 89/100 dollars 
($637.89) commencing July 13, 2022. 
Claimant has not proven entitlement to any additional temporary benefits beyond 
what was already paid. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants are entitled to no credit against PPD benefits. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal’s IME expense in the amount 
of three thousand six hundred sixty-one and 00/100 dollars ($3,661.00). 
Dr. Trout remains the authorized treating physician. 
Defendants shall pay a penalty in the amount of nine thousand and 00/100 
dollars ($9,000.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of one hundred three and 00/100 
dollars ($103.00). 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 15 
 
 
Signed and filed this ___16th ___ day of April, 2024. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
L. Tyler Laflin (via WCES) 
Meredith Ashley (via WCES) 
Kathryn Johnson (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 

WILLIAMS V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY 
Page 16 
 
 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
