Case Number: 23700466.01
Case Title:  MASCHKE, JUSTIN V. CITY OF DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Maschke Justin-23700466.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JUSTIN MASCHKE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
          File No. 23700466.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
CITY OF DES MOINES, 
  : 
       
 
 
  :                            
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
Head Notes:  1100, 1108.50, 1402.30, 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
                      1803, 2701, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Justin Maschke filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the City of Des Moines, self-insured employer, for a 
partially stipulated work injury date of November 8, 2022. The case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on August 28, 2024. The case proceeded to a 
live video hearing via Zoom, with all participants appearing remotely. The hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on August 28, 2024. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on October 18, 2024, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant’s right cubital tunnel syndrome arose out of and in the 
course of his employment; 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent partial disability; 
3. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care for the cubital tunnel 
syndrome; 
4. 
Reimbursement for claimant’s independent medical evaluation pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39; and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-15  13:29:00     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 2 
5. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 52-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
8) He is not married and does not have any children. He is a high school graduate, who 
has worked for the City of Des Moines since February of 2000. (Tr., pp. 8-9) He started 
his tenure with the city in the Forestry Department, doing tree trimming work. (Tr., p. 9) 
He described it as heavy work. He was in forestry for about six years, after which he 
transferred to the Streets Department. 
 
In the Streets Department, claimant worked in the asphalt section. He used 
several machines, including pavers, the “lay-down” machine, and the milling machine. 
He said this was also heavy work. He was in the asphalt section for about four or five 
years when he took a promotion in approximately 2010 and went to the street cleaning 
division. (Tr., pp. 9-10) 
 
Claimant testified that the street cleaning department is responsible for operating 
the street sweepers that clean the streets, but is also the front-line for illegal dumping. 
(Tr., p. 10) He explained that when people dump items on the roadsides, such as 
refrigerators, stoves, tires, etc., it is the street cleaning department that cleans it up. 
Now that he has seniority, he is able to primarily use a loader for moving large items. 
However, he testified that there are times when large items are down in a ditch or 
placed somewhere a machine cannot be maneuvered, so he will have to “manhandle” 
some items by hand. (Tr., pp. 10-11) Additionally, the street cleaning department helps 
with cleanup from storm damage, which generally involves using chainsaws and 
“throwing logs.” (Tr., p. 11) He noted that they have to move storm debris away from 
telephone poles, utility boxes, and fire hydrants, and often they cannot get their 
machinery into those areas to move it so it has to be done by hand. He also loads dump 
trucks to haul brush and compost to the landfill or recycling cite. (Tr., pp. 24-25) 
 
Prior to the work injury at issue, claimant had bilateral carpal tunnel releases. 
(Tr., pp. 13-14) He thought it had been about 15 years prior, and he did not have any 
ongoing symptoms from that prior condition. (Tr., p. 14) He also had a prior left shoulder 
surgery. (Tr., pp. 25-26) On November 8, 2022, claimant was completing his normal 
morning routine. (Tr., pp. 11-12) He was completing a pre-trip inspection on his 
machine, and found it needed DEF fluid, which is a diesel additive. (Tr., p. 12) The tank 
for the fluid is located under the hood of the machine. Claimant testified that he was 
lifting the hood and got it about three-quarters of the way up when he had to adjust his 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 3 
grip. One of the hydraulic cylinders was broken on the machine, which resulted in the 
hood jerking back as he was pulling, which also jerked his right arm. Claimant testified 
that the hoods on the machines are extremely heavy, and often two employees will lift 
the hood together. (Tr., p. 13)  
 
Claimant testified that hood jerking his arm was the beginning of his problems. 
(Tr., p. 12) He reported the injury to his supervisor the day it happened, and was sent 
for medical treatment the next day. (Tr., p. 20) He saw Marcus Rushing, M.D., on 
November 9, 2022, at Unity Point Occupational Medicine Clinic. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) 
Claimant explained that he injured his right arm the day prior while trying to raise the 
hood on a street sweeper, and tugging on the hood with flexed arms in order to prop it 
open. He said immediately after, “he felt pain in the elbow (patient points to cubital 
fossa) that migrated up towards his shoulder.” He rated his pain at 7 out of 10 at rest 
and worse when he used the arm.  
 
After physical examination, Dr. Rushing’s assessment was right distal biceps 
tendinitis. He provided an injection and medications, and told claimant to apply ice and 
return in one week. He noted an MRI would be considered pending no symptom 
resolution. Claimant was placed on restrictions of no use of the right arm. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
2) He returned to Dr. Rushing on November 16, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) At that time, he 
had completed his medication, and said his symptoms had improved somewhat. He still 
had an ache in the area of the distal biceps, and numbness and tingling in the fourth 
and fifth digits on the right with wearing the shoulder sling. Dr. Rushing discontinued the 
sling, and prescribed a topical cream to apply to the biceps. He also ordered physical 
therapy, and continued claimant’s work restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 4-5)  
 
Claimant next saw Dr. Rushing on December 13, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) At that 
time, he had completed physical therapy and reported his symptoms were significantly 
improved. He asked for a trial of full duty work. Dr. Rushing agreed to allow him to 
return to full duty, and wanted to see him back in two weeks. Claimant returned on 
January 4, 2023, at which time his biceps had continued to improve, but he was still 
having numbness and tingling in his fourth and fifth digits with radiation proximal into the 
distal forearm. Dr. Rushing allowed him to continue full duty, but ordered an MRI of the 
right hand and right forearm.  
 
The MRI took place on January 25, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 17-19) Claimant returned 
to Unity Point Occupational Medicine on January 30, 2023, and saw Judith Nayeri, D.O. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 12) Dr. Nayeri reviewed the MRI reports, and noted the forearm showed a 
low to intermediate grade biceps tear, and common extensor tendon tear. The MRI of 
the right hand showed mild to moderate capsulitis of the metacarpophalangeal joints, 
most notably the index and long fingers; hamate interosseous ganglion, which may 
reflect a hamate abutment-related arthritis; and focal dorsal capsular swelling or ill-
defined ganglion was seen in the partially assist wrist up to one centimeter. Dr. Nayeri 
referred claimant to orthopedics, and allowed him to continue working full duty. 
 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 4 
Claimant saw Benjamin Paulson, M.D., at Iowa Ortho on February 9, 2023. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 20) Dr. Paulson noted that claimant had previous bilateral carpal tunnel 
releases. Claimant complained of pain in his right hand, radiating to his forearm, along 
with numbness and tingling in his right fourth and fifth fingers. He said his biceps tear 
was doing better after physical therapy. Dr. Paulson reviewed the MRI and agreed with 
the interpretation of capsulitis of the MCP joints of the index and long finders and 
hamate intraosseous ganglion. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) They discussed treatment options, and 
decided to proceed with conservative treatment including occupational therapy and 
Voltaren gel. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 21-22) He was allowed to return to work without restrictions. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23)  
 
Claimant returned to Iowa Ortho on March 9, 2023, and saw Kellie Wong, PA-C 
for Dr. Paulson. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 24) Claimant reported ongoing right-hand pain, radiating to 
the elbow. The pain was constant, and was aggravated by bending and twisting. He felt 
occupational therapy was helping some, but still complained of ulnar-sided right wrist 
pain. After physical examination, PA-C Wong’s assessment was right hand and wrist 
pain and right cubital tunnel syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25) Claimant wished to continue 
occupational therapy. He was also counseled on elbow placement and wearing a brace 
at night for his cubital tunnel syndrome.  
 
Claimant returned on April 6, 2023, and saw Devin Stane, PA-C. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 27) 
He had completed occupational therapy, which he felt was somewhat helpful, but he 
continued to have symptoms. He was referred for an EMG/NCS of the right upper 
extremity. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 28) The EMG took place on April 18, 2023, at Capital 
Orthopaedics. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 64) Claimant returned to Dr. Paulson on April 26, 2023 to 
review the results. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 30) Dr. Paulson reviewed the EMG results and 
diagnosed right cubital tunnel syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 31) He recommended surgery. 
 
On April 27, 2023, Dr. Paulson authored a letter to the claims adjustor in 
response to her questions regarding causation and treatment. (Defendant’s Exhibit A, p. 
1) Dr. Paulson opined that claimant’s right cubital tunnel syndrome was not caused by 
the work incident on November 8, 2022. He stated that cubital tunnel syndrome is 
“multifactorial in its development but in general it is not from a pulling or stretching injury 
that he experienced on November 8, 2022.” Rather, he opined it was most likely 
idiopathic in nature and developed independent of his work injury. He noted that while 
he did not believe it to be work-related, he still recommended claimant have a cubital 
tunnel release due to his symptoms. 
 
On May 9, 2023, Dr. Paulson authored another letter in response to some 
additional questions from the claims adjustor. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1) He opined that 
claimant’s right cubital tunnel syndrome was not a cumulative injury resulting from 
claimant’s work for the city as a street sweeper operator. He stated that the activities 
listed in claimant’s job description would not be activities he would consider to be 
contributing factors as listed in the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury 
Causation, Second Edition. He further opined that claimant’s cubital tunnel syndrome 
was not materially aggravated from lifting the hood of the street sweeper on November 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 5 
8, 2022. He opined that claimant “is in the same condition now whether he had the 
incident or not” on the date of injury. 
 
Claimant’s next medical treatment took place on September 25, 2023, when he 
saw Michael Gainer, M.D. at Iowa Ortho. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 33) Dr. Gainer was seeing 
claimant for evaluation of his right elbow. He reviewed the prior MRI, and agreed it 
showed a partial distal biceps tendon rupture. After physical examination, Dr. Gainer 
recommended surgery to repair the biceps. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 34)  
 
On September 28, 2023, claimant returned to Unity Point Occupational Medicine 
and saw Katie Swift, ARNP. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 14) He reported right shoulder pain that had 
been ongoing since the November 8, 2022 injury. ARNP Swift reviewed claimant’s 
medical treatment since the date of injury, and noted that while claimant initially 
reported some shoulder pain, it seemed to have resolved, and his medical care was 
then primarily focused on his hand and forearm pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 14-15) After physical 
examination, ARNP Swift noted that she did not find any significant findings other than 
reports of pain with movement, which would be caused from underlying degenerative 
changes. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 15) She noted good range of motion and good strength. She did 
not believe there was any acute injury to the shoulder at that time, and recommended 
claimant focus on repairing the biceps and extensor tendon injuries, and then possibly 
re-evaluate the shoulder.  
 
On October 11, 2023, Dr. Gainer repaired the right distal biceps tendon. (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 86) His operative report notes that the biceps tendon was found to be about fifty 
percent ruptured off the biceps. His first post-operative visit took place on October 24, 
2023, at which time he reported mild symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 38) He continued to report 
numbness and tingling in his fingers. Dr. Gainer advised claimant to start elbow range of 
motion exercises. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 39) At his next visit on November 7, 2023, claimant 
reported his symptoms were improving. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 41) On November 21, 2023, he 
again reported improved symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 44) Dr. Gainer noted his range of 
motion was improving. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 45) He allowed claimant to discontinue his elbow 
brace, and start lifting up to ten pounds occasionally. With respect to treatment for his 
cubital tunnel syndrome, Dr. Gainer and claimant discussed treatment options, and 
agreed to proceed with cubital tunnel release surgery.  
 
On December 4, 2023, Dr. Gainer authored a letter to the claims adjustor in 
response to her questions about causation. (Def. Ex. C, p. 1) He opined that claimant’s 
right cubital tunnel was not related to his right distal biceps tendon injury. He also 
reviewed claimant’s job description, and did not consider the activities performed to be a 
risk factor for him developing cubital tunnel. Finally, he opined that the mechanism of 
injury related to the November 8, 2022 work incident did not cause or materially 
aggravate claimant’s cubital tunnel syndrome to the degree it needed treatment.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Gainer for follow up of his biceps repair on December 
12, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 46) At that time, claimant was doing well and had no complaints. 
Dr. Gainer increased his lifting capacity to 25-pounds. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 47)  

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 6 
 
Claimant saw Gregory Yanish, M.D., at Capital Orthopaedics on December 27, 
2023. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 76) He reported numbness and tingling in his right hand for several 
months. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 78) He described his job duties with the city as operating heavy 
equipment, including a street sweeper; loading and unloading trucks; and using 
chainsaws, jackhammers, etc. He also noted his work injury and recent biceps tendon 
repair. Dr. Yanish reviewed claimant’s previous MRI and EMG results, as well as Dr. 
Paulson’s medical records. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 79) After physical examination, he diagnosed 
claimant with cubital tunnel syndrome, and discussed treatment options. Claimant 
decided to proceed with a right endoscopic cubital tunnel release. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Gainer on January 9, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 49) He reported 
some mild tenderness in his elbow, with prolonged use causing aggravation. Dr. Gainer 
increased his weight limit to 30- to 40-pounds. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 50)  
 
Claimant had a right endoscopic cubital tunnel release on January 25, 2024. (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 88) His first post-operative visit with Dr. Yanish took place on February 2, 
2024. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 81) He reported significant improvement in the paresthesia in the 
operative hand. He had been performing early gentle range of motion exercises of the 
elbow, wrist, fingers, and thumb with no complications. Dr. Yanish encouraged claimant 
to use the hand normally as tolerated, and continue with the range of motion exercises 
as formal therapy would not be needed. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 82) He was released from care, to 
follow up as needed.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Gainer on February 20, 2024, and reported some pain in his 
shoulder as well as his elbow. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 52) He was given a 40- to 50- pound lifting 
restriction for the right arm. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 53) On March 19, 2024, he continued to report 
pain in his shoulder, and some pain and soreness after using his right elbow. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 55) He was given a 60-pound restriction on his right arm. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 56) 
 
On March 20, 2024. Dr. Yanish authored a letter to claimant’s attorney. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) Dr. Yanish noted claimant’s job involved working with heavy 
equipment for the city, and he had this job for the past 24 years. He listed claimant’s job 
duties as including “running heavy equipment including a street sweeper, loading and 
unloading trucks, using chain saws, jack hammers, etc.” He noted his initial diagnosis 
was mild to moderate right cubital tunnel syndrome, mainly demyelinating. With respect 
to causation, Dr. Yanish opined claimant most likely had an acute on chronic injury, 
secondary not only to his duties working with heavy and vibratory equipment over the 
past 24 years, but also a superimposed acute exacerbation from the work incident on 
November 8, 2022.  
 
Dr. Yanish provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. Using section 16, he noted deficits in 
elbow range of motion, which he attributed to the distal biceps tendon repair, as well as 
strength deficits and sensory deficits. Based on those deficits, he provided a 13 percent 
right upper extremity impairment rating.  

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 7 
 
On April 16, 2024, claimant returned to Dr. Gainer. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 58) He reported 
doing well, but sometimes getting a “charley horse feeling” in his arm when he tried to 
lift anything heavy. Dr. Gainer recommended a course of occupational therapy for 
strengthening, and released him to return to work with no restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 59) 
On May 14, 2024, claimant returned to Dr. Gainer and reported doing well except for 
some continued shoulder pain that did not resolve with therapy on his elbow. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 61) He had completed therapy, and had full range of motion in his elbow. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
62) Dr. Gainer placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI), and released 
him to return to full duty work with no restrictions. He noted that claimant may need 
evaluation of his right shoulder due to continued discomfort. 
 
On July 3, 2024, Steven Aviles, M.D., authored a letter to the claims adjustor 
regarding claimant’s right shoulder. (Def. Ex. D, p. 1) There are no treatment records for 
claimant’s right shoulder in evidence, as he had not reached MMI by the date of hearing 
and thus the shoulder was not included as an issue for this decision. Dr. Aviles noted 
that claimant had a SLAP tear, partial biceps tear, and impingement in his right 
shoulder. He opined that the right shoulder pain was causally related to the work injury 
on November 8, 2022, as he reported it immediately. His care for the shoulder was 
somewhat delayed, but his history was consistent with the injury. Dr. Aviles also did not 
believe that there was any preexisting injury in the right shoulder. He recommended 
surgery, consisting of right shoulder arthroscopy, biceps tenodesis, subacromial 
decompression, glenohumeral debridement, extensive, with intraoperative PRP 
injection. At the time of hearing, claimant had just had the right shoulder surgery, which 
took place on August 22, 2024. (Tr., pp. 15, 17) His arm was still in a sling at the time of 
hearing.  
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Brian Crites, M.D., 
on July 16, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 3) Dr. Crites reviewed medical records related to 
claimant’s right upper extremity. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 3-7) He noted that Dr. Gainer wrote a 
letter dated May 17, 2024, assigning a zero percent impairment rating, but that letter is 
not in evidence. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 7) Dr. Crites also noted that claimant had recently been 
seen for his right shoulder and would be having shoulder surgery soon, but he did not 
have those records available. He noted claimant had a prior left shoulder surgery in 
2006, and had prior bilateral carpal tunnel releases. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 8) 
 
Dr. Crites reported claimant’s current right shoulder symptoms as including pain 
and decreased range of motion. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 7) His right elbow was better than before 
the surgery with Dr. Gainer, and his main complaint was cramping or Charley Horse 
sensations in the biceps with activity. Finally, he reported ongoing intermittent sharp 
pain with certain movements in his right wrist, especially when trying to “palm” a 
steering wheel when driving.  
 
Dr. Crites performed a physical examination and measured claimant’s strength 
and range of motion. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 8-9) He noted a mild Popeye deformity of the biceps 
muscle belly compared to the left. (Cl. Ex. 2, p 8) He noted claimant was tender over the 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 8 
cubital tunnel, and also had mild hypothenar atrophy on the right compared to the left. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 9) Based on his examination, his assessment was right distal biceps 
tendon tear; right cubital tunnel syndrome; right wrist sprain/material aggravation of 
arthritis; and right shoulder possible labral/SLAP tear. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 10) 
 
With respect to causation, Dr. Crites opined that the work injury on November 8, 
2022 was the direct cause of the distal biceps tendon tear with subsequent surgical 
repair. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 10) With respect to the cubital tunnel syndrome, he agreed that it 
can have a multifactorial etiology. However, he disagreed with Dr. Paulson and Dr. 
Gainer that it was not related to the work injury. He noted that claimant did not have any 
symptoms of cubital tunnel syndrome prior to his injury. His symptoms started within a 
week of the injury and remained consistent. His work duties are consistent with causing 
cubital tunnel syndrome, and his injury was consistent with causing and/or aggravating 
cubital tunnel syndrome as the swelling of the elbow from the injury would affect the 
ulnar nerve. Therefore, he opined that the work injury on November 8, 2022 was a 
substantial contributing factor in the cubital tunnel syndrome and need for surgery.  
 
He agreed with Dr. Paulson that the work injury aggravated claimant’s 
preexisting right wrist arthritis, however he opined it was not a temporary aggravation 
but a permanent and material aggravation. He noted that claimant did not have any right 
wrist pain prior to the injury, and did not return to baseline as he continues to have 
symptoms. With respect to the right shoulder, he noted claimant had a known injury to 
the distal aspect of the biceps tendon and then developed pain in the proximal aspect of 
the muscle tendon unit. He also noted that claimant complained of pain radiating up to 
his shoulder on the day after the injury, and on September 28, 2023 he was tender on 
exam in the bicipital groove. He opined that the mechanism of injury was consistent with 
causing injury to both ends of the biceps muscle, and the right shoulder condition for 
which he was currently undergoing treatment was causally related to the November 8, 
2022 work injury. 
 
Using the fifth edition of the AMA Guides, Dr. Crites provided an impairment 
rating (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 11) For the right elbow, he noted that section 16.7d states that if a 
tendon has been ruptured or undergone surgery, strength can be used to assign 
impairment. Due to the surgical repair of claimant’s distal biceps tendon, Dr. Crites 
assigned 4 percent upper extremity impairment to the elbow for loss of supination 
strength. He also assigned a total of 5 percent to the elbow for loss of motion. 
Combined, his total impairment rating for the right elbow was 9 percent of the upper 
extremity. 
 
For the right wrist, he assigned an 11 percent impairment rating for loss of motion 
secondary to the work injury. For the right shoulder, he assigned 4 percent of the upper 
extremity due to loss of motion, but noted that rating was provisional and would need to 
be recalculated once claimant reached MMI from his right shoulder surgery. Using the 
combined values chart, Dr. Crites’ total combined impairment rating came to 22 percent 
of the upper extremity. 
 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 9 
Dr. Crites agreed that claimant reached MMI on May 14, 2024 for his right elbow. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 12) He opined he reached MMI for his right wrist on April 26, 2023. Finally, 
he did not believe he had reached MMI for his right shoulder, as he was still receiving 
treatment. He opined that claimant needed to continue with the treatment for his right 
shoulder. He did not recommend any further treatment for the right elbow, but opined he 
would likely require intermittent cortisone injection for his right wrist to help reduce the 
symptoms from his arthritis.  
 
Finally, with respect to restrictions, Dr. Crites recommended claimant avoid lifting 
more than 50 pounds, avoid pushing or pulling more than 30 pounds, and avoid 
repetitive gripping more than 10 pounds. He noted the restrictions may change after 
shoulder surgery. 
 
On July 29, 2024, Dr. Gainer authored another letter to the claims adjustor after 
reviewing Dr. Crites’ IME report. (Def. Ex. E, p. 1) He outlined his discrepancies with 
respect to Dr. Gainer’s impairment rating for claimant’s elbow. First, regarding the 5 
percent allocated to loss of supination strength, he noted that the AMA Guides state that 
an impairment rating for loss of strength cannot be given until at least one year after 
surgery. With respect to the 4 percent assigned for loss of flexion, he noted that 
claimant had full flexion of his elbow at his last examination, and the physical therapist 
measured 130 degrees on April 19, 2024. Dr. Crites measured 110 degrees. Therefore, 
at most, Dr. Gainer would assign 1 percent for loss of motion. He further stated that 
strength loss is only to be used in rare instances when the Guides do not give adequate 
impairment from any other factor. Finally, he states decreased strength cannot be rated 
in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, or deformities or absence of 
parts. He also noted that Dr. Crites’ recommended restrictions appeared to pertain to 
the shoulder and not the elbow, as he noted they might need to be amended after 
shoulder surgery. 
 
With respect to causation, he noted his views were in agreement with Dr. 
Paulson, and based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury 
Causation, second edition. He stated that the occupational risk factors for ulnar 
entrapment at the elbow clearly state only some evidence for the combination of force 
and repetition as being an occupational factor for causation of cubital tunnel syndrome. 
He said there was insufficient evidence of vibration, repetition, force, awkward position, 
keyboarding activities, cold environment, and length of employment. Therefore, he 
opined that Dr. Crites’ opinion that it “happened around the time of injury and that his 
job duties are consistent with causation of cubital tunnel” was not based on a review of 
the medical literature. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 1-2) 
 
On August 2, 2024, Dr. Paulson authored another letter to the claims adjustor 
after reviewing Dr. Crites’ IME. (Def. Ex. F, p. 1) Dr. Paulson maintained his opinion that 
the work injury only caused a temporary aggravation of claimant’s preexisting wrist 
arthritis. He noted that it is not surprising that claimant continues to have mild 
symptoms, as osteoarthritis is degenerative and naturally and gradually progresses 
despite activity levels. He also noted that with mild symptoms, claimant did not need 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 10 
any further treatment unless it progresses. Again, however, he stressed it would be a 
natural progression. Referencing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and 
Injury Causation, second edition, he stated that factors such as force, repetition, 
posture, vibration, highly repetitive work, and forceful work all have insufficient evidence 
of being a contributing factor of carpometacarpal joint osteoarthritis. Factors such as 
age, BMI, and genetic factors all have strong evidence of being a factor in development 
of osteoarthritis of the thumb CMC joint. He again opined that the injury may have 
aggravated claimant’s wrist, but given that he has only mild symptoms per Dr. Crites’ 
report, he believed claimant had returned to baseline where he would have been 
regardless of the injury on November 8, 2022. 
 
With respect to Dr. Crites’ impairment rating, he repeated the same language in 
the AMA Guides that Dr. Gaines used, and opined it was inappropriate to give a rating 
for both lost range of motion and loss of strength. With respect to range of motion of the 
elbow, he noted his own measurements on September 14, 2023 were consistent with 
the therapist’s measurements, and agreed that a 1 percent impairment would be 
appropriate. Regarding the wrist, he did not see any documentation of range of motion 
measurements on Dr. Crites’ IME report. (Def. Ex. F, p. 2) Additionally, he did not have 
the contralateral side for comparison. Therefore, without seeing claimant again, he 
could not comment directly on Dr. Crites’ rating. However, he noted that because he 
does not believe there was any material aggravation of the wrist arthritis, he does not 
think giving any impairment for the wrist would be appropriate. As such, overall, he 
would give a 1 percent upper extremity rating based on the loss of flexion in the elbow. 
 
With respect to causation of the cubital tunnel syndrome, Dr. Paulson noted that 
claimant’s lack of symptoms of cubital tunnel syndrome prior to the injury is not an 
indication of cause. He stated that “time relationship does not mean something is 
caused from another.” He again noted that cubital tunnel is multifactorial in nature and 
the vast majority develops in patients regardless of their activities or injuries and is 
many times idiopathic in nature. He again stressed that temporal relationship does not 
mean causation, and having symptoms develop a few days or a week later does not 
mean the incident a week before caused it. Regarding his work duties, Dr. Paulson did 
not believe claimant’s job as a street sweeper fell under the combination of risk factors 
such as extensive force and repetition. He did not believe Dr. Crites provided any 
evidence of claimant’s work duties being consistent with causing cubital tunnel 
syndrome either.  
 
Finally, with respect to Dr. Crites’ statement that the swelling in claimant’s elbow 
from the biceps injury would affect the ulnar nerve, Dr. Paulson disagreed. (Def. Ex. F, 
p. 3) He noted that the biceps tendon is anatomically on the opposite side of the elbow 
from the ulnar nerve. He agreed there could be some swelling from the biceps tendon 
tear, but that it would be on the other side of the elbow. He also noted that the 
mechanism for tearing the biceps tendon would not be a mechanism of a direct blow 
over the cubital tunnel, and he did not see how it would increase swelling directly within 
the cubital tunnel. Finally, he noted that if there was potentially any swelling, it would be 
temporary in nature and would eventually resolve. As such, he reiterated that he does 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 11 
not believe the cubital tunnel syndrome is related to claimant’s work injury, and opined 
that he would have developed cubital tunnel syndrome to the same degree regardless 
of the injury. 
 
On August 12, 2024, Dr. Crites provided a supplement to his IME report, after 
reviewing Dr. Paulson’s August 2, 2024 letter. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 23) First, he disagreed with 
the statement that claimant returned to baseline because his symptoms are mild. He 
noted that claimant was asymptomatic prior to the injury, and his baseline would 
therefore be an asymptomatic state, not a mildly symptomatic state. Because he has 
symptoms he has not returned to baseline, and thus had a permanent material 
exacerbation independent of the level or grade of symptoms.  
 
With respect to his impairment rating, Dr. Crites noted that the portion of the AMA 
Guides referenced states in full, “decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of 
decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence of parts that prevent 
effective application of maximum force in the region being evaluated.” (Bold from 
Dr. Crites) He stated that claimant’s supination strength was tested with his elbow at 90 
degrees of flexion per standard orthopedic practice, and that position is within the range 
of motion of his elbow as documented by his exam. Therefore, the range of motion 
deficit did not prevent the effective application of maximum force as the testing took 
place inside the available motion of the joint. As such, he opined that his rating was 
valid. With respect to the different range of motion measurements, he stood by his 
measurements, as taken by him on the day of his examination measured with a 
goniometer. He noted it is not uncommon, clinically, to have different range of motion 
measurements at different times, due to variables such as swelling, whether the patient 
was “warmed up,” inter-examiner variability, and others. 
 
Regarding the wrist range of motion, he agreed that he omitted the values he 
obtained during his examination from his IME report. He provided the measurements he 
took that day, and provided digital copies of his handwritten exam notes from the date of 
the IME to support his assignment of wrist impairment. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 23-26) 
 
Finally, with respect to causation, Dr. Crites stated that repetitive work is 
associated with cubital tunnel syndrome, and there are many references to support this. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 24) He said that is why activity modification and brace immobilization are 
the mainstay of initial treatment. Additionally, he said in this particular case, the timing of 
the onset of symptoms is clinically relevant. He pointed out that swelling from an injury 
does not necessarily stay at the exact site of the injury, and can move within the 
subcutaneous place. He noted this is seen frequently in the clinical setting with injuries 
such as proximal and distal biceps ruptures, knee injuries, and ankle injuries “to name a 
few.” He said with a proximal biceps rupture, it is quite common to see the development 
of bruising and swelling distal to the injury a few days later. The delayed onset of 
symptoms after claimant’s acute injury is consistent with the time needed for the 
swelling to travel to the site of the cubital tunnel and cause irritation to the nerve. He 
stated that at the elbow the ulnar nerve is in the subcutaneous place. Dr. Crites 
reiterated that because of the multifactorial nature of cubital tunnel syndrome, it is his 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 12 
opinion that the overall clinical picture is consistent with claimant’s development of 
cubital tunnel syndrome secondary to both his repetitive work and his acute injury. The 
combination, he said “was the straw that broke the camel’s back so to speak.” 
 
With respect to the issue of causation of the cubital tunnel syndrome, I find the 
opinions of Dr. Yanish and Dr. Crites to be more convincing than the opinions of Dr. 
Paulson and Dr. Gainer. It seems from the records that neither Dr. Paulson nor Dr. 
Gainer had an accurate understanding of claimant’s complete job duties working for the 
city. The job description for a “street sweeper operator” is very general, providing little 
detail about the specific work involved. (Def. Ex. G) Under “examples of essential work” 
it includes operating a street sweeper, installing and adjusting brooms, minor servicing 
and maintenance on equipment, assisting in varied street cleaning and motorized 
equipment operations, and keeping mileage and service records. (Def. Ex. G, p. 1) 
There is no detail in the job description about the different types of motorized equipment 
the workers use, the frequency with which they are used, the amount of repetitive 
motion or vibratory work that is done, or other details that are important to determining 
whether claimant’s work activities are consistent with those that contribute to the 
development of cubital tunnel syndrome. 
 
Claimant credibly testified that there is much more to the job than simply 
operating a street sweeper machine. When asked if the description was an accurate 
description of his job, claimant noted that it was a basic description, but did not include 
the activities involved with cleaning up illegal dumping, for example. (Tr., p. 23) He also 
noted that as a senior employee, he more often works running a loader and assisting 
with illegal roadside dumping than operating a street sweeper. (Tr., p. 24) He frequently 
has to handle items by hand in places like ditches where he is unable to maneuver the 
loader. He also helps with storm clean up, using chainsaws and “throwing logs.” (Tr., p. 
11) He then loads dump trucks with brush and other compost materials to take to the 
landfill or compost site. (Tr., p. 24) In other words, there is much more to claimant’s job 
than driving a street sweeper, and the very broad terms used in the official job 
description do not properly illustrate the true nature of claimant’s work. 
 
It does not appear that either Dr. Paulson nor Dr. Gainer had a complete picture 
of claimant’s full work activities when comparing his job description to the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation, especially considering claimant’s job 
does involve vibratory and repetitive work, along with other factors for cubital tunnel 
syndrome. On the other hand, both Dr. Yanish and Dr. Crites appear to have had a 
more accurate understanding of claimant’s complete job duties, as well as the 
mechanism of injury. Dr. Yanish noted that claimant’s job had him working with “heavy 
and vibratory equipment over the past 24 years,” which is accurate. He opined that 
claimant’s cubital tunnel syndrome was most likely an acute on chronic injury, resulting 
from both his work duties and the work injury on November 8, 2022. Dr. Crites expands 
on this, explaining that in addition to his job duties being consistent with causing cubital 
tunnel syndrome, the onset of symptoms was clinically significant in determining that the 
injury was also consistent with causing and/or aggravating cubital tunnel syndrome. Dr. 
Crites called the November 8 incident the straw that broke the camel’s back, which is 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 13 
essentially the same as saying an acute on chronic injury. Dr. Crites also notes that 
claimant was completely asymptomatic prior to the injury, and has not returned to 
baseline, indicating a permanent aggravation of his preexisting arthritic condition.  
 
Given all of the evidence in the record, I find that claimant’s right cubital tunnel 
syndrome arose out of and in the course of his employment with the city. As a 
compensable injury, claimant is entitled to past and future medical expenses related to 
treatment for the cubital tunnel syndrome. 
 
With respect to permanent impairment, the impairment ratings provided by Dr. 
Yanish and Dr. Crites are similar. They both found decreased strength in the right upper 
extremity, as well as decreased range of motion in the elbow. Dr. Yanish found a 
sensory deficit as well, and provided a total rating of 13 percent of the upper extremity. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Crites rated the right elbow, right wrist, and right shoulder 
separately, and then combined them for a total of 22 percent of the upper extremity. 
Given that claimant has now had shoulder surgery and was not at MMI at the time of 
hearing, the shoulder portion of the rating should be excluded, making the combined 
rating without the shoulder 19 percent of the upper extremity, pursuant to the combined 
values chart on page 604 of the AMA Guides. 
 
Dr. Crites’ IME report provides more detail regarding the basis for the impairment 
rating, and Dr. Crites also defended his use of strength measurements against the 
criticisms provided by Dr. Paulson and Dr. Gainer. His IME also took place most 
recently in time, making his measurements the most accurate picture of claimant’s 
condition at the time of hearing. As such, I find his rating to be the most accurate. 
Claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability equivalent to 19 percent of the upper 
extremity, which is equal to 47.5 weeks of benefits.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to determine is whether claimant’s right cubital tunnel syndrome 
arose out of and in the course of his employment. The party who would suffer loss if an 
issue were not established ordinarily has the burden of proving that issue by a 
preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the 
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged injury actually 
occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the employment. Quaker 
Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 
N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or source of 
the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and circumstances of the 
injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995). An injury arises out 
of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury and the 
employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must be a rational consequence 
of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to the 
employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 14 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369,374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. Yanish and Dr. Crites to be more 
convincing and credible than the opinions of Dr. Paulson and Dr. Gainer. Both Dr. 
Yanish and Dr. Crites appeared to have a better understanding of claimant’s actual job 
duties over the course of his 24-years with the city. Claimant credibly testified regarding 
his job duties, which are only listed in very general terms on the official job description. 
Both doctors explained that claimant’s cubital tunnel syndrome was likely the result of 
an acute on chronic injury, resulting from his years of repetitive, vibratory work, and 
exacerbated by the acute injury on November 8, 2022. I found their opinions to be the 
most accurate with respect to claimant’s work duties, and supported by the greater 
weight of evidence. As such, I find that claimant’s cubital tunnel syndrome arose out of 
and in the course of claimant’s employment.  

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 15 
Because claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of employment, 
defendants are responsible for all medical expenses and mileage incurred in claimant’s 
treatment, including any future treatment that is causally related to the work injury. 
Claimant seeks an order granting alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27, in the 
event he requires further treatment for the cubital tunnel syndrome. Because it was a 
denied claim, defendant did not designate an authorized treating physician, and 
claimant was free to choose his own provider, which he did. Defendant offers no 
argument regarding the alternate care claim. However, at this time, there is no request 
for treatment that is being denied. There also is no recommendation for additional 
medical care related to the cubital tunnel syndrome.  
A claim is ripe for adjudication when it presents an actual, present controversy, 
as opposed to one that is merely hypothetical or speculative. State v. Wade, 757 
N.W.2d 618, 627 (Iowa 2008). As claimant is not in need of medical care for the cubital 
tunnel syndrome at this time, the issue is not ripe for consideration. However, claimant 
is entitled to causally related future treatment for the condition, should the need arise.  
The next issue to determine is the extent of permanent partial disability to which 
claimant is entitled. The parties have stipulated to a scheduled member injury. I found 
Dr. Crites’ impairment rating to be the most accurate and reliable rating with respect to 
the right upper extremity, excluding the shoulder. Claimant argues that pursuant to the 
Supreme Court’s decision in Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676 
(Iowa 2024), Dr. Crites’ separate ratings for the elbow and wrist must be added together 
rather than combined using the AMA Guides. I disagree.  
The Bridgestone case is not applicable here, as that case dealt with two 
scheduled member injuries that were compensated under different subsections of Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2) – a shoulder, compensated under 85.34(2)(n), and an arm, 
compensated under 85.34(2)(m). In this case, Dr. Crites’ rating involves the wrist and 
the elbow, which are both compensated as an arm under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(m). An arm is compensated on the basis of 250 weeks. Dr. Crites’s impairment 
rating, when the shoulder portion is removed, is equivalent to 19 percent of the upper 
extremity, which is equal to 47.5 weeks of benefits. I find that permanent partial 
disability benefits are payable beginning May 14, 2024, the date of MMI for claimant’s 
right elbow.  
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for 
Dr. Crites’ IME, in the amount of $3,500.00. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 31) Defendant indicated at 
hearing this issue may have been resolved, but claimant included it in his brief so it will 
be addressed. Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 16 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen 
physician’s opinion that there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). 
Dr. Crites’ IME took place on July 16, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 3) In his report, he 
notes that Dr. Gainer provided a zero percent rating on May 14, 2024, which would then 
entitle claimant to an IME under section 85.39. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 7) Dr. Gainer’s May 14, 
2024 rating is not in evidence, however. That being said, defendant procured no-
causation opinions from Dr. Paulson on April 27, 2023, and May 9, 2023, and from Dr. 
Gainer on December 4, 2023. (Def. Exs. A, B, C) Those opinions are “tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating,” and as such, claimant is entitled to be reimbursed for 
Dr. Crites’ IME under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
The final issue is claimant’s request for an assessment of costs. Assessment of 
costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 10A.328. Costs are to be 
assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. Claimant seeks the filing fee in the 
amount of $128.75, and the cost of obtaining Dr. Yanish’s report, in the amount of 
$1,350.00. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 27-30) Under rule 876 IAC 4.33, these items are allowable 
costs. As claimant was generally successful in his claim, I exercise my discretion and 
award claimant a total of $1,478.75 in costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant forty-seven and one half (47.5) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits, commencing May 14, 2024, at the stipulated rate of 
eight hundred seven and 82/100 dollars ($807.82). 
 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 

MASCHKE V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 17 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.  
 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Crites’ IME in the amount of three 
thousand five hundred and 00/100 dollars ($3,500.00), pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39. 
 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one thousand four 
hundred seventy-eight and 75/100 ($1,478.75), as outlined above. 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ____15TH ___ day of May, 2025. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Christopher Spaulding  
(via WCES) 
John Haraldson  
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
