Case Number: 21009537.02
Case Title:  ROWE, ANDY V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Commissioner
Source:      Rowe Andy-21009537.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ANDY ROWE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
  File No. 21009537.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION 
BC CONSTRUCTION, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
AUTO-OWNERS INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:    1402.40, 1804, 2501, 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
            
         2502, 2907, 4000.2 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Andy Rowe, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, BC Construction, Inc., as the employer, and 
Auto-Owners Insurance Company, as the insurance carrier.  Hearing was held on July 
15, 2025 via Zoom video conference.  The undersigned heard this case as a deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner.  Since hearing this case, the undersigned was 
appointed as the interim workers’ compensation commissioner.   Having heard this case 
originally and for purposes of administrative efficiency, this decision is entered as final 
agency action pursuant to Iowa Code sections 10A.321(5); 17A.15(1).  Any appeal from 
this decision must be taken as judicial review pursuant to Iowa Code sections 10A.322; 
17A.19. 
The parties submitted a hearing report prior to the commencement of the 
evidentiary hearing.  On that hearing report, the parties entered into certain stipulations.  
Those stipulations are accepted and relied upon in this decision without further factual 
findings or conclusions of law.   
One stipulation that is out of the ordinary and should be mentioned is a 
stipulation by the parties that “Weekly benefits for 9/17/24 – 9/15/25 should be awarded, 
but are not payable, as Claimant agreed to forego benefits for this period in satisfaction 
of Defendants’ lien against Claimant’s third-party recovery.”  (Hearing Report)  Counsel 
for the parties explained this stipulation on the record at the commencement of the 
hearing and the stipulation was accepted.  Benefits will be awarded for the period from 
September 17, 2024 through September 15, 2025 pursuant to the parties’ agreement.  
However, pursuant to the agreement of the parties, those benefits will not be deemed 
“payable” because they have already been paid pursuant to agreement of the parties as 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Dec-31  13:45:27     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
satisfaction of defendants’ lien in a third-party case pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.22. 
At the commencement of hearing, three sets of exhibits were offered.  Joint 
Exhibits 1-16 were received without objection.  However, objections were asserted to 
both claimant’s exhibits and defendants’ exhibits.  A verbal ruling was entered on these 
objections at the time of hearing and a formal, written ruling was entered on August 28, 
2025. 
Mr. Rowe offered Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 12.  Defendants offered Exhibits 
A through J.  Claimant objected to certain of defendants’ exhibits as untimely under the 
agency’s rules and hearing assignment order.  Defendants responded by objecting to 
certain of claimant’s exhibits produced in response to the defendants’ untimely exhibits. 
Following receipt of written objections and the arguments of counsel at the 
commencement of hearing, the undersigned overruled certain objections asserted by 
claimant because no prejudice was demonstrated.  However, with respect to 
Defendants’ Exhibit H, pages 64-109, and Defendants’ Exhibit I, the undersigned found 
that claimant established prejudice with the submission of late evidence by defendants.   
Claimant was able to obtain responsive reports to the late evidence produced by 
defendants.  Claimant candidly admitted the prejudice he sustained was financial in 
securing responsive reports from his independent medical evaluators and vocational 
expert.  The undersigned offered a remedial measure in which defendants would 
reimburse claimant for the additional expense of the rebuttal reports in exchange for 
admission of the late reports offered by defendants.  Defense counsel was not 
authorized to accept the proposed remedial offer and no representative for the employer 
or insurance carrier was present to permit discussion or authorization of the proposed 
remedial offer.  Accordingly, prejudice was found and Defendants’ Exhibit H, page 64-
109, and Defendants’ Exhibit I were excluded from the evidentiary record. 
In a corresponding ruling, the undersigned also excluded Claimant’s Exhibit 1, 
pages 108-134, Claimant’s Exhibit 2, pages 152-153, and Claimant’s Exhibit 4, pages 
184-209, as these were the responsive or rebuttal reports obtained by claimant and 
were also untimely.  Although the proposed evidence was excluded from the record, the 
proposed exhibits were permitted to remain in the agency file for purposes of any 
appellate review.  Accordingly, although the exhibit sets contained in the hearing record 
contain all proposed exhibits, the above referenced exhibits were not admitted into the 
evidentiary record, have not been reviewed, and are not part of this decision.  All other 
portions of Claimant’s Exhibits and Defendants’ Exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record. 
Claimant testified live and called no other witnesses.  Defendants called Timothy 
Combs to testify and called no other witnesses.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the arbitration hearing. 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Following the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing, the undersigned ordered 
counsel to file post-hearing briefs.  Counsel filed their briefs simultaneously on August 
29, 2025.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of permanent total disability benefits 
as a result of the stipulated June 5, 2021 work injury. 
2. Whether claimant is an odd-lot employee, entitling him to an award of 
permanent total disability benefits as a result of the stipulated June 5, 2021 
work injury. 
3. If claimant is not entitled to permanent total disability, whether claimant is 
entitled to an award of healing period benefits from July 19, 2021 through 
March 25, 2024. 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
he is not permanently and totally disabled or an odd-lot employee. 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of past medical expenses contained 
at Claimant’s Exhibit 11. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
8. Whether penalty benefits should be awarded for defendants’ alleged late 
payment of weekly benefits without a reasonable basis or excuse and, if so, 
the amount of penalty that should be imposed. 
9. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Andy Rowe, claimant, was a 66-year-old man at the time of hearing.  Mr. Rowe 
graduated from high school.  He has not pursued any post-secondary education. 
Mr. Rowe worked primarily as a welder and heavy equipment operator 
throughout his career.  He also performed maintenance for a paper mill in Montana, 
worked briefly as a painter, and operated his own construction company.  Claimant 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
started his business, Rowe Construction, in 1984 with his brother.  He performed 
estimating, project management, and performed a variety of projects including home 
construction, as well as installation of windows, siding and roofs.  He described it as a 
little of everything other than concrete work.   
In 2009, claimant began working as an estimator for Community Wholesale and 
became an estimator for Home Depot in 2011.  In 2017, claimant began working for the 
employer, BC Construction, Inc., as a part-time manager.  He later transitioned to a full-
time role with the employer.  Claimant asserted that he planned to work until the age of 
72. 
On June 5, 2021, claimant was a passenger in a pickup owned by BC 
Construction and driven by his supervisor, Tim Combs.  Mr. Rowe and Mr. Combs had 
completed their day of work in Fort Dodge and were returning to Waterloo.  They were 
towing a trailer behind the pickup when another vehicle struck their trailer from the rear.   
Mr. Rowe described the incident and the nature of the trailer swaying behind the 
pickup.  Mr. Combs was able to maintain control of the truck and trailer.  In fact, no 
significant damage was done to either the pickup in which claimant was riding or the 
trailer being towed.  Nevertheless, Mr. Rowe credibly described the violent nature of the 
trailer swaying behind the truck and the effects it had on his body in the pickup truck. 
Emergency personnel were called to the scene of the accident.  Claimant 
declined medical care on the date of injury.  Mr. Rowe testified he experienced 
symptoms on the date of the accident but assumed those symptoms would resolve with 
time.  Claimant attempted to return to work the next day.  However, he was unable to 
perform his duties. 
Mr. Rowe has not worked since the date of injury.  The employer ultimately 
terminated claimant for reasons unrelated to the work injury.  He has not submitted any 
job applications or otherwise pursued alternate employment.  Mr. Rowe was contacted 
by a former manager from Home Depot about potentially returning to work for that 
company approximately three to four months prior to the hearing.  Claimant did not 
attempt that return to work, but I find that it would not be physically possible for claimant 
to return to his work at Home Depot.   
His position with Home Depot was as an estimator, which required him to drive to 
job sites to perform his duties.  Claimant is not likely to qualify for such a position while 
taking narcotics and his primary care physician recommended against any such type of 
position.  I accept that recommendation as reasonable and find that claimant could not 
return to his prior position with Home Depot. 
At the recommendation of a primary care provider,  Mr. Rowe presented to the 
Allen Memorial Hospital in Waterloo on June 7, 2021.  He reported back pain, neck 
pain, and a headache on that date.  He was discharged the same day. 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
Claimant’s back pain, neck pain, and headache persisted.  On June 25, 2021, 
Mr. Rowe sought treatment by Brian O’Shaughnessy, M.D., who indicated that claimant 
may have both a cervical and lumbar strain, as well as headaches, as a result of the 
work accident.  At Dr. O’Shaughnessy’s recommendation, claimant participated in 
physical therapy, trigger point injections in his neck, as well as facet injections in his low 
back.  Claimant also submitted to both neck and low back MRIs at Dr. O’Shaughnessy’s 
recommendation. 
Claimant’s symptoms persisted and he sought treatment at the emergency room 
a few times in the summer of 2021.  Ultimately, claimant was referred to a urologist and 
a neurosurgeon for evaluation.  Daniel Lee, M.D., a urologist, evaluated claimant on 
August 11, 2021.  Dr. Lee opined that claimant’s reported urinary incontinence may be 
related to his work accident.  Claimant then sought evaluation with a neurosurgeon, 
Russell Buchanan, M.D., on August 16, 2021. 
Dr. Buchanan noted complaints of headaches, neck pain with radiating 
symptoms into the left arm, as well as low back pain.  Dr. Buchanan recommended 
nerve testing as well as a referral to a pain specialist for potential epidural steroid 
injections.  Instead, defendants redirected claimant to Matthew Howard, M.D., a 
neurosurgeon at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.   
Dr. O’Shaughnessy performed the recommended nerve testing on September 8, 
2021, which demonstrated mild denervation at the C5-6 distribution of the cervical 
spine.  Dr. Howard evaluated claimant on September 28, 2021.  Ultimately, Dr. Howard 
concurred with the recommendations of Dr. Buchanan and concurred with the referral to 
a pain specialist for injections. 
Ashar Afzal, M.D., a pain specialist, evaluated claimant on October 12, 2021.  Dr. 
Afzal performed C4-5 facet injections on November 1, 2021, C5-6 facet injections on 
November 29, 2021, and C6-7 facet injections on December 2, 2021.  Claimant 
experienced temporary relief from the injections, but returned to Dr. Buchanan for 
further evaluation on January 10, 2022. 
Unfortunately, the conservative treatment failed to provide sustained, or long-
lasting relief for claimant’s neck symptoms and headaches.  Dr. Buchanan ultimately 
recommended an anterior cervical discectomy and fusion from C4 through C7, which he 
performed on March 17, 2022.  Claimant testified that the neck surgery improved his 
migraine headaches and reduced his neck pain.  However, claimant also testified that 
he had painful and decreased range of motion in his neck after the neck fusion surgery. 
For his low back, Dr. Buchanan again recommended referral to a pain specialist.  
Dr. Afzal evaluated claimant again on June 21, 2022 and performed an epidural steroid 
injection.  The injection provided temporary pain relief.   
Mr. Rowe returned to Dr. Buchanan on July 13, 2022, reporting that he fell at 
home on June 3, 2022 due to a back spasm.  Claimant testified that he fell down stairs 
into his basement when he got a “jolt” in his low back and his legs buckled.  Dr. 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Buchanan recommended a lumbar MRI and x-rays.  The MRI was performed and, on 
follow-up, Dr. Buchanan recommended against surgical intervention but recommended 
a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) be performed. 
Unfortunately, claimant’s low back symptoms persisted and he returned to Dr. 
Afzal in August 2022.  At that time, Dr. Afzal provided right-sided facet injections at L3-4 
and L4-5.  Claimant submitted to the FCE that Dr. Buchanan recommended.  The FCE 
was conducted by John Kruzich, OTR/L, on September 6, 2022.  Mr. Kruzich 
recommended against any lifting from floor to waist and limiting lifting to occasionally 12 
pounds from 12 inches above the floor to shoulder level.  He also recommended limits 
on claimant’s lifting overhead, carrying, squatting, climbing ladders, sustained kneeling, 
bending, climbing stairs, as well as some limitations on standing, sitting, and walking. 
Claimant testified that he felt terrible the day after the FCE and remained in bed 
all day.  Mr. Rowe testified that he experienced high blood pressure after the FCE that 
remained for days.  He also testified that his pain level remained high until September 
11, 2022, when he experienced left-sided weakness and numbness and was taken to 
the emergency room.  The emergency room physician diagnosed claimant with a small 
intracranial bleed consistent with a stroke.  Claimant has experienced TIA’s or “mini-
strokes” since September 11, 2022.  However, he testified that he recovered well from 
the stroke. 
Defendants requested an independent medical evaluation, which was performed 
by Robert Broghammer, M.D. on September 19, 2022.  Dr. Broghammer opined that 
claimant sustained a 27 percent permanent functional impairment related to his neck 
condition and resulting fusion.  He assigned an additional 5 percent permanent 
functional impairment for claimant’s lumbar spine, and combined those impairments to a 
resulting 31 percent of the whole person for both conditions.   
Claimant returned for further care with his personal physician, Dr. Kettman, 
reporting ongoing, severe and constant low back pain.  Dr. Kettman noted the elevated 
blood pressures and opined that claimant’s high pain levels likely contributed to his 
elevated blood pressure.  Unfortunately, in spite of several conservative attempts, 
claimant continued to experience low back pain.  Dr. Kettman recommended a second 
neurosurgical evaluation in November 2022. 
Unfortunately, two different neurosurgeons declined to evaluate claimant 
because they did not accept his insurance.  Dr. Kettman ultimately referred claimant 
back to Dr. Afzal for a spinal cord stimulator trial.  Dr. Afzal evaluated claimant on 
February 13, 2023, noting that claimant “appeared to be in severe distress.”  (Joint 
Exhibit 10, p. 196)  Dr. Afzal performed an epidural steroid injection at L5-S1 and 
ordered a repeat lumbar MRI. 
Upon claimant’s return, Dr. Afzal noted on March 2, 2023 that Mr. Rowe was 
“almost in tears because of the severity of his symptoms.”  (Joint Ex. 10, p. 198)  Dr. 
Afzal referred claimant back to Dr. Buchanan for neurosurgical evaluation.  Dr. Kettman 
prescribed a new medication for claimant’s mental health difficulties at approximately 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
this same time.  In fact, on April 5, 2023, claimant reported to Dr. Kettman that he felt 
suicidal because he could not tolerate the pain and nothing was helping.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 
69). 
On April 19, 2023, Dr. Buchanan re-evaluated claimant.  He reported complaints 
in claimant’s low back and noted that claimant had fallen 7 or 8 times because of his 
back pain.  Once again, Dr. Buchanan recommended claimant return to the pain 
specialist, Dr. Afzal. 
Due to his psychiatric difficulties, Dr. Kettman referred claimant for psychiatric 
evaluation with Megan Heise at Cedar Valley Mental Health on May 1, 2023.  Ms. Heise 
diagnosed claimant with recurrent major depressive disorder and adjustment disorder 
with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  (Joint Ex. 13, p. 224)  As a result of her 
evaluation, Ms. Heise documented symptoms that included depressed mood, 
anhedonia, irritability, impaired ability to think and make decisions, passive suicidal 
ideation, and nervousness.  She cleared claimant to proceed with the spinal cord 
stimulator but recommended further medication management. 
Dr. Afzal performed an injection on May 2, 2023 and concurred with the 
recommendation to move forward with the spinal cord stimulator.  After a delay, Dr. 
Afzal performed the spinal cord stimulator trial on July 31, 2023.  Claimant’s function 
improved during the trial and a permanent spinal cord stimulator was implanted for 
claimant’s low back symptoms on September 25, 2023. 
Claimant testified that the stimulator provided significant relief but that its 
effectiveness has waned with time and as he increases his activity.  (Transcript, pp. 66-
67)  Unfortunately, claimant has required narcotic medications prescribed by Dr. 
Kettman since December 2023 for continued pain management.   
Mr. Rowe obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by David 
Segal, M.D. on May 31, 2024.  Dr. Segal opined that claimant achieved maximum 
medical improvement (MMI) for his neck on March 17, 2023 and MMI for his low back 
on March 25, 2024.  Dr. Segal opined that claimant sustained 37 percent permanent 
functional impairment as a result of his neck injury and resulting fusion.  He assigned an 
additional 19 percent permanent functional impairment for claimant’s low back 
condition, including permanent impairment for incontinence.  Dr. Segal also opined that 
claimant has reactive depression and assigned an additional 15 percent of the whole 
person in functional impairment for the mental health component of claimant’s work 
injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1) 
Dr. Segal opined that claimant’s heightened pain levels following the FCE were 
likely a substantial factor in causing claimant’s stroke five days later.  He explained that 
the results of the FCE should be viewed with the understanding that exertion at the FCE 
performance level caused claimant to have a stroke.  Therefore, Dr. Segal imposed 
work restrictions that were more restrictive than those previously outlined in the FCE.  
Specifically, Dr. Segal recommended claimant not lift or carry over 5 pounds 
occasionally from waist height, rarely lift up to 10 pounds, as well as recommended 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
limitations on claimant’s ability to stand, sit, walk, bend, kneel, crouch, squat, climb 
ladders, reach overhead, and a prohibition on the use of vibratory tools.  (Claimant’s Ex. 
1) 
Claimant also sought an independent psychiatric evaluation, performed by Adam 
Woods, M.D., on April 15, 2025.  Dr. Woods diagnosed claimant with adjustment 
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  He opined this diagnosis was 
caused by the work injury.  He further opined that claimant’s mental condition is 
permanent and assigned a 40 percent permanent functional impairment to the mental 
health condition.  Dr. Woods recommended ongoing psychotherapy and ongoing 
medication management for Mr. Rowe’s mental health injury.  Perhaps most 
importantly, Dr. Woods opines that claimant cannot work at this point as a result of his 
mental health injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2) 
Dr. Kettman also responded to an inquiry from claimant’s counsel on April 29, 
2025.  Dr. Kettman opined that the work injury was a substantial contributing factor to 
claimant’s present neck and low back conditions, as well as the neck fusion and 
implantation of the spinal cord stimulator in claimant’s low back.  Dr. Kettman further 
opined that claimant’s current and ongoing chronic pain caused his current mental 
health condition as well as his need for mental health treatment.  Dr. Kettman concurred 
that claimant’s mental health condition is permanent, and that claimant will require 
ongoing narcotic pain medication for his neck and back pain for the foreseeable future.  
He recommended against any driving-based occupations while claimant is on narcotics.  
Finally, Dr. Kettman indicated that claimant is not capable of returning to work as a 
result of his work injury and opines that claimant would require significant 
accommodations, such as taking unscheduled breaks at claimant’s discretion, to return 
to work.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3) 
Defendants asserted a specific credibility challenge to claimant’s testimony.  
Defendants contend that claimant provided inaccurate testimony in many respects.  
They assert that claimant provided inconsistent and exaggerated testimony on many 
topics.   
Defendants contend that claimant previously denied any injury to his low back in 
a 2017 lawnmower accident.  However, they assert he conceded a big bruise above his 
buttocks as a result of that accident at the time of hearing.  They also point to medical 
records that claimant reported severe low back and buttock pain following the 
lawnmower incident.  They challenge claimant’s contention that he had no sleep issues 
prior to this date of injury. 
Defendants also note that claimant provided different estimates of the speed at 
which the other driver struck the trailer being towed by the pickup in which claimant was 
riding on the date of injury.  Defendants note, however, that claimant admitted he did 
not see the other vehicle prior to impact at hearing.   
Defendants note some inconsistencies between claimant’s deposition testimony 
and some records pertaining to his purchase of fishing licenses in Iowa and Wisconsin.  

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
They challenge some potential inconsistencies in medical records pertaining to claimed 
incontinence.  Defendants also challenge the significance of some reported mental 
health symptoms noted in claimant’s medical records as a specific challenge to his 
credibility.  Having considered each of the arguments and examples asserted by 
defendants and having compared those with claimant’s hearing testimony and 
demeanor at hearing, I am not as concerned about claimant’s credibility as defendants.   
I acknowledge some differences exist in the evidentiary record and that the 
record could be interpreted differently if viewed under a microscope for discrepancies.  
Overall, however, I found claimant’s testimony about his ongoing symptoms and abilities 
to be credible and convincing.  Ultimately, I find claimant’s testimony to be credible, at 
least with respect to his ongoing symptoms and abilities. 
I find that Mr. Rowe continues to have severe low back pain, severe neck pain 
with activity, decreased motion in his neck, and ongoing mental health difficulties as a 
result of his work injury.  I find that claimant has unsuccessfully attempted reasonable 
recuperation, including attempts to increase his activities and lose weight.  
Unfortunately, these injuries have significantly impaired his daily activities and life. 
I acknowledge defendants’ arguments.  Defendants point out that claimant had a 
pre-existing history of some mental health issues.  Those mental health issues were not 
well explained to or documented for claimant’s evaluating experts.  Defendants contend 
that the opinions of Dr. Segal are unreliable because they are based upon inaccurate 
and incomplete information.  Indeed, Dr. Segal’s history appears to lack some of the 
information noted by defendants.  Dr. Segal did not appear to have pre-injury records, 
he failed to note claimant’s diabetic condition that pre-existed the date of injury, and 
failed to note that claimant was taking medication for high blood pressure prior to the 
date of injury.   
Claimant also experienced an incident where he injured his back on May 28, 
2017 when a riding lawn mower fell on him.  That incident required hospitalization and it 
does not appear that Dr. Segal was apprised of that information as part of his evaluation 
or analysis.  Defendants also challenge whether claimant experienced urinary 
incontinence when evaluated by Dr. Segal, and challenge his corresponding permanent 
impairment rating.  These, along with other credibility and historical gaps in Dr. Segal’s 
history, are noted and considered. 
Defendants also challenge the credibility of Dr. Woods’ psychiatric opinions.  
Specifically, defendants challenge his opinions because Dr. Woods was under the 
impression that claimant did not have pre-existing psychiatric illnesses. Defendants 
further challenge the history provided by claimant to Dr. Woods and contend it is 
inconsistent with other medical evidence in this record. 
Defendants further challenge the opinions and credibility of Dr. Kettman, 
claimant’s personal physician.  Defendants concede that Dr. Kettman had the most 
comprehensive history as a long-term primary care provider for claimant.  However, 
defendants contend his opinions are suspect because they are relayed through a 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
“check the box” report solicited by claimant’s counsel.  Defendants further contend that 
Dr. Kettman’s final report contradicts his own medical records pertaining to claimant’s 
ability to drive.  Ultimately, defendants contend that this agency should reject the 
opinions of claimant’s long-term primary care provider, evaluating neurosurgeon, and 
evaluating psychiatrist. 
Again, I acknowledge defendants’ challenges.  Yet, the opinions of Drs. Kettman, 
Segal, and Woods are not seriously challenged with contrary medical evidence or 
opinions in this record.  The opinions of claimant’s long-term primary care provider are 
entitled to significant weight, given his knowledge of claimant’s conditions and any 
changes in claimant’s function, treatment, or abilities after this work injury.  The opinions 
of Dr. Segal are not rebutted directly in this record.  Even with some gaps in history or 
challenges asserted by defendants, I find Dr. Segal’s neurosurgical opinions to be the 
best and most credible evidence in this record.  Similarly, I find the psychiatric opinions 
of Dr. Woods to be the most credible and convincing from a mental health standpoint.  
While there may be gaps in the history provided to some of these physicians, or other 
issues that could affect their credibility, none of the challenges asserted by defendants 
cause me to entirely dismiss the opinions of Drs. Kettman, Segal, and Woods. 
Ultimately, I accept the opinions of Dr. Kettman, Dr. Segal, and Dr. Woods.  I find 
that claimant’s ongoing cervical, lumbar, and mental health conditions are causally 
related to the work injury.  I find that claimant has achieved MMI for his neck and low 
back conditions, but he requires significant physical restrictions, as outlined by Dr. 
Segal.  I also accept and find the recommendation of Dr. Kettman, namely that claimant 
would be required to have an accommodation that permits unscheduled breaks from 
work at the claimant’s discretion, to be able to perform any work.  Finally, I accept Dr. 
Woods’ opinion that claimant’s mental health condition is permanent.  Dr. Woods’ 
permanency opinion implicitly concludes claimant achieved MMI for his mental health 
condition, and I explicitly find that he is at MMI for his mental health condition, though 
ongoing care for each of his injuries remains likely.  I further accept Dr. Woods’ opinion 
and find that Mr. Rowe is unable to perform work from a mental health standpoint. 
To the extent necessary and not implicit from the above findings, I reject the 
opinions of Dr. Broghammer.  Dr. Broghammer assigns permanent restrictions in 
excess of those outlined by the FCE, which were clearly above claimant’s physical 
capabilities and, at least as a substantial factor, led to claimant’s stroke. 
As noted above, claimant is close to retirement age.  He was approximately five 
years from his anticipated retirement at the time of hearing.  He has limited education 
and training, other than in physically demanding occupations.  It is unlikely that he will 
be able to retrain at his age and with his limited educational experience.  Claimant is not 
able to return to any of his prior occupations given his current physical and mental 
health conditions.  He does not possess significant transferrable skills to other 
occupations. 
Claimant introduced a vocational opinion from Barbara Laughlin.  Given the 
evidentiary rulings at the commencement of the hearing, Ms. Laughlin’s opinions are 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
unrebutted.  She opines that claimant is precluded from employment based upon the 
restrictions assigned by Drs. Kettman, Segal, and Woods.  I accept Ms. Laughlin’s 
analysis and opinion as the most credible and convincing vocational evidence in this 
record.  Therefore, I specifically find that claimant has proven he is permanently and 
totally disabled under a traditional industrial disability analysis. 
In reaching this finding, I acknowledge defendants’ arguments.  Specifically, 
defendants argue that claimant was terminated from his employment for reasons 
unrelated to his injuries.  Defendants also note that claimant did not seek the services of 
a vocational expert for retraining or placement.  Nor has claimant sought any alternate 
employment since his injury.  They also point to some medical records in which it is 
implied that claimant retired, rather than left the workforce due to injury. 
Defendants also accurately note that claimant has some computer skills and 
customer service skills having run his own business.  They critique Ms. Laughlin’s report 
because it does not contain reference to claimant’s ability to read blueprints, perform 
welding or bookkeeping, or operate cranes and other heavy equipment.  Defendants 
also contend that claimant’s “[m]edical records demonstrate a clear focus on fishing 
rather than work.”  (Defendants’ Appeal Brief, p. 18)  While acknowledging these 
arguments, some of which are legitimate (e.g., no effort to seek alternate employment, 
Ms. Laughlin’s failure to note prior vocational skills), I ultimately accept the restrictions 
of claimant’s medical experts and the opinions of his vocational expert as the most 
credible and convincing evidence in this record.  Given these findings, I also find that 
any type of required job search would be futile with claimant’s education, employment 
history, and the restrictions he currently carries, including limitation on driving while on 
narcotics. 
Obviously, defendants do not carry the burden of proof, but they could have 
deposed these experts, sought timely alternate expert evidence, or undertaken 
additional defense measures to challenge claimant’s motivation, restrictions, and 
employability.  While they are able to poke some holes in the opinions of claimant’s 
experts, they are not successful in refuting those opinions or causing their opinions to 
be so incredible that they should be rejected in total.  The gaps or holes identified by 
defendants are not sufficient to render the entirety of the opinions rendered by 
claimant’s primary care physician, neurosurgeon, and psychiatrist illogical, incredible, or 
invalid.  Instead, claimant put forth the most credible and convincing evidence.  
Therefore, I ultimately find that claimant has proven by a preponderance of the evidence 
that he is permanently and totally disabled under the traditional industrial disability 
analysis. 
Mr. Rowe also asserted a claim under the odd-lot doctrine.  Although I already 
found claimant proved permanent total disability under the traditional industrial disability 
analysis, I find that claimant provided a prima facie case that he is permanently and 
totally disabled.  I find that defendants did not produce evidence of suitable alternate 
employment for claimant.  Even if the minimal evidence generated or referenced by 
defendants could be construed as meeting their burden of production, I again find the 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
evidence submitted by claimant to be the most credible and convincing with respect to 
his restrictions, impairment, and vocational abilities. 
Mr. Rowe also asserts a penalty benefit claim for late payment of 10 weeks of 
benefits throughout his claim.  Reviewing defendants’ post-hearing brief, there does not 
appear to be a dispute about whether the asserted weeks were paid late.  Rather, there 
appears to be an explanation from defendants that they paid the vast majority of the 
benefits due in a timely manner and advanced claimant weekly benefits pursuant to an 
agreement pertaining to a third-party lien.  Defendants also point out that some of the 
late weeks were around holidays such as Christmas, Labor Day, or the Fourth of July.  
Of course, there is not a legal extension of time to pay weekly worker’s compensation 
benefits around legal holidays and those weeks were paid late. 
I find that claimant proved 10 weeks of benefits, totaling $2,804.35, were paid 
untimely.  Six of those weeks were paid within a few days of the benefits being due.  Of 
the remaining four weeks, they were paid from 4 to 23 days late.  Defendants’ 
explanation that they paid the majority of the weeks timely does not excuse their failure 
to pay 10 weeks timely.  Nor are holidays a reason that excuses defendants for paying 
weekly benefits late. Nevertheless, I also find that defendants’ late payments were not 
egregious or protracted. 
Claimant submitted medical bills for payment or reimbursement at Claimant’s 
Exhibit 11.  Defendants challenge those medical bills for various reasons.  I found that 
the medical care for claimant’s stroke and hospitalization from September 11 through 
September 14, 2022 are causally related to or at least that the work injury was a 
substantial contributing factor to the increased blood pressure and resulting stroke.  
Therefore, I find claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that the medical 
bills associated with treatment for his stroke are related to the work injury. 
Defendants challenge medical bills incurred with Dr. Kettman because Dr. 
Kettman also evaluated and provided treatment for depression, hypertension, thyroid 
issues, and constipation during his evaluations.  Defendants further challenge any 
medical expense for a visit performed via telehealth by Dr. Kettman, asserting that it is 
not reasonable to award such expenses for a physical injury when no physical 
examination occurred.  I reject these challenges to Dr. Kettman’s expenses.  Dr. 
Kettman evaluated claimant for his low back complaints and may have incidentally 
considered other issues as a primary care physician.  However, issues such as 
depression and hypertension are relevant considerations in this case.  Constipation 
could be the result of the use of narcotics and is relevant.  I consider the treatment by 
Dr. Kettman to be causally related, reasonable, to have provided benefit to claimant, 
and to be reasonable expenses even if conducted via telehealth appointments. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issues are whether claimant’s stroke arose out of and in the 
course of his employment.  The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance 
of the evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
in the course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 
1996); Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising 
out of” refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the 
time, place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 
128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship 
exists between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury 
must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not 
merely incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 
2000); Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment 
when it happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be when performing employment duties and while the employee is 
fulfilling those duties or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
Having found that claimant proved his work injury caused significant pain and an 
increase in his blood pressure after his FCE, I conclude that claimant also proved by a 
preponderance of the evidence that his work injury, resulting FCE, and increased blood 
pressure were at least a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his underlying 
condition resulting in claimant sustaining a stroke on September 11, 2022. 
Claimant also asserts that his ongoing low back and neck conditions are causally 
related to the work injury.  Again, having accepted the opinions of Dr. Kettman and Dr. 
Segal as most convincing and credible, I conclude that claimant proved his low back 
and neck conditions since the date of injury arose out of and are causally related to the 
work injury.  Although there was some evidence of a pre-existing low back injury, I 
specifically found that claimant proved his ongoing low back and neck injuries are 
related to the work injury.  Therefore, I conclude claimant carried his burden of proof on 
these issues. 
The next disputed issue is the claim that Mr. Rowe is permanently and totally 
disabled as a result of the work injury.  Total disability does not mean a state of absolute 
helplessness.  Permanent total disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the 
employee from performing work that the employee's experience, training, education, 
intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  
See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. 
Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
Mr. Rowe has proven injuries to his neck, low back, and mental health.  None of 
these injuries are scheduled injuries pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u).  
Therefore, his claim is compensated as an unscheduled injury.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v).  He was terminated from his employment and was not working at the time 
of hearing.  Therefore, his injury is compensated using an industrial disability analysis.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 
587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
However, a claim is only ripe for award of permanent disability if the claimant has 
achieved maximum medical improvement.  The point in time where it is medically 
indicated that significant further improvement from the injury is no longer anticipated is 
often referred to as achieving maximum medical improvement (MMI).  Waldinger Corp. 
v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1, 6 (Iowa 2012). 
I found that claimant proved he is unable to work at the present time.  I accepted 
the opinions of Dr. Segal and found that claimant proved he has achieved MMI for his 
neck and low back conditions.  I also accepted the opinion of Dr. Woods that claimant’s 
mental health condition is permanent, found that claimant achieved MMI, and found that 
he sustained a permanent mental health injury.  Considering all of that evidence and 
those findings, along with all of the relevant industrial disability factors outlined by the 
Iowa Supreme Court, I ultimately found that Mr. Rowe is permanently and totally 
disabled.  Therefore, using the traditional industrial disability analysis, I conclude that 
Mr. Rowe carried his burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence to establish 
that he is permanently and totally disabled.  I conclude claimant is entitled to an award 
of benefits from the date of injury through the date of the arbitration hearing and 
continuing into the future until claimant is no longer permanently and totally disabled.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(3)(a). 
In the alternative, claimant asserts a claim under the odd-lot doctrine.  Having 
determined claimant is permanently and totally disabled under the traditional industrial 
disability analysis, the odd-lot is technically not applicable.  However, if this case is 
analyzed under the odd-lot doctrine for purposes of appellate review, I conclude 
claimant has proven his odd-lot claim. 
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court 
formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an 
odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment 
in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled 
if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 16 
 
 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 266 (Iowa 1995).  Even under 
the odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
In this case, I conclude claimant clearly produced evidence to establish a prima 
facie case of total disability.  He offered medical opinions pertaining to permanent 
disability and restrictions.  Claimant also produced a vocational opinion indicating he is 
permanently disabled.   
Once claimant met this burden, the burden of production shifted to defendants.  I 
conclude defendants did not meet their burden of production.  However, even if 
defendants are determined to have met their burden of production, I conclude claimant 
carried the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish he is permanently disabled under 
an odd-lot analysis. 
The parties dispute the commencement date for permanent  disability benefits.  
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(3), “Compensation for an injury causing 
permanent total disability … is payable until the employee is no longer permanently and 
totally disabled.”  In this instance, claimant was unable to return to work after the injury 
date and had not resumed any gainful employment at the time of the hearing.  
Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to an award of permanent total disability 
benefits commencing on June 6, 2021 and continuing through the date of the arbitration 
hearing and into the future until claimant is no longer permanently and totally disabled.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(3)(a). 
Mr. Rowe also asserts a claim for medical benefits contained at Claimant’s 
Exhibit 11.  Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Having found that the treatment rendered in those medical expenses is causally 
related to the work injury, I conclude that claimant proved entitlement to payment or 
reimbursement of those expenses. 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 17 
 
 
However, defendants raise an authorization defense and assert that Dr. Kettman 
was not an authorized medical provider.  When a designated physician refers a patient 
to another physician, that physician acts as the defendant employer’s agent.  
Permission for the referral from defendant is not necessary.  Kittrell v. Allen Memorial 
Hospital, Thirty-fourth Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner, 164 (Arb. 
November 1, 1979) (aff’d by industrial commissioner).  See also Limoges v. Meier Auto 
Salvage, I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Reports 207 (1981). 
The records indicate that Dr. Kettman became an authorized medical provider on 
referral from Dr. Buchanan on February 2, 2022 for a pre-surgical evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 
2, p. 49)  Dr. Afzal also requested a pre-surgical consultation from Dr. Kettman on 
September 19, 2023, again making Dr. Kettman authorized via referral from another 
authorized physician.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 80) 
Once a physician is authorized, they remain an authorized physician unless and 
until defendants notify claimant that they no longer authorize a physician or certain care 
from that physician and explain the reasons for the change in authorization.  Iowa Code 
section 85.27(4).  In this instance, defendants have not demonstrated that authorization 
was ever withdrawn from Dr. Kettman or that claimant was notified of the withdrawal of 
authorization or the reason for such withdrawal.  Therefore, I conclude Dr. Kettman was 
an authorized physician and conclude his expenses should be awarded.  Iowa Code 
section 85.27(4). 
Defendants challenge whether treatment for the claimant’s stroke was causally 
related.  Having determined that claimant proved this claim by a preponderance of the 
evidence, I similarly conclude these medical expenses are payable by defendants.  
Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  Defendants similarly challenged the mental health claim.  
Having found that claimant carried his burden of proof on the mental health claim as 
well, I conclude those expenses are also owed by defendants.  Ultimately, I conclude 
claimant has proven entitlement to payment or reimbursement of the expenses 
contained at Claimant’s Exhibit 11. 
Mr. Rowe next asserts a request for reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation.  Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-
retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee 
believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 18 
 
 
In their brief, defendants acknowledge a statutory obligation to reimburse 
claimant pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  However, defendants contend they 
should only be obligated to reimburse claimant for a single examination under the 
statute.  It appears defendants acknowledge claimant is entitled to reimbursement for 
the $5,525.00 independent medical evaluation (IME) performed by Dr. Segal.  Indeed, 
Dr. Broghammer issued permanent impairment ratings for the neck and low back long 
before Dr. Segal’s evaluation occurred.  Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of $5,525.00 for Dr. Segal’s IME. 
The next substantive issue that must be decided is penalty benefits.  Mr. Rowe 
asserts a claim for penalty benefits for late payment of 10 weeks of benefits.  
Defendants acknowledge that the 10 weeks of benefits were paid late.  There is no 
evidence of a reasonable basis for the late payments or that the bases for those late 
payments were contemporaneously conveyed to claimant. 
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 10A.315(4) 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4) (2023); Robbennolt v. 
Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236-37 (Iowa 1996).  
“Benefits may be delayed, without penalty, during such time as an employer’s 
liability is “fairly debatable”. Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 
109, 111 (Iowa 1995).  A delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable 
investigation is not unreasonable.  Id.  
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  Rodda v. Vermeer Mfg., 734 N.W.2d 
480, 483 (Iowa 2007).  An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in 
favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993).  An issue of 
fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which would support a finding 
favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194, 199 (Iowa 
2001).  
“An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ does not make it 
so.”  Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  The 
employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner could reasonably find that the 
claim was “fairly debatable.”  Id.   
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 
254, 259 (Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the 
penalty include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available 
to the employer and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 
at 238. 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 19 
 
 
An employer may not unilaterally decide to deny, delay, or terminate benefits 
without adhering to section 10A.315. Iowa Code § 10A.315 (2023).  Section 
10A.315(4)(c) creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow, to show the 
employer met its burden of a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1)-(3).1   First, the 
employer’s excuse must be preceded by a reasonable investigation and evaluation into 
whether the benefits were owed.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1); Baker v. 
Bridgestone/Firestone & Old Republic Inc., 872 N.W.2d 672, 678 (Iowa 2015).  Second, 
the results of the reasonable investigation were “the actual basis . . . 
contemporaneously” relied on by the employer for the denial, delay or termination of the 
benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(2).   Third, the employer “contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of their denial, delay or termination.”  Iowa Code § 
10A.315(4)(c)(3).  An employer cannot unilaterally decide to terminate benefits without 
adhering to section 10A.315.   Iowa Code § 10A.315.  
In this case, there are 10 weeks of late paid benefits.  The delays are not 
significant or protracted.  Many are relatively short and around the time of holidays.  Of 
course, there is no legal excuse for delaying weekly benefits simply because a holiday 
falls within that payment week.  I conclude claimant proved 10 weeks of benefits were 
delayed.  I further conclude that defendants failed to prove they had a reasonable basis 
for denial or delay in payment of the benefits delayed.  Defendants also failed to prove 
they contemporaneously conveyed to claimant the basis for delaying benefits.  
Therefore, penalty benefits are due in some amount.  Iowa Code section 10A.315. 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 10A.315 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases.  Id. at 237.  In this regard, the Commission 
is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed with a maximum 
penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits.  Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).   
In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 
the employee’s injury and wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  Several of the delays 
involved in this situation involved three days or less.  None of the delays exceeded 23 
days.  The delays were not egregious but the delays occurred multiple times throughout 
this claim.  The total amount of benefits delayed to claimant was $2,804.35. 
Having considered the relevant factors and the purposes of the penalty statute, I 
conclude that a section 10A.315 penalty in the amount of $500.00 is appropriate in this 
case.  Such an amount is appropriate to punish the employer for delays in payment of 
 
 
 
1 See also unpublished opinion.  Pettengill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 
N.W.2d 740 (Iowa Ct. App. 2015).   

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 20 
 
 
benefits under these facts and should serve as a deterrent against future conduct.  
However, the facts of this case are not of such an egregious nature that an additional 
penalty is warranted.  
The final issue submitted for determination is whether costs should be assessed 
against either party and, if so, in what amount.  Assessment of costs is within the 
discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  In this instance, claimant 
prevailed.  Therefore, I conclude that it is appropriate to assess costs against the 
employer and insurance carrier in some amount. 
Claimant seeks assessment of his filing fee ($128.75).  The employer and 
insurance carrier will be ordered to reimburse claimant’s filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 
4.33(7).  Claimant also seeks assessment of the costs ($319.00) of his deposition 
transcript.  Defendants elected to introduce claimant’s deposition transcript into the 
evidentiary record at Defendants’ Exhibit A.  Therefore, I conclude it is reasonable to 
assess the cost of claimant’s deposition pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
Finally, Mr. Rowe seeks reimbursement for the cost of obtaining reports from Dr. 
Woods and Ms. Laughlin.  Pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6), “the reasonable costs of 
obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports” can be assessed as 
litigation costs.   
In Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015), the Supreme Court noted that a claimant can be reimbursed expenses 
associated with the preparation of a written report as a cost under administrative rule 
876 IAC 4.33 because the report is being used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s 
testimony.  Id. at 846-47.  However, only the cost of the report can be assessed, not the 
underlying exam or treatment.  Id.  I conclude it is reasonable to assess some amount 
for the reports of Dr. Woods and Ms. Laughlin, both of whom I accepted as the most 
credible and convincing evidence in this record. 
Review of the cost request at Claimant’s Exhibit 12 demonstrates that Dr. 
Woods’ invoice documents a charge of $2,800.00 for preparation of his IME report.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 12, p. 313)  I am a bit suspicious, or skeptical, about Dr. Woods’ invoice 
reflecting that it took him 2 hours to review the medical records and 1 hour to conduct 
his interview but required 7 hours to draft and edit his report.  Nevertheless, there is no 
competing evidence or realistic challenge made to the number of hours spent drafting 
Dr. Woods’ report so I accept this invoice as accurate.  I conclude it is reasonable and 
appropriate to assess $2,800.00 as costs for Dr. Woods’ IME report pursuant to 876 
IAC 4.33(6).   
Claimant is also entitled to a second practitioner’s report.  He seeks the cost of 
Ms. Laughlin’s report.  Review of her invoice demonstrates that she utilized 4.5 hours to 
draft her written report in lieu of testimony.  (Claimant’s Ex. 12, p. 315)  Ms. Laughlin’s 
invoice indicates she charged $135.00 per hour, resulting in a total charge of $607.50 
for her report.  Again, I conclude it is reasonable and appropriate to assess claimant’s 
cost in the amount of $607.50 for Ms. Laughlin’s report pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 21 
 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits weekly 
commencing on June 6, 2021 and continuing through the date of the arbitration hearing 
and into the future until claimant is no longer permanently and totally disabled. 
 
Defendants shall pay all weekly benefits at the rate of five hundred sixty and 
94/100 dollars ($560.94) per week. 
 
Defendants are entitled to credit for benefits previously paid and for those 
benefits the parties stipulated to as part of waiver of a third-party lien at the 
commencement of the arbitration hearing. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
 
Defendants shall pay the medical provider directly for any outstanding medical 
expenses, or reimburse claimant for all medical expenses he previously paid, all of 
which are contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 11. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation 
performed by Dr. Segal in the amount of five thousand five hundred twenty-five and 
00/100 dollars ($5,525.00). 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant penalty benefits in the amount of five hundred and 
00/100 dollars ($500.00). 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the 
amount of three thousand eight hundred fifty-five and 25/100 dollars ($3,855.25).  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this __31st ___ day of December, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           INTERIM WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

ROWE V. BC CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 22 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
John Rausch (via WCES) 
Christine Westberg Dorn (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
