Case Number: 5067027
Case Title:  TILL, DALE P V. WINDSTAR LINES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Till Dale-5067027d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DALE TILL, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                    File No. 5067027 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
WINDSTAR LINES, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NATIONAL INTERSTATE INS. CO., 
  :       Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1402.20,  
 
 
  : 
   1402.40, 1802, 1803, 2502, 2907, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
   3001, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Dale Till, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from Windstar Lines, Inc., employer and National Interstate Insurance 
Company, insurance carrier as defendants.  Hearing was held on March 24, 2020.  This 
case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines, Iowa.  
However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  
Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with claimant 
appearing remotely from his attorney’s office, defense counsel appearing remotely, and 
the court reporter also appearing remotely.  The hearing proceeded without significant 
difficulties.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Claimant, Dale Till, was the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE4, claimant’s exhibits 1-8, and defendant’s 
exhibits A-E.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on May 1, 2020, at which time the case 
was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jul-10  14:17:19     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on June 16, 2018. 
2. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the alleged 
June 16, 2018, work injury.  If so, the nature and extent of permanent 
disability claimant sustained. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from June 16, 
2018 to September 25, 2019. 
4. The appropriate commencement date for any permanency benefits. 
5. The appropriate rate of weekly workers’ compensation benefits. 
6. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses under Iowa 
Code section 85.27. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to be reimbursed pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39 for the IME. 
8. Whether penalty benefits are appropriate. 
9. Assessment of costs.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Dale Till, alleges he sustained an injury to his low back and left hip as 
the result of his employment with Windstar Lines, Inc. (“Windstar”).  He has alleged an 
injury date of June 16, 2018.  Defendants deny claimant sustained an injury or that he is 
entitled to any workers’ compensation benefits.    
 
Mr. Till was hired by Windstar on March 20, 2016 as a part-time charter bus 
driver.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 23) Mr. Till typically drove students, student athletes, and adults.  
For example, he drove college athletes to conference games, or adults to places like 
Nashville, Tennessee where they stayed for several days.  Prior to each bus trip, Mr. Till 
was required to perform a safety inspection of the bus.  Additionally, he was required to 
inspect the engine compartment.  For each bus trip the driver was responsible for 
loading and unloading the suitcases from the luggage compartment in the bottom of the 
bus.  The luggage ranged in weight from 20 to in excess of 100 pounds.  On an average 
trip, each passenger would have at least one bag.  The buses had a capacity of 56 
passengers.  Often times, Mr. Till would have to get on his knees in order to load and 
unload the luggage.  (Tr. pp. 27-30; Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 18-19) 
 
Mr. Till received his job assignments from Windstar via telephone.  Windstar 
would contact Mr. Till via telephone to offer him of a particular job or trip opportunity.  
The dispatcher, Jody, would call the driver and ask him if he was interested in taking a 
trip from point A to point B on a certain date, and provide other information.  Part-time 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
drivers then had the option to accept the trip or decline the trip.  If the driver accepted 
the trip, then three to four days later Windstar would send a detailed itinerary to the 
driver via email.  Prior to June 16, 2018, Mr. Till does not remember a time when the 
initial contact regarding a trip was made in any manner other than via telephone.  
Generally, the only communications that were sent via e-mail were notifications of 
events such as a Christmas party or the death of a driver’s family member.  (Testimony) 
 
Around the same time that Mr. Till started working as part-time driver for 
Windstar, he also started driving a bus part-time for Dubuque Community Schools.  Mr. 
Till drove a bus occasionally for the Dubuque Community School District from March 30, 
2016 through the Spring of 2019.  He drove a bus that was adapted for students with 
disabilities.  The bus had a built-in lift for wheelchairs.  His bus also usually had an 
attendant on board to help the students with any needs.  On average, he drove four 
hours per week.  Mr. Till testified that this was not an intensively physical job.  He did 
not have any physical problems with that job. In 2016, Mr. Till did not drive a bus for the 
school during the summertime because school was out for the year.  (Tr. p. 17, 23-24, 
75) 
 
Prior to working for Windstar, Mr. Till did not have any problems with his hips or 
back.  Once he began working for Windstar, he noticed that he gradually began having 
some soreness in his left hip.  However, he was not sure if it was from driving too long 
or from lifting luggage.  He also noticed some issues with his low back.  (Testimony) 
 
Mr. Till did have some conservative medical treatment prior to the injury in 
question.  On November 29, 2017, Mr. Till went to Grand River Medical Group where he 
saw Melissa K. Casey, P.A.  Mr. Till presented with left hip pain that he has had since 
summertime.  He reported daily pain that involved his left lateral hip and sometimes his 
left buttocks.  He did not have lower back pain.  Additionally, he had no numbness, 
tingling, or weakness in either leg.  Over-the-counter Aleve did not seem to help much 
with his symptoms.  An x-ray of his left hip was taken.  He was to increase his Aleve to 
two tablets per day.  The assessment was left hip pain.  (JE1, p. 1) 
 
Mr. Till returned to Grand River Medical Group on December 12, 2017 where he 
saw Stephen Pierotti, M.D.  The doctor noted left hip pain that had been present for six 
months.  The pain was not constant, but intermittent with ambulation, twisting, and 
turning.  He did not have pain at rest.  He had been taking two Aleve per day which 
helped with the pain, but causing stomach problems.  Dr. Pierotti felt that his symptoms 
were consistent with severe arthrosis, but Mr. Till did not have severe pain.  He 
recommended meloxicam and if that did not work, then a trial of Celebrex or perhaps 
injections.   
 
Mr. Till was seen at Grand River Medical Group on January 29, 2018.  He went 
there to switch care and for his welcome to Medicare physical.  The notes state that he 
had a history of left hip pain with arthrosis and was taking meloxicam as needed.  The 
doctor’s assessment included primary osteoarthritis of the left hip.  (JE1, pp. 6-7)   

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
 
On March 20, 2018, Mr. Till underwent a medical examination for his Commercial 
Driver Certification.  He denied back or joint problems.  His examination was negative 
for any conditions other than obesity and use of a CPAP.  (JE2, pp. 10-12) 
 
This brings us to the injury in question.  On June 16, 2018, Mr. Till picked up a 
company car around 8:00 a.m., at the Dubuque Windstar terminal.  He drove to the 
Belvidere Oasis on I-90, which is approximately 25 miles west of Chicago.  He went 
there to relieve a driver who was on a second leg from New York City.  Mr. Till then 
drove the group to their end destination in Muscoda, Wisconsin.  While Mr. Till was 
driving the bus he could tell that it was very heavily loaded.  There were a lot of 
passengers and a lot of heavy luggage.  The overhead compartments were full of 
paraphernalia and souvenirs.  A couple of times on the trip, the bus bottomed out and 
that caused his seat to hit the floor and he felt shock.  Mr. Till believes his seat 
bottomed out three times.  He drove to his destination and unloaded the luggage.  He 
then left the depot around 2:00 p.m.  He was about 15-20 miles south of the depot when 
he received a call from his supervisor that a passenger had left personal items on the 
bus.  The bus was so full that one of the chaperones had placed some items in the 
driver’s storage compartment.  Unfortunately, the chaperone forgot to get those items 
out of the compartment.  Mr. Till had to turn around and return the items before he could 
complete his trip.  (Tr. pp. 35-41)  
 
When he returned home on Saturday, he did not have any pain in his lower back 
or left hip that was anything above normal.  The next day was Father’s Day, he 
remembers having some discomfort around 4:00 p.m., during a grill out.  This would 
have been approximately 24 hours after he had unloaded the bus.  He was 
experiencing discomfort in his lower back and wanted to lay down.  He did not do 
anything unusual on that Sunday.  He describes the pain he had as dull.  The pain 
intensified.  When he woke up on Monday, he had tremendous pain in his lower back.  
He laid on the couch all day Monday and hoped his back pain would subside.  Yogi Cox 
from Windstar called Mr. Till to see if he could drive to Washington D.C.   Mr. Till told 
him he could not because he was hurting too bad.  By the morning of Tuesday, June 
19th, the pain was “vicious.”  He had to crawl to the bathroom when he first woke up.  
Mr. Till sought treatment at the emergency room at Mercy Hospital in Dubuque.  (Tr. pp. 
41-44) 
 
On June 19, 2018, Mr. Till went to emergency care at Mercy Medical Center in 
Dubuque.  He presented with back pain which began three days ago after lifting some 
luggage.  He reported left lumbar sacral pain that radiated into his left buttock.  Mr. Till 
described the pain as moderate and burning and exacerbated by movement.  The 
diagnosis was low back pain.  He was treated conservatively.   Mr. Till was also limited 
from any heavy lifting.  He was instructed to follow-up with his primary care physician.  
(JE3)   
 
Mr. Till said he waited in hell for a week, thinking that the pain medications would 
work.  However, when they did not he went to the emergency department at UnityPoint 
on June 25, 2018.  He reported left-sided low back pain with radiation into the left 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
buttock for the past week.  He was having difficulty sleeping due to his pain and he was 
having occasional numbness into his left thigh.  He reported that he had driven over 
numerous bumps on a bus, which compressed his spine.  The examination revealed 
paraspinal muscle tenderness and impairment of motion due to pain.  The straight leg 
tests were positive on the left.  MRI of the lumbar spine revealed an L4-L5 lateral disc 
protrusion occupying the lateral recess.  Epidural steroid injections and therapy were 
recommended. He was prescribed Oxycodone.   He was to schedule an appointment as 
soon as possible with an orthopaedic surgeon.  (JE4, pp. 18-24; Tr. p. 46) 
 
On June 27, 2018, Timothy J. Miller, M.D., gave Mr. Till a lumbar epidural steroid 
injection at the L4-5 level on the left.  (JE4, pp. 25-27)  
 
Several weeks after his June 16, 2018 trip, Mr. Till experienced increased left hip 
pain.  At times, in certain positions, his hip would buckle.  He had not experienced this 
prior to June 16, 2018.  (Tr. p. 50, 61) 
 
A July 9, 2018 x-ray of the lumbosacral spine was performed.  The x-ray 
demonstrated multilevel degenerative changes and significant instability on the flexion 
and extension views.  Dr. Parvin recommended additional injections.  (JE4, p. 27; Def. 
Ed. D, p. 26)   
Mr. Till returned to Dr. Miller on July 12, 2018 with pain in his left leg.  Dr. Miller 
performed a trans foraminal epidural steroid injection.  (JE4, pp. 28-29) 
 
Mr. Till returned to Dr. Pierotti on July 17, 2018.  Mr. Till reported that he saw Dr. 
Parvin for pain radiating from his back to his buttocks, down the leg and below the knee 
to the anterolateral leg with numbness.  He had been to a pain clinic on two occasions 
for injections at two different levels.  His last injection was five days ago, this provided 
minimal relief.  His pain was worse with sitting for long periods of time and sleeping also 
bothered him at times.  Dr. Pierotti felt that most of his symptoms were due to 
radiculopathy with pain below the knee and numbness.  He also had osteoarthritis of a 
severe degree on x-rays, but it does not cause him any pain.  The notes indicate that he 
was having significant pain control problems.  He was taking oxycodone and getting 
injections.  Dr. Pierotti recommended that Mr. Till talk to the Pain Clinic about his pain 
and possibly see Dr. Parvin again.  Dr. Pierotti did not think that Mr. Till had enough 
pain in the hip to consider having a replacement.  (JE1, p. 3)  
 
Mr. Till returned to Finley Hospital on July 30, 2018.  His back symptoms had 
improved.  He was instructed to stop taking opiates and begin taking Tylenol.  If his pain 
did not continue to decrease, then surgery might be an option.  (JE4, pp. 32-33; Tr. p. 
48)    
 
At the end of August, one of the owners of Windstar called Mr. Till to see how he 
was feeling.  Mr. Till told him that he did not know when he would be able to return to 
work, but he would call Windstar when he was able to go back to work.  Approximately 
two weeks later, Mr. Till went to Windstar and met with supervisor Brenda and the 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
assistant supervisor, Yogi Cox.  Mr. Till told them that he still was not certain when he 
could come back to work and asked if they wanted his key and company card back.  Mr. 
Till was told to keep the key and the card.  Mr. Till intended to return to work when he 
was able.  (Tr. pp. 51-53)  
 
Mr. Till returned to see Dr. Pierotti again on December 5, 2018 for follow-up of 
his left hip arthritis.  He reported pain in his anterior thigh and groin with ambulation.  He 
was tired of the pain and wanted to discuss a total hip arthroplasty.  Dr. Pierotti felt that 
the majority of his pain was from his arthritic hip.  The plan was to proceed with a hip 
replacement.  (JE1, pp. 3-4)  
 
Dr. Pierotti performed the left total hip arthroplasty on January 14, 2019.  Mr. Till 
was discharged from Finley Hospital on January 17, 2019.  By February 13, 2019, he 
was not really having any hip pain and he was very pleased.  (JE1, p. 4; JE4, pp. 35-37) 
Mr. Till saw Dr. Pierotti again on March 13, 2019.  At that point, he was two months out 
from his hip replacement surgery.  Mr. Till reported no pain in his hip and he was getting 
around easily and taking no medication for his pain.  He was very happy with the 
procedure.  He was to return in one year for x-rays.  (JE1, p. 4)  
 
At the request of the defendants, Erin J. Kennedy, M.D., reviewed Mr. Till’s 
records and issued a report on September 13, 2018.  Dr. Kennedy noted that the 
records she reviewed were dated from June 19, 2018 through July 8, 2018.  Dr. 
Kennedy noted that Mr. Till had reported the mechanism of injury in different ways.  He 
reported pain with lifting luggage, pain from ACL compression with going over bumps 
while driving.  She noted that the mechanism of injury was not clear and she believed 
this certainly brought causation into question.  (Def. Ex. D, pp. 25-27) 
 
Dr. Kennedy saw Mr. Till on September 24, 2018.  Mr. Till reported that he was 
not certain what caused his low back and radiating left leg symptoms.  He felt it was a 
combination of factors including the seat that was without appropriate shock absorption, 
bending to lift heavy suitcases, and sitting long hours while driving.  He described lifting 
up to 50 pounds, though some luggage weighed more.  He also reported that the seat 
seemed flat and his back ached when he last drove which was a day or two prior to his 
pain change.  His pain worsened and radiated from his low back to his left buttock and 
posterior thigh.  He could not identify a point in time at work when he had a sudden 
zinger or change of symptoms.  It was at least 36 hours after the time when he last 
drove the bus that he had worsening pain.  Dr. Kennedy felt that Mr. Till’s presentation 
was most consistent with left L5 radiculopathy based on description of his tingling 
middle 3 digits and L4 radiculopathy based on his response to ESI at that level.  She 
could not opine that his condition was work-related.  Dr. Kennedy felt that if an 
occupational exposure had caused irritation of these nerve roots, it would likely happen 
at the moment in time in which the nerve roots were impinged, not days after.  She 
believed it more likely that he developed symptoms as the natural course of his 
degenerative condition.  Dr. Kennedy did not offer any opinions with regard to Mr. Till’s 
left hip.  Dr. Kennedy restricted Mr. Till from work as she felt he could not safely drive 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
passengers in his current condition.  (Def. Ex. D, pp. 29-30) I find that as of September 
24, 2018, Mr. Till was restricted from his job as a bus driver.     
 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Till saw Farid Manshadi, M.D., for an IME on 
September 25, 2019.  In addition to examining Mr. Till, Dr. Manshadi also reviewed his 
medical records.  Mr. Till reported that he gradually developed pain in his left hip over 
the course of his employment at Windstar.  Mr. Till felt the primary aggravating factors 
were long periods of driving and busses with poor suspension in the driver’s seat.  On 
June 16, 2018, Mr. Till drove a Windstar bus with very poor suspension which caused 
significant bouncing.  At the end of the trip, he had to lift out multiple suitcases weighing 
around 100 pounds each.  He had to bend and twist in order to move the luggage.  
When he woke up the following day, he had had severe pain in his low back.  He used a 
heating pad, but that did not resolve his pain.  By the next day he had to crawl to go 
from his bedroom to the bathroom.  After his back injury, his left hip pain also gradually 
began to worsen.    (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1-5)   
 
At the time of his examination with Dr. Manshadi, Mr. Till reported that he felt 
improvement from the injections and the left hip surgery.  However, he still experienced 
some ongoing back and left hip pain.  He had difficulty with long drives, heavy lifting, 
and shoveling.  Dr. Manshadi stated: 
I believe he sustained a low back injury which resulted in L4-L5 far lateral 
disc protrusion with left lower extremity radiculopathy, as well as left-sided 
hip pain.  Please note that he probably has had some hip arthritis which was 
not really symptomatic.  However, with his work activities while working for 
Windstar, this became significantly aggravated to become symptomatic, 
and eventually requiring him to have total left hip arthroplasty with Dr. 
Pierotti.  Mr. Till reports that he does bus driving for the school only maybe 
twice a month now.  However, his job at Windstar was fairly physical, 
especially when he tried to pull out the heavy suitcases from the suitcase 
compartment, and that required him, in fact, many times to crawl into the 
compartment underneath of the bus to retrieve the heavy suitcases.  This 
job required a lot of twisting and bending.  As such, my diagnosis remains 
left-sided low back pain with L4-L5 disc disease on the left side, status post 
injections with improvement of low back pain symptoms; and left-sided hip 
arthritis, status post left total hip arthroplasty.      
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Dr. Manshadi stated that Mr. Till had reached MMI for his low back and left hip.  
Pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
he placed Mr. Till in the DRE lumbar Category II and assigned five percent whole 
person impairment.  With regard to the total hip arthroplasty, Dr. Manshadi assigned 15 
percent whole person impairment.  He placed the following permanent restrictions on 
Mr. Till:  avoid any activity which requires repetitious bending or stooping or twisting at 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
his waist.  He was also to avoid squatting and lifting more than 20 pounds.  Mr. Till also 
needed to be allowed to sit, stand, and walk on an as needed basis.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4)    
At the time of the arbitration hearing, Mr. Till continued to experience pain in his 
low back.  His pain is aggravated by lifting or pushing.  Since his hip surgery, his hip is 
much better; however, he continues to have dull hip pain that comes and goes.  He 
manages his symptoms with Tylenol and ibuprofen.  Mr. Till does not believe he could 
perform his prior job at Windstar.  He cannot drive more than 90 minutes at a time.  He 
also does not think he could load and unload the luggage.  (Tr. p. 58) 
Mr. Till did not have any problems with his low back or left hip prior to working for 
Windstar.  He was able to perform all the functions of his job with Windstar from March 
of 2016 until he completed his June 16, 2018 trip.  Mr. Till credibly testified about the 
difficulties he experienced during this trip, including a problematic seat and a very 
heavily loaded bus with poor suspension.  The first time he sought treatment after the 
June 16, 2018 trip was on June 19.  Since that time, Mr. Till has consistently reported 
that his pain began while working for Windstar.  With regard to Mr. Till’s low back, I find 
the opinions of Dr. Manshadi to be more persuasive than those of Dr. Kennedy.  I do not 
find Dr. Kennedy’s rationale to be persuasive.  Because Mr. Till reported that there was 
more than one aspect of his job with Windstar that caused his pain, Dr. Kennedy felt 
that causation was in question.  I find the opinions of Dr. Manshadi to be well-reasoned 
and to carry greater weight than those of Dr. Kennedy.  Thus, I find Mr. Till has carried 
his burden to demonstrate that his low back pain is related to his work at Windstar.  I 
further find that Mr. Till sustained 5 percent permanent functional impairment to the 
body as a whole as the result of his back injury.     
We now turn to Mr. Till’s left hip.  Dr. Manshadi is the only physician to offer a 
causation opinion regarding Mr. Till’s left hip.  Dr. Manshadi causally connects Mr. Till’s 
left hip, including the need for surgery, to the June 16, 2018 work injury.  Dr. Manshadi’s 
opinion is unrebutted.  I find Mr. Till has carried his burden to show that his left hip 
problems are related to the June 16, 2018 work injury.  I further find that Mr. Till 
sustained 15 percent permanent functional impairment to the body as a whole as the 
result of his hip injury.    
As noted above, I found the opinions of Dr. Manshadi to be more persuasive than 
those of Dr. Kennedy.  Based on the opinions of Dr. Manshadi and the testimony of Mr. 
Till, I find that Mr. Till has permanent restrictions as set forth by Dr. Manshadi.  Those 
include: avoid any activity which requires repetitious bending or stooping or twisting at 
his waist.  He is to avoid squatting and also avoid lifting no more than 20 pounds.  He 
should also continue with common total hip arthroplasty precautions.  He needs to be 
allowed to sit, stand and walk on an as needed basis.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) I find Mr. Till 
could not perform his job as a bus driver at Windstar or as a bus driver with the 
Dubuque Community School District with these restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 18-20)   
 
 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
Mr. Till is no longer employed with Windstar.  After Mr. Till received his second 
injection, he received a call from Jody, the dispatcher.  She asked Mr. Till if he was 
interested in a job.  He told her about the bus with the seat that was not working 
properly and his back injury.  Mr. Till advised Jody, he could not accept the job due to 
his back injury.  He did not know when he would be capable of driving again, but he 
would call her when he was able to come back to work.  He believes this call likely took 
place in late July.  Mr. Till did not hear from Windstar again until the end of August when 
he received a phone call from one of the owners who wanted to see how Mr. Till was 
doing.  Mr. Till said he still was not ready to return to work, but he would call him when 
he thought he was able to drive for Windstar again.  Mr. Till offered to return his 
company credit card and key, but he was told that was not necessary.  It was Mr. Till’s 
intention to return to work for Windstar at some point and work until he was seventy-one 
years old.  (Tr. pp. 51-52) 
 
On September 25, 2018, Yogi Cox, the Dubuque Operations Manager for 
Windstar sent an email to Mr. Till.  The subject line of the email states: “Employment 
Status.”  The body of the email states:  
It may make sense for us to remove you from our list now.  It costs us money 
to keep you on our drug screen list, ADP, TSS, etc.  If you want to resign, 
that makes you eligible for rehire should the time come and your back is 
better and your availability is good.  Would you like to go this route?  Let me 
know, thanks!   
(Def. Ex. B, p. 16) 
Mr. Cox sent a follow-up email to Mr. Till on October 3, 2018.  Once again the 
subject line read “RE:  Employment Status.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 16)  The body of the email 
stated:  “I didn’t hear back from you from the below email [09/25/18 email].  Can you 
please let me know what your plan is moving forward by Friday.  Thank you!”  (Def. Ex. 
B, p. 16)  Mr. Till saw the emails, but he did not open them because he was doing 
something else and thought he would go back and read the emails later.  He also 
testified that he did not expect to receive notice of a possible job assignment via email 
because they had always come via telephone.  The Employee Termination form dated 
of October 19, 2018, states that Mr. Till abandoned his job.  Mr. Till testified that he did 
not read the emails before he was terminated on October 19, 2018.  Up until the point 
that he received the termination notice, Mr.  Till thought he was an employee in good 
standing.   (Def. Ex. B, pp. 14-16; Tr. pp. 55-57) 
 
As of September 24, 2018, defendants’ own doctor, Dr. Kennedy restricted Mr. 
Till from performing his job as a bus driver.  The employer sent Mr. Till the emails about 
his employment status on September 25 and October 3, 2018, after he was restricted 
from work by their own doctor.  Although Mr. Till failed to timely open emails about his 
employment status, his failure is not material due to Dr. Kennedy’s restrictions.  I find 
that the defendants did not offer to return Mr. Till to work, because at the time of those 
emails, he was restricted from performing the job that was offered.  I find defendant did 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
not offer work for which Mr. Till would receive the same or greater wages that he 
received at the time of the injury.     
Mr. Till retired from John Deere in December of 2013.  He worked part-time as a 
fork truck driver for Swiss Colony Brands during the holiday season from October 2015 
until March of 2016.  In March of 2016, he began working part-time for Dubuque 
Community Schools and Windstar Lines as a bus driver.  He wanted to return to work 
so he could help with his daughters’ education costs.  Mr. Till testified that prior to his 
injury, he planned to continue working his part-time jobs until age seventy-one.  (Tr. p. 
53)   
At the time of the injury Mr. Till was working two part-time jobs.  Although he 
cannot return to his prior jobs, no medical provider has opined that he cannot work.  I 
find Mr. Till’s restrictions preclude him from a significant number of jobs.  However, I find 
that the preponderance of the evidence does not show that he is permanently and 
totally disability.  I find Mr. Till has demonstrated that he has a work history with varied 
skills that would enable him to pursue alternate employment if he were so motivated.  
Mr. Till has experience using computers, telephones, and working with dealerships to 
answer technical questions.  He also has mechanical expertise.  Mr. Till has testified 
that he has not looked for employment since his injury.  He decided that given his pain it 
was probably time for him to retire.  At the time of the injury he was 65 years old.  At the 
time of the hearing he was 67 years old.  He had intended to work until the age of 71.   
I find that Mr. Till has sustained a significant loss of future earning capacity as a 
result of the work injury.  Unfortunately, he has now been out of the labor market for well 
over a year and he has significant restrictions.  He has lost access to a significant 
portion of his pre-injury employment opportunities.  However, it is possible that he could 
expand his employment opportunities with a willingness to work.     
Considering Mr. Till’s age, proximity to retirement, educational background, 
employment history, ability to retrain, limited motivation to seek employment, length of 
healing period, permanent impairment, and permanent restrictions, and the other 
industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that he has 
sustained a 30 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of his work injury with 
the defendant employer. 
 
There is a dispute surrounding the appropriate weekly workers’ compensation 
rate for Mr. Till.  At the time of the injury, Mr. Till was 65 years old.  At the time of the 
hearing, he was living with his ex-wife and his adopted daughter, Betsy who was 21 
years old.  At the time of the injury Betsy was not living with Mr. Till, but he did claim her 
on this tax returns.  I find that for the purposes of calculation of his weekly workers’ 
compensation rate, Mr. Till is entitled to three exemptions.  (Tr. p. 11)   
 
Mr. Till testified that the average weekly wage of $541.77 seemed like a 
reasonable representation of his earnings.  He estimated that he was paid roughly 
$13.50 per hour.  He thought forty-five hours per week seemed like a reasonable 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
average, but there were some weeks he worked a lot more hours and some weeks 
when he worked a lot less hours.  Mr. Till testified that his hours varied, but he worked 
at least as much as the average part-time driver, but certainly not as much as a full-time 
Windstar driver.  At the Dubuque terminal he estimated there were probably eight full-
time drivers and twenty-five part-time drivers.  Full-time drivers received benefits, but 
part-time drivers did not.  If Windstar had a trip that part-time drivers had declined, a full-
time driver was then required to take that trip.  A full-time driver at Windstar could easily 
work sixty hours per week.  (Tr. pp. 33-34) The employment paperwork for Mr. Till 
clearly states that he was a part-time employee.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 3-7, 14)  I find that Mr. 
Till worked less than the less than the usual weekly earnings of the regular full-time 
adult laborer in the line of industry in which the employee is injured in that locality.  I 
further find that Mr. Till was a part-time employee at Windstar.  I find that the 
defendants’ calculation of Mr. Till’s gross weekly wages is correct.  I find that his gross 
weekly wages are $406.15.  Mr. Till was single and entitled to three exemptions.   
 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 6.  The expenses set forth on claimant’s exhibit 6, p. 32 all predate the work injury.  
There is no evidence in the record to show that these expenses were incurred as the 
result of the work injury.  These expenses are not the responsibility of the defendants.   
 
A review of the records and testimony supports claimant’s claim for payment of the 
past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s exhibit 6, pages 33-43.  I find that these 
expenses were reasonably and necessary to treat the work injury of June 16, 2018.  I 
further find that the defendants are responsible for these expenses.   
Claimant is seeking reimbursement for the IME that Dr. Manshadi performed on 
September 25, 2019.  One year prior to this, defendants obtained an opinion from Dr. 
Kennedy.  Dr. Kennedy opined that Mr. Till’s back problems were not related to his work.  
She did not address the issue of impairment.   
Under Iowa law, an employee can only obtain reimbursement for an 
independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39 if the strict 
requirements of the statute are met. Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority 
v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). Iowa Code section 
85.39(2) provides: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  
Dr. Manshadi offered the only medical opinion on permanent impairment. As 
such, claimant cannot establish that a physician retained by the employer rendered a 
permanent impairment rating before Dr. Manshadi's evaluation. Claimant cannot satisfy 
the statutory prerequisites to qualify for an independent medical evaluation pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39. Claimant's request for award of Dr. Manshadi's independent 
medical evaluation fees pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 is denied.    
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.14(6)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Mr. Till sustained permanent 
injury to his body as a whole.  The Iowa legislature enacted significant changes to the 
Iowa workers’ compensation laws, which took effect in July 2017.  One of the changes 
was to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) which now states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u” hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused 
by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee 
possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the reduction in the 
employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall take into account 
the permanent partial disability of the employee and the number of years in 
the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at 
the time of the injury. If an employee who is eligible for compensation under 
this paragraph returns to work or is offered work for which the employee 
receives or would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings 
than the employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee's functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee's earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee's 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph 
and is terminated from employment by that employer, the award or 
agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed 
upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the employee for a 
determination of any reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused 
by the employee's permanent partial disability. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
According to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), Mr. Till’s compensation shall be paid 
during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the reduction in the 
employee's earning capacity caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning 
capacity that the employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall take into 
account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the number of years in the 
future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the time of the 
injury.   

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
In the present case, I conclude that Mr. Till was not offered work for which he 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury.  Mr. Till was offered work as a bus driver.  However, at 
that time, the defendants’ own doctor restricted him from performing his job.  Thus, I 
conclude that Mr. Till shall not be compensated based only upon his functional 
impairment resulting from the injury.  Rather, he shall be compensated in relation to his 
earning capacity.  Having considered all of these factors, I conclude Mr. Till sustained 
30 loss of earning capacity.  As such Mr. Till is entitled to 150 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits.   
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34.  I conclude that Mr. Till’s healing period 
ended on September 25, 2019 when he was placed at Maximum Medical Improvement 
(MMI).  Thus, the commencement date for his permanent partial disability benefits is 
September 25, 2019.  Defendant shall pay Mr. Till 150 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on September 25, 2019.     
Mr. Till is seeking healing period benefits from June 16, 2018 to September 25, 
2019.  Mr. Till testified that he felt that he could not perform his job during this time.  
Defendants dispute his entitlement to these benefits.  Claimant argues that he has not 
worked at Windstar since the date of injury on June 16, 2018 and that the record is void 
of any meaningful employment since that time.   
During his treatment Mr. Till was, at times, on opiates and likely would not have 
been able to drive a bus.  However, his treating physicians did not restrict him from 
driving.  It was not until defendants obtained the opinion of Dr. Kennedy that Mr. Till was 
formally restricted from driving.  I find that Mr. Till was disabled from bus driving 
beginning on September 24, 2018.  I conclude Mr. Till is entitled to healing period 
benefits from September 24, 2018, until he reached MMI on September 25, 2019.        
We now turn to the issue of the appropriate weekly workers’ compensation rate. 
Claimant alleges he is entitled to three exemptions and defendants argue he is only 
entitled to two.  Defendants dispute his entitlement to claim his adopted daughter as an 
exemption.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Mr. Till is entitled to 
three exemptions.   
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The Code states that the basis of compensation 
shall be the weekly earnings of the injured employee at the time of the injury. Weekly 
earnings is defined as the gross salary, wages, or earnings of an employee to which 
such employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the customary 
hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured, as regularly required by 
the employee's employer for the work or employment.  The different subsections of 
85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending on the type of 
earnings and employment. 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
The parties dispute which subsection of Iowa Code 85.36 should be used to 
calculation Mr. Till’s rate.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Mr. Till 
worked less than the less than the usual weekly earnings of the regular full-time adult 
laborer in the line of industry in which the employee is injured in that locality.  I further 
conclude that Mr. Till was a part-time employee at Windstar.  Thus, I conclude that Iowa 
Code section 85.36(9) is the appropriate code section in this case.  Iowa Code section 
85.36(9) states: 
If an employee earns either no wages or less than the usual weekly 
earnings of the regular full-time adult laborer in the line of industry in which 
the employee is injured in that locality, the weekly earnings shall be one-
fiftieth of the total earnings which the employee has earned from all 
employment during the twelve calendar months immediately preceding the 
injury. 
 
 
I conclude that the appropriate gross weekly earnings are as set forth in 
defendants’ exhibit A.  His average weekly wages were $406.15.  He is single and 
entitled to 3 exemptions.  Thus, his weekly workers’ compensation rate is two hundred 
eighty-one and 44/100 dollars ($281.44).   
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses.  The employer shall 
furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all 
conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The employer shall also 
allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services.  
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer 
has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., 
Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening 
October 1975). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that defendants are responsible 
for the medical expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 6, pages 33 through 43.   
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant failed to prove 
entitlement to reimbursement for the IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Claimant is seeking penalty benefits.  In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 
554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 
(Iowa 1996), the supreme court said: 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 16 
 
 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 
1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 17 
 
 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
Claimant argues penalty benefits are appropriate because defendants have not 
paid any indemnity benefits.  Mr. Till testified that defendants were aware of his worker’s 
compensation injury no later than June 18, 2018.  (Tr. p. 45) Dr. Kennedy who was 
hired by the defendants stated that an injury report was completed by defendants no 
later than July 19, 2018.  Defendants did not obtain a causation opinion until September 
24, 2018.  I find that this was not necessarily an unreasonable delay because 
defendants are entitled to time to investigate a claim.  However, the record is void of 
what investigation, if any, defendants were completing during this timeframe.  
Additionally, I find that defendants’ actions were unreasonable with regard to claimant’s 
left hip claim.  Defendants never obtained a causation opinion with regard to claimant’s 
left hip. 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 18 
 
 
Even if defendants had conducted and documented a reasonable investigation 
into Mr. Till’s workers’ compensation claim, defendants failed to contemporaneously 
convey their reason for the denial to Mr. Till.  The record is void of any communication 
from defendants setting forth the basis for the denial.  I find claimant carried his burden 
of proof to show that defendants denied benefits.  I further find that defendants have 
failed to prove they conducted a reasonable investigation into Mr. Till’s hip claim.  I 
further find that defendants failed to contemporaneously convey their basis for the 
denial to Mr. Till.  Thus, I conclude penalty benefits are appropriate in this case.    
 
Once claimant establishes a delay in payment of benefits, it is defendants' burden 
to establish that they possessed a reasonable basis, or excuse, for the delay in payment 
of benefits. Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b)(2). I conclude that defendants did not offer a 
reasonable excuse for the denial of the hip claim. Similarly, I conclude that defendants 
did not contemporaneously convey their bases for denial of benefits to claimant. Iowa 
Code section 86.13(4)(c)(3). Defendants bore the burden to establish a reasonable basis, 
or excuse, and to prove the contemporaneous conveyance of those bases to the claimant. 
Defendants failed to carry their burden of proof on the penalty issues, and a penalty award 
is appropriate. Iowa Code section 86.13. 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases. Id. at 237. In this regard, the Commission 
is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed with a maximum 
penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits. Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).   
In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 
the employee's injury and wages, and the employer's past record of penalties. Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996). In this instance, 
defendants did obtain Dr. Kennedy’s opinion regarding his back and that established a 
reasonable basis for their denial of the back claim.  However, defendants failed to 
obtain an expert opinion regarding his left hip.  A penalty sufficient to alert the insurance 
carrier to this problem and deter similar future conduct is warranted.   
Having considered the relevant factors and the purposes of the penalty statute, I 
conclude that a section 86.13 penalty in the amount of $7,500.00 is appropriate to 
punish the employer for its denial in payment of benefits and failure to 
contemporaneously convey its basis for denial.   
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 86.40.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Commissioner or the 
hearing deputy.  I find that claimant was generally successful in his claim.  Therefore, an 
assessment of costs is appropriate.  Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs in the 
amount of $85.75 for deposition transcription of his deposition.  I find that is an 
appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33(1).  Claimant is also seeking service charges in the 
amount of $6.67.  I find that this is an appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33 (3).  The 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 19 
 
 
filing fee in the amount of $100.00 dollars.  I find that this is an appropriate cost under 
876 IAC 4.33(7). 
Claimant is also seeking the examination of Dr. Manshadi in the amount of 
$350,00 and the report fee in the amount of $1,600.00.  Agency rule 876 IAC 
4.33(6) permits the assessment of “the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two 
doctors' or practitioners' reports.” The Iowa Supreme Court has interpreted this 
administrative rule. The Court held: 
[A] physician's written report of an examination and evaluation under 
section 85.39 would be a reimbursable expense under section 85.39, just 
as an unreimbursed written report of an examination and evaluation, like 
deposition testimony and witness fees, could be taxed as hearing costs by 
the commissioner. Yet, a physician's report becomes a cost incurred in a 
hearing because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor's testimony. The 
underlying medical expenses associated with the examination do not 
become costs of a report needed for a hearing, just as they do not become 
costs of the testimony or deposition. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 846. 
I conclude that claimant had prevailed and that assessment of costs in some 
amount was reasonable. Pursuant to the Iowa Supreme Court's holding in Young, 
claimant may not receive the cost of Dr. Manshadi's evaluation as a cost. However, Dr. 
Manshadi's charges for drafting a report are a permissible cost. Id.  I conclude that the 
cost of Dr. Manshadi's report, $1,600.00, should be taxed against defendants as a cost 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.40 and 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the weekly rate of two hundred eighty-one 
and 44/100 dollars ($281.44).   
Defendants shall pay healing period benefits from September 24, 2018 through 
September 24, 2019.    
Defendants shall pay thirty (30) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on September 25, 2019. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 

TILL V. WINDSTAR LINES, INC. 
Page 20 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Deciga 
Sanchez v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5052008 (App. Apr. 23, 2018) (Ruling on 
Defendants’ Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider or Amend Appeal Decision re: Interest Rate 
Issue). 
Defendants shall be responsible for past medical expenses as set forth above. 
Defendants shall pay penalty benefits in the amount of seven thousand five 
hundred and 00/100 dollars ($7,500.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _10th __ day of July, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
 
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
Casey Steadman (via WCES) 
Kalli Gloudemans (via WCES) 
Abigail Wenninghoff (via WCES) 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
