Case Number: 19700200.01
Case Title:  ELMORE, KERRY V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Elmore Kerry-19700200.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KERRY ELMORE, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 19700200.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
QUAKER OATS COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  :       Head Note Nos.:  1100, 1108, 1400 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Kerry Elmore, filed a petition for arbitration on August 15, 2019, 
seeking workers’ compensation benefits from Quaker Oats Company, employer, and 
Indemnity Insurance Company of North America, insurance carrier.  The claimant was 
represented by Nate Willems.  The defendants were represented by Kent Smith. 
The matter came on for hearing on November 16, 2020, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 
3; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7; and Defense Exhibits A through H.  The claimant 
testified at hearing.  Debra Hoadley served as the court reporter.  On November 17, 
2020, claimant filed a motion to reopen the record, making allegations regarding his 
employment circumstances.  The claimant submitted Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  On January 
11, 2021, this motion was rejected under Rule 4.19(3)(e).  The undersigned did not 
review Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  The matter was fully submitted on January 8, 2021, after 
helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on August 1, 2019. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Sep-10  12:37:12     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 2 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of any permanent disability and whether 
claimant is entitled to any permanent partial disability benefits.  If so, the 
nature and extent of such benefits are disputed. 
3. The rate of compensation is disputed on the basis of gross wages. 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to the medical expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 5. 
5. Defendants assert the claim was not timely filed under Iowa Code section 
85.26. 
6. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for benefits paid on his prior 
tinnitus claim (March 29, 2013) under Iowa Code section 85.34(7). 
7. Defendants assert that the principles of res judicata apply to this claim as it 
relates to claimant’s March 29, 2013, tinnitus claim. 
8. Claimant seeks costs set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 7. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship at all relevant times. 
2. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are not in dispute. 
3. The parties have stipulated that if any permanent disability benefits are owed, 
the commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is August 2, 
2019. 
4. The parties have stipulated that the claimant was married and entitled to two 
exemptions for purposes of rate calculation. 
5. Affirmative defenses have been waived with the exception of statute of 
limitations (as set forth above). 
These stipulations have been accepted by the undersigned and these 
stipulations are deemed binding upon the parties. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Kerry Elmore was 59 years old as of the date of hearing.  He has 
worked at Quaker Oats since 1982 up through the date of hearing.  He served in the 
United States Army after receiving his GED in 1979.  Since 2011, Mr. Elmore has 
worked as a general maintenance person (GMP).  His job duties generally involved 
cleaning at the Quaker plant.  His earnings are in the record.  At the time of the alleged 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 3 
injury he was earning $32.05 per hour and he worked regular overtime, up to 60 plus 
hours per week.  (Defendants’ Exhibit F)  He also earned regular bonuses under his 
union contract. 
Mr. Elmore filed two prior claims against Quaker Oats (hereafter “Quaker”).  He 
filed a petition alleging a March 29, 2013, tinnitus injury which was settled on 
Agreement for Settlement on June 26, 2014.  (Claimant Exhibit 1 pages 1-4)  He was 
paid a total of 49.6 weeks of compensation amounting to $40,000.00.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1, 
3)  He then filed a petition for review reopening on the same claim, which was 
eventually settled on a compromise basis on November 7, 2017.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-10)  
For the review-reopening claim, he was paid $40,000.00 on a full and final basis.  (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 9)  Richard Tyler, Ph.D., served as Mr. Elmore’s expert in those cases.  Marlan 
Hansen, M.D., served as the defendants’ expert in those claims. 
Mr. Elmore alleges that he sustained a cumulative noise exposure aggravation 
injury related to his hearing which manifested on or about August 1, 2019.  Specifically, 
he contends that his condition of tinnitus has been materially aggravated since his 
November 7, 2017, compromise settlement.  Therefore, his condition prior to the alleged 
injury is particularly relevant. 
There is no doubt that Mr. Elmore has been exposed to a noisy work 
environment at Quaker.  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 1-2)  As a result, he has had hearing loss, which 
at the time of hearing was not compensable because he still worked in the noisy 
environment.  In addition, at some point he developed the condition of tinnitus.  Again, 
this fact is not really in dispute.  The primary disputes are whether this condition was 
materially aggravated after his compromise full and final settlement in 2017, and 
whether the current claim is barred by res judicata and/or the statute of limitations. 
Mr. Elmore testified live and in-person (via Court Call) at hearing.  I find his 
testimony to be highly credible.  Mr. Elmore was an accurate historian and his testimony 
was consistent with other portions of the record.  There was nothing about his 
demeanor which caused me any concern regarding his truthfulness. 
Prior to August 1, 2019, Mr. Elmore’s tinnitus was significantly disabling as 
documented in the evidence.  When he began employment with Quaker, he did not 
have the condition of tinnitus.  Quaker prepared noise measurement reports and other 
work records to document exposure in the plant.  Mr. Elmore had regular hearing 
evaluations from the beginning of his employment through November 2020.  In his 
September 6, 2013, independent medical evaluation (IME) Richard Tyler, Ph.D., 
summarized these reports, opining that Mr. Elmore was in a very noisy environment and 
was exposed to impulsive noises which is more damaging.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 2-3)  Dr. Tyler 
also documented Mr. Elmore’s substantial overtime worked and the manner in which 
this contributed to his tinnitus and hearing deficits.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 5) 
According to Dr. Tyler, in 2004, Mr. Elmore’s tinnitus was first noted in his 
hearing examination.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 7)  His tinnitus progressed from there until he 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 4 
sustained an injury as defined by Iowa law, which manifested on or about March 29, 
2013.  There was, of course, no specific event which occurred on that date, but rather 
his condition progressed as a result of repeated noise exposure until it manifested on 
that date.  In his IME examination with Dr. Tyler, Mr. Elmore filled out a hearing loss and 
tinnitus questionnaire (in January 2013) which allowed Mr. Elmore to describe his 
symptoms at that time.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 20-27)  Therein, Mr. Elmore described the 
“crickets” sound which he described as a “30” on a 100 point scale.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 24)  In 
the written portion, he described his inability to understand voices in conversations.  (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 24)  He described and rated his difficulties with concentration, his emotional 
well-being, hearing and inability to sleep.  This is how he rated those areas on a 100 
point scale (100 being total great effect; 0 no effect). 
67. 
Concentration 
 
30 
68. 
Emotion well being  
30 
69. 
Hearing 
 
 
60 
70. 
Sleep  
 
 
30 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 25)  Based upon his review of the records, history taken from Mr. Elmore, 
Dr. Tyler assigned an 11.4 percent body as a whole rating for the tinnitus.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
13) He recommended hearing aids and opined the tinnitus was due to the noisy 
environment at Quaker and recommended significant restrictions at work and social 
activities.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 12-13)  Neither party followed the restrictions.  
Defendants had claimant evaluated by Marlan Hansen, M.D., at the University of 
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  Dr. Hansen reviewed documents and examined Mr. 
Elmore.  He opined Mr. Elmore did have tinnitus and apportioned his claim between the 
work-related and non-work portions.  He assigned a 1 percent whole body rating for the 
tinnitus and did not recommend any medical restrictions.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 9)  He did feel 
Mr. Elmore may benefit from a trial of hearing aids. 
As mentioned above, the parties settled this claim on an agreement for 
settlement on June 26, 2014.  After the settlement, Mr. Elmore continued to work in the 
noisy environment.  The condition apparently progressed further as Mr. Elmore filed a 
review-reopening petition on September 12, 2016.  Both parties obtained subsequent 
evaluations from their original experts, Dr. Tyler and Dr. Hansen.  (Def. Ex. C, pp. 17-
19; Def. Ex. E)  Both assigned higher impairment ratings from tinnitus and documented 
his increasing symptoms.  Dr. Hansen noted that the condition of tinnitus is subjective 
and opined that his increase in symptoms was consistent with the natural progression of 
his tinnitus and hearing loss.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 18) 
In any event, Mr. Elmore’s review-reopening petition was settled and then 
approved on November 7, 2017.  This settlement, unlike the first, was a compromise 
settlement under Section 85.35(3).  The basis for the dispute was set forth as follows: 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 5 
Claimant alleges he developed tinnitus due to exposure to noise in the 
course of his employment at Quaker Oats.  The parties settled this claim 
on an Agreement for Settlement basis for 9.9% industrial disability, which 
was approved by the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner on June 27, 
2014. . . .  
Claimant alleges he sustained a change of physical condition since the 
Agreement for settlement in June 2014 and he has sustained additional 
industrial disability.  Claimant relies on the report from Richard Tyler 
Ph.D., finding Claimant’s hearing loss had increased and he had 
significant tinnitus.  Claimant argues that his increased tinnitus has 
resulted in additional industrial disability. 
Defendants argue that Claimant’s alleged increase in tinnitus is, at most, a 
natural progression of his condition that was expected to occur at the time 
of the June 2014 settlement.  Defendants rely on the report from Marlan 
Hansen, M.D., finding that Claimant’s hearing loss/tinnitus from June 214 
[sic] to the present was a natural progression of his hearing condition that 
existed prior to the settlement.  Defendants believe Claimant has not 
sustained any change of condition that would entitle him to additional 
benefits.  In addition, Defendants argue Claimant has not sustained any 
industrial disability as evidenced by his ongoing employment at Quaker 
Oats. 
Given the dispute, the parties have agreed to settle the March 29, 2013 
tinnitus claim on a full and final basis for $40,000 in new money. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-6) 
Mr. Elmore went back to work in the same noisy environment after the 
settlement.  He now contends that his condition then worsened after November 7, 2017.  
It is undoubtedly the same condition he has had since at least 2013 when the first injury 
manifested. 
At hearing, Mr. Elmore credibly testified that his tinnitus now wakes him up more 
often in a given night.  (Tr., p. 13)  He described significant fatigue and waking up 
numerous times per night, sometimes with headaches and feelings of anxiety.  (Tr., pp. 
14-15)  He described the crickets sound as being louder, but he also described hearing 
sounds like a car engine “with really bad lifters ticking really superfast …”  (Tr., p. 14)  
Mr. Elmore has had to develop creative strategies to address his waking up in order to 
relax.  (Tr., pp. 15-16)  This is new since 2017.  (Tr., p. 16)  He testified that before his 
2017 settlement, when he would wake, he would simply roll over and go back to sleep.  
Since the condition has progressed with the new, louder noises it now takes him a half 
hour or so to get relaxed and back to sleep using new, creative strategies.  He testified 
that his fatigue is so severe now that he occasionally misses work due to lack of sleep, 
anxiety and headaches.  (Tr., pp. 16-19)  Mr. Elmore also testified that he now fails to 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 6 
hear important safety cues at work such as co-workers hollering at him, or fork trucks 
driving up behind him.  (Tr., p. 19)  He also testified that his inability to hear or 
understand his co-workers now causes him significant difficulties.  He testified that 
some co-workers call him “stupid” or “dumb” due to his inability to hear or understand 
what is happening at work.  (Tr., pp. 21-22)  He now communicates often through text 
messages even with team leaders at work.  He testified his inability to concentrate has 
caused him to turn over household tasks, such as paying bills, to his spouse.  (Tr., p. 
24) 
Mr. Elmore filled out a new hearing loss and tinnitus questionnaire for Dr. Tyler in 
May 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 28-35)  On this form, he rated the loudness of the crickets 
sound as a 70 on a 100 point scale.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 32)  In the written comments section, 
he added a number of detailed problems his tinnitus causes including confusion, the 
inability to “define” voices, the inability to hear anything when there is background noise, 
inability to sleep and feeling exhausted and confused during the day, as well as social 
problems.  He rated his deficits as follows: 
67. 
Concentration 
 
90 
68. 
Emotional well being 
80 
69.  
Hearing  
 
 
90 
70. 
Sleep  
 
 
80 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 33)  In comments he further described social isolation and confirmed a 
number of the problems and difficulties he has at work and in his activities of daily living.  
He wrote the following concluding comments:  “I’d give anything to be a part in a 
conversation.  I’m laughed at a lot because they think I’m stupid because I can’t hear.  
And to be able to sleep or not be so tired all day.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 34)  In the tinnitus 
handicap questionnaire, he detailed his tinnitus interfering significantly with his life, more 
so than the earlier questionnaire.  (Compare Cl. Ex. 2, p. 35 with Cl. Ex. 2, p. 27) 
In August 2020, defendants had claimant evaluated by a new medical expert, 
Douglas Hoisington, M.D.  Dr. Hoisington reviewed a number of records, as well as a 
detailed letter from defense counsel setting forth the course of events.  He also 
examined Mr. Elmore.  He offered the following opinions.  “As stated above, there has 
been no additional hearing loss since September 2016, and the tinnitus has remained 
the same.”  (Def. Ex. D, p. 20)  Dr. Hoisington recommended new hearing aids but did 
not assign any additional impairment or restrictions.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 20) 
 
Mr. Elmore’s attorney wrote to Dr. Tyler on September 14, 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
17)  He provided a number of important records to Dr. Tyler, including prior tests, 
medical reports, Mr. Elmore’s deposition, answers to interrogatories, and defense 
expert reports.  Dr. Tyler also had all of Mr. Elmore’s questionnaires, including the July 
2020 questionnaire.  Dr. Tyler reviewed all of this information and interviewed Mr. 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 7 
Elmore.  He prepared a lengthy report detailing the history of Mr. Elmore’s condition and 
rendering expert opinions including a detailed appendix.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 36-54)  Dr. Tyler 
disagreed with Dr. Hoisington’s assessment and he assigned a 38 percent whole body 
impairment for Mr. Elmore’s tinnitus pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 42-43) He opined this was an 11 percent increase 
in functional impairment since November 2017.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 42)  The rating assigned 
impairment for hearing difficulties, sleep difficulties, concentration difficulties and 
emotional difficulties.  Dr. Tyler noted the following restrictions:   
He should not work around intense noise, particularly impulsive noise.  He 
should not work where careful concentration is needed.  He should not 
work where communication with fellow workers is required.  These 
restrictions have become more critical, because of his increase in hearing 
loss and tinnitus difficulties. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 37) 
After reviewing the reports, I find Dr. Tyler’s report compelling.  Dr. Tyler has 
consistently evaluated Mr. Elmore on three distinct occasions since 2013, and is in the 
best position to provide an overall assessment.  Dr. Tyler’s professional credentials in 
the field of audiology are impeccable.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 55-98)  I find his report is strong 
supporting evidence for Mr. Elmore’s assertion that his condition has worsened since 
November 2017, when he settled his tinnitus claim.  I find this report more convincing 
than Dr. Hoisington’s report.  Dr. Hoisington simply claimed without explanation that “the 
tinnitus has remained the same.”  It is entirely unclear in this record what he based this 
conclusion on.  This was the first occasion Dr. Hoisington evaluated Mr. Elmore.  It does 
not appear that he reviewed the claimant’s deposition testimony or reviewed the same 
detailed description of symptoms which was available to Dr. Tyler.  He did review a 
lengthy letter from defense counsel which, while generally accurate, did not specifically 
detail the symptoms Mr. Elmore has experienced since November 2017.  (See Def. Ex. 
D, pp. 30-37)  Furthermore, while Dr. Hoisington is undoubtedly qualified to render 
expert opinions, he does not have the breadth of experience and background in tinnitus 
claims as Dr. Tyler. 
The problem for the claimant, however, is that Dr. Tyler did not provide an 
opinion that the claimant sustained a new tinnitus injury which manifested on or about 
August 1, 2019.  Dr. Tyler merely opined that Mr. Elmore’s condition had substantially 
worsened.  “Based on the information available to me, I conclude that the sensorineural 
hearing loss and tinnitus experienced by Mr. Elmore worsened since 2017."  (Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 43)  While it is clear in his report that he did not believe that Mr. Elmore should 
continue to be exposed to the noisy work environment, it is also clear that Dr. Tyler 
opined that this was the exact same condition he had been dealing with since at least 
2013.  There was no new cumulative trauma manifestation.  The condition simply 
worsened. 
 
 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 8 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant sustained an injury which 
arose out of and in the course of his employment which manifested on or about August 
1, 2019.  Claimant has alleged that he substantially and materially aggravated his 
preexisting diagnosis of tinnitus as a result of his exposure to excessive noise for the 
employer since he settled his tinnitus claim in November 2017.  He contends the 
condition manifested on August 1, 2019.  Defendants do not seriously dispute that the 
claimant has suffered tinnitus.  They assert both that the condition is the same as it was 
in November 2017, and to the extent it has worsened at all, that the condition has 
naturally progressed and that his work activities since 2017, have not substantially or 
materially aggravated the condition.  The defendants further argue that claimant’s claim 
is barred by the doctrine of res judicata since he settled his tinnitus claim in November 
2017 on a full and final basis. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A 
is specifically excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 
85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 9 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
Because a cumulative injury has been alleged, the issue of medical causation is 
significantly linked to the issue of whether he suffered an injury which arose out of and 
in the course of his employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
The first issue is whether the claim is barred by the doctrine of res judicata.  The 
question is whether a worker can sustain a new, cumulative injury by aggravating a 
condition which has already been settled, in this case on a full and final basis under 
Section 85.35(3). 
 
 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 10 
Defendants set forth the following argument. 
Claimant’s alleged August 1, 2019 injury is precluded by res judicata.  
“It is well settled that the doctrines of claim preclusion and issue 
preclusion (formerly termed res judicata) are applicable in appropriate 
circumstances to administrative quasi-judicial adjudications.”  Price v. 
Koehring Cranes, File No. 5016412 (App. Dec. Aug. 19, 2008), citing Bd. 
Of Sup’rs, Carroll City v. Chi. & N.W. Transp. Co., 260 N.W.2d 813, 815 
(Iowa 1977).  Claimant already filed a Petition for tinnitus in 2013 and filed 
a Review/Reopening Petition in 2017.  The Commissioner approved a 
settlement of this matter in November 2017.  (Ex. 1, p. 5)  Claimant’s 
tinnitus didn’t stop or improve at some point then reoccur unexpectedly.  It 
persisted from 2013 through the present. 
(Def. Brief, pp. 11-12)  The defendants go on to argue that tinnitus is subjective. 
I reject this argument.  The claimant settled his 2013 claim for tinnitus on 
November 1, 2017, on a full and final basis.  He then filed a petition alleging he 
sustained a new cumulative trauma hearing injury on August 1, 2019.  It is the 
claimant’s burden to prove he sustained a new cumulative trauma injury which 
manifested on that date.  The fact that he had experienced a previous disability, which 
he settled, does not bar him from attempting to prove that he sustained a new 
cumulative trauma injury. 
I find, however, that the claimant failed to prove that he sustained a new, 
cumulative trauma injury, following his 2017 settlement.  His condition undoubtedly 
worsened somewhat after the settlement.  Mr. Elmore continued to work for Quaker in a 
noisy environment and Quaker continued to allow him to work, probably because their 
own expert at that time placed no restrictions on him.  In any event, he did continue to 
experience noise exposure, including impulsive noise.  With the benefit of hindsight, it 
appears it was unwise for the claimant to continue to work in the noisy environment 
given the nature and severity of his condition. 
The condition also progressed naturally and it is somewhat difficult to determine 
how much of his condition is from a natural progression and how much is from 
continued noise exposure.  In any event, it is likely that his condition worsened 
somewhat because of his continued noise exposure.  I find, however, that claimant has 
failed to meet his burden of proof that he sustained a new, distinct cumulative trauma 
injury. 
In Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., the Supreme Court addressed the issue of a 
subsequent personal injury which arises from an aggravation of a prior work-related 
injury.  In Ellingson, the claimant had suffered a traumatic event work injury in 1985 
which resulted in a serious cervical condition.  Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440, 442 (Iowa 1999) Ellingson argued that she sustained a discreet cumulative injury 
which manifested later and was partially responsible for her disability.   

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 11 
To the extent that the evidence reveals a subsequent aggravation of 
Ellingson's January 4, 1985 injury, this is a relevant circumstance in fixing 
the extent of her permanent disability. Aggravating work activities were 
doubtless a causal factor with respect to the total degree of disability that 
she exhibited at the time of the hearing. It is clear, however, that she may 
not establish a cumulative-injury claim by merely asserting that her 
disability immediately following the January 4, 1985 injury was increased 
by subsequent aggravating work activities. That circumstance only serves 
to increase the disability attributable to the January 4, 1985 injury. To 
show a cumulative injury she must demonstrate that she has suffered a 
distinct and discreet disability attributable to post–1985 work activities 
rather than as an aggravation of the January 4, 1985 injury. In presenting 
that claim to the commissioner, she could only prevail if the commissioner, 
as primary fact finder, found that a factual basis for a cumulative-injury 
disability existed. The commissioner did not make that finding. The 
findings of the commissioner have the effect of a jury verdict. Ward v. Iowa 
Dep't of Transp., 304 N.W.2d 236, 237 (Iowa 1981); Paveglio v. Firestone 
Tire & Rubber Co., 167 N.W.2d 636, 640 (Iowa 1969). 
Ellingson, 599 N.W.2d at 444. 
Mr. Elmore’s condition is the exact same condition he had in 2013 and settled in 
2014 and 2017; namely severe tinnitus.  It is now slightly worse than it was at the time 
he effectuated his full and final settlement in 2017.  Mr. Elmore asserted that the type of 
noise he hears is new (a loud roaring as opposed to loud crickets).  He also asserts that 
he is more isolated and has had to develop new strategies to deal with the worsening 
condition.  A number of symptoms are somewhat more severe.  Dr. Tyler, however, did 
not opine that the claimant sustained a new, distinct or discreet cumulative trauma injury 
as a result of the continued noise exposure.  Rather, Dr. Tyler opined that his condition 
has simply worsened over time.  “Based on the information available to me, I conclude 
that the sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus experienced by Mr. Elmore has 
worsened since 2017."  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 43)  Having reviewed Dr. Tyler’s report thoroughly, 
I simply do not have enough evidence that the claimant sustained a new, discreet 
cumulative trauma injury to his hearing which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment. 
For these reasons I find that claimant has failed to prove that he sustained a 
cumulative trauma injury which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  The 
remaining issues, therefore, are deemed moot. 
 
 

ELMORE V. QUAKER OATS COMPANY 
Page 12 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this _10th _ day of September, 2021. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Nate Willems (via WCES) 
Kent Smith (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
