Case Number: 5066398
Case Title:  LUND, NORMA V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lund Norma-5066398D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NORMA LUND, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5066398 
MERCY MEDICAL CENTER, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY   : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 Head Note Nos.:  1100; 1802 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Norma Lund, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Mercy Medical Center, employer, and Indemnity Ins. Co. 
of America, insurer, both as defendants for a disputed work injury date of February 25, 
2018.  
The case was heard on October 31, 2019, in Des Moines, Iowa. The case was 
considered fully submitted on November 27, 2019, upon the simultaneous filing of 
briefs. 
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-20; Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5; Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-K, and the live testimony of claimant, Norma Lund, Cindy Sue Jennings, and 
Chester Calambas.  
ISSUES 
 Whether claimant sustained an injury on February 25, 2018, which arose out of 
and in the course of employment; 
 Whether claimant is entitled to healing period benefits beginning May 17, 2018; 
and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-10  14:12:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 2 
 
 The assessment of costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties agree that at the time of the alleged injuries, claimant was an 
employee of defendant-employer. They further agree that the issues of permanent 
partial disability benefits and medical benefits are not ripe for determination but that they 
will work out those issues based on the decision herein.   
At the time of the alleged injury the claimant’s gross earnings were $616.10, she 
was single and entitled to one exemption. Based on the foregoing, the claimant’s weekly 
benefit rate is $383.07.  
The defendants are entitled to a credit for short term disability and long term 
disability paid and for medical paid by the defendants’ health insurance or previously by 
workers’ compensation against any award herein.  
The defendants waive all affirmative defenses. While the parties do not agree on 
the causal connection between the medical bills and the injury, defendants would 
further stipulate that the fees and prices charged by the providers in the disputed 
medical expenses were fair and reasonable, that the treatment was reasonable and 
necessary, that they will not offer any contrary evidence as to the reasonableness of the 
fees and/or treatment, and although the causal connection of the expenses to the work 
injury cannot be stipulated, the parties agree that the listed expenses are at least 
causally connected to the medical condition upon which the claim of injury is based. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was a 58-year-old woman at the time of hearing. She began work as a 
sterilization processing technician for defendant-employer on December 19, 2016. As a 
part of her duties, she would assemble instruments necessary for surgery. This required 
her to lift items off and onto trays, lift the trays off the carts for sterilization, push the 
carts into the sterilization room, and pull the carts from the same.  
Cindy Jennings was the sterile processing supervisor at all times material hereto 
and was claimant’s direct supervisor from the time that claimant started working at 
defendant-employer until claimant ceased working for defendant-employer. Chester 
Calambas is a co-worker of claimant who shared shifts with her. The aforementioned 
testified live. Mary Bowlin, a supervisor, and Daniel Bench, a co-worker, testified via 
deposition. (Exhibits J and K)  

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 3 
 
All had slightly varying testimony regarding the quantity of work done during a 
shift and the weight of the trays. Claimant testified that the trays she lifted weighed 30 to 
50 pounds and sometimes even 60. Cindy Jennings maintained that no tray weighed 
more than 25 pounds due to a requirement by the “Joint Commission” although she 
acknowledged that some trays were 27 to 28 pounds. (Tr. page 81) Mr. Bench 
elaborated on this. He stated that the vendors have to weigh the pans every time and 
certify that they are under 25 pounds because that is the legal limit for them to be 
considered sterile by the Joint Commission. (Ex. K, p. 17) Mr. Bench testified that the 
pans are weighed and that most weigh less than 20 pounds but that the heaviest are 
vendor pans and ortho pans. The vendors weigh close to 25 pounds and the medium 
ortho tray weighs approximately 22 pounds. (Ex. K, pp. 9-10) Chester Calambas, a 
co-worker, testified that he lifted trays of 30 pounds but never more than 40. (Trans. p. 
107) He also testified that all vendor trays that came pre-assembled had their weight 
printed on a label. The job description provided by defendants did require lifting of up to 
50 pounds occasionally and pushing and pulling up to 65 pounds. (JE 1:2) An 
orthopaedic doctor, Stephen Aviles, M.D., testified that orthopedic surgeons use some 
of the heaviest equipment in a hospital and ordinarily their trays are 20-25 pounds. (Ex. 
D, p. 20) Mary Bowlin testified that the heaviest tray to lift would be a medium ortho or a 
vendor pan or a total hip that would be around 25 pounds. (Ex. J 41, p. 6) According to 
Ms. Bowlin, no pan would weigh more than 25 pounds. (Ex. J 41, pp. 6-8) Id.  
There was also a dispute about how high the trays would be lifted. Mr. Calambas 
said that you would not have to lift a tray overhead while claimant testified she would do 
this on a regular basis. Mr. Calambas stated that the heavy ones are placed around 
waist height or three to four feet high but not over the shoulder. (Tr. p. 106) Ms. Bowlin 
agreed with this but confirmed that there were times that a worker would have to lift off 
above shoulder height. (Ex. J 41, p. 19)  
However, Ms. Jennings testified that on occasion vendor trays go on the top shelf 
and that some vendor trays are heavier than a typical tray. (Tr. p. 97) Ms. Jennings also 
testified that about 5 percent of the claimant’s job required some overhead lifting in the 
range between 20-25 pounds. (Tr. p. 83) Mr. Bench testified that the pans on the top 
shelf were only small ones and the ones at the waist and chest-high shelves were the 
heaviest ones. (Ex. K, p. 10) This is in direct contradiction to Mr. Calambas’ testimony 
that overhead lifting of trays never happened.  
Finally, the witnesses disagreed as to the number of trays processed during a 
shift. Claimant maintained that she lifted 100 trays out of the washer during that 
weekend before she was injured. Ms. Jennings testified that it was possible claimant 
could have handled 100 trays during the shift but not taken 100 trays out of the washer. 
Mr. Calambas confirmed this and stated that they would not be able to fit 100 trays on 
their shelves and carts. Mr. Calambas and claimant did not have a good working 
relationship.  

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 4 
 
Based on the foregoing, I find that the pans weighed no more than 25 to 27 
pounds; that some trays were lifted at or above shoulder height and that while most of 
the trays lifted at or above shoulder height should have been light, the claimant could 
have lifted vendor trays and placed them in the uppermost part of the sterile carts, and 
that she could have handled 100 trays during one shift.  
Claimant maintains that as a result of this work, she sustained rotator cuff tears 
based on a February 25, 2018, work incident. Prior to her alleged injury date, her 
performance reviews were generally positive and while she had a history of right 
shoulder pain, she was able to do her job without difficulty or accommodations.  
She did have a history of treatment including medications such as prednisone, 
Flexeril, Tylenol #3, diclofenac, injections, light duty or no work. (JE 2) Prior MRI studies 
showed rotator cuff tendinitis but no full-thickness tear. (JE 2:7) The diagnosis in 2000 
was rotator cuff tendinitis. (JE 2:7) She had neck pain in 2014 and then returned to 
Jason Sullivan, M.D., on March 15, 2016, for right shoulder pain radiating down into the 
biceps. (JE 2:10) An injection was administered at her request. (JE 2:10) She 
underwent some chiropractic care for the right neck and shoulder pain due to repetitive 
use of her right shoulder. (JE 4:18) She saw John L. Gaffney, M.D., on September 15, 
2017, for right shoulder pain. (JE 2:11) She was sent for physical therapy.  
On or about February 25, 2018, claimant worked the 3:00 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
shift. She wrapped vendor trays, lifted them and placed them on a cart. Around 6:30 
p.m., she felt a pain in the right side of her neck, radiating down into her chest. Both 
shoulders felt tight and sore. Usually she would have a partner but her co-worker, Mr. 
Calamba, was not able to work due to dialysis. When he was present, she felt that he 
was not as helpful due to his own physical limitations. She testified that she asked for 
help but that no one was available to help her or that she was refused help.  
The following day she worked with the in-house trays and pushed carts in and 
out of the sterilizer. She rested on Monday and returned to work on Tuesday. That day 
she did have assistance from a different co-worker, but her neck and shoulder pain 
continued. 
She did not report her injury and instead sought out medical care with Todd 
Harbach, M.D., on her own. (JE 5:21-22) Dr. Harbach’s notes reflect an onset of pain on 
February 25, 2018. (JE 5:24) There is no mention of any lifting of pans or traumatic 
incident. (JE 5:24)  
Dr. Harbach diagnosed claimant with bilateral shoulder impingement rather than 
neck pain and injected both shoulders. (JE 5:24-25) He recommended physical therapy, 
prescribed medications and placed restrictions. (JE 5:26) “We discussed that she may 
just not be able to handle the amount of lifting required of her current job and possibly 
she could work in a different area in central supply at Mercy Hospital,” Dr. Harbach 
wrote. (JE 5:25) 

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 5 
 
Since the pain did not subside, claimant reported the injury to her supervisor on 
March 16, 2018. She was seen on the same at Mercy Employee Health. (JE 6:32) The 
notes states, “Employee believes this is related to work activities.” (JE 6:32) 
Claimant was referred to Mercy One for evaluation. (JE 8:37) During the 
March 19, 2018, examination, the subjective history is recorded as follows, “States hurt 
herself lifting surgical pans. She thought she hurt her neck and went to see ortho and 
was injected both shoulders and told she tore both rotator cuffs.” (JE 8:36) ARNP 
Joanne Harbert diagnosed claimant with acute bilateral shoulder strain. (JE 8:36) 
Claimant was placed on restrictions and ordered to go to physical therapy. (JE 8:43-44)  
Neither restrictions nor the physical therapy improved her condition. An MRI 
performed on May 14, 2018, showed a full-thickness tear of the right rotator cuff. (JE 
10:55) Claimant was referred to an orthopedist. Despite complaint of pain in both 
shoulders only the right was treated initially.  
Dr. Aviles saw claimant on June 11, 2018, for right shoulder pain. (JE 5:27) In the 
history section, he records that there was an injury that occurred while lifting at work. 
(JE 5:27)  
History of Present Illness 
1. [R]ight shoulder pain 
Onset: on 02/25/2018. Severity level is 3. It occurs constantly and is 
stable.  Location: right shoulder. The pain is aching. Context: there is an 
injury. Trauma type: lifting, occurred at work. Hand Dominance: right. 
Norma is a 57-year-old woman who developed RIGHT shoulder pain after 
working a weekend for sterile processing. She states that she does not 
remember any clear injury, but that she had significant pain the evening of 
Sunday after working the Saturday and Sunday shift. She incidentally 
does complain of LEFT shoulder pain. 
(JE 5:27) 
He diagnosed her with a right full-thickness rotator cuff tear. (JE 5:29) He 
recommended surgery but did not perform it. (JE 5:29) On July 9, 2018, Dr. Aviles wrote 
that claimant could not recall a particular trauma or injury but instead described pain as 
a result of increased workload. (Ex. A:1) He did not believe that the rotator cuff tears 
were the result of work but rather a just an occurrence that is a “fairly normal 
phenomenon.” (Ex. A:1)  
After he provided an opinion indicating that the right shoulder was not work 
related, the defendants did not provide any further treatment and claimant was charged 
with the responsibility of directing her own care. (JE 14:65)  

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 6 
 
Claimant sought out the assistance of Jeffrey P. Davick, M.D., who performed 
surgery on claimant’s right rotator cuff on November 29, 2018. (JE 2:13; JE 11:56-58) 
The subjective notes record “She is a 57-year-old female who injured the right shoulder 
at work. She was working at Mercy Hospital in sterile processing. She was repetitively 
putting trays on a shelf above shoulder height and felt a deep pull in her right shoulder.” 
(JE 2:13)  
On March 19, 2019, claimant underwent an MRI of her left shoulder which 
revealed a full-thickness tear of the left rotator cuff. (JE 2:14; JE 13:63) Dr. Davick 
performed surgery on April 2, 2019, to repair the left rotator cuff. (JE 11:58) Claimant 
had not been released from Dr. Davick’s care at the time of the hearing.  
On March 18, 2019, ARNP Harbert wrote a letter in response to an inquiry from 
defendants’ counsel. (Ex. B) In the letter, she described claimant’s history of the injury 
as related to “lifting heavy objects over shoulders on a cart.” (Ex. B:4) She agreed with 
the July 9, 2018 opinion of Dr. Aviles and noted that she never took claimant off work 
but rather had given claimant temporary restrictions until she was transferred to 
orthopaedics. (Ex. B:5)  
On April 24, 2019, Dr. Aviles responded to a second letter from the defendants’ 
counsel. (Ex. C) In the letter, Dr. Aviles stated claimant did not describe any specific 
trauma on June 11, 2018; that the type of tear she sustained was one that developed 
from chronic injury rather than acute trauma; the work injuries were not the type to 
cause a rotator cuff tear but rather normal activities of daily living. (Ex. C:8)  
Question #2:  Her MRI dated May 14, 2018, 3 months after the injury 
alleged on February 24, 2018 showed a full-thickness tear of the 
supraspinatus, possibly of the subscapularis with some biceps 
subluxation.  It should be noted upon my review of that MRI that there was 
adipose architecture in the volume that was lost as a result of the 
supraspinatus tear.  This only develops as a result of chronic injury.  
Furthermore, there was no evidence of acute trauma in the joint including 
no blood in the joint or edema in the bone.  I saw no evidence of acute 
injury present.  All evidence suggested that this was a more chronic tear. 
(Ex. C:8)  
On August 23, 2019, Dr. Harbach did not find any record of claimant reporting an 
inciting incident or acute trauma but rather hurting after performing all the activities 
required of her job for several shifts. (Ex D:11) The positive response she had to the 
injections led him to conclude that the work did not cause any injury to her cervical 
spine nor did it aggravate or light up a pre-existing degenerative condition in her spine. 
(Ex. D:11) He felt that her problems were related to her shoulder. (Ex. D:11)  

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 7 
 
On September 9, 2019, Dr. Aviles wrote a letter agreeing that if claimant had 
lifted 50 pounds overhead repeatedly and at one point felt a pop with new onset of pain 
that it could possibly be the cause of the rotator cuff tear as seen on her MRI dated 
May 14, 2019. (Ex. 1:1)  
Likely because of his late change in opinion, Dr. Aviles was deposed on 
October 21, 2019. (Ex. H) During the deposition, he re-affirmed that claimant cited no 
specific trauma but he did acknowledge that her onset of pain occurred on the evening 
of a Sunday after working a Saturday and Sunday shift. (Ex. H, internal pp. 5-6) Dr. 
Aviles explained that 60 percent of individuals with rotator cuff tears have no symptoms. 
(Ex. H, internal p. 31) When asked about causation, Dr. Aviles testified as follows: 
Q.  And what was your opinion about whether or not the rotator cuff tear in 
the right shoulder was related to her work activities at Mercy Hospital? 
A. My concerns at the time was that she had not recalled any particular 
injury.  That was first – first and foremost.  The second concern that I had 
was that the space where the rotator cuff had pulled away from, that 
space was not filled with blood, which is what you normally see from an 
acute injury.  That space was filled with architecture of fat cells and veins 
and arteries.  And those veins and arteries and those fat cells have to 
build up and have to grow over time.  It takes longer than three months, 
which is the time from the alleged injury to the MRI for that to develop.  So 
I just didn’t think that based upon my review of that MRI that that was the 
time at which – that the injury time that she had suggested was the time 
when it occurred.  That combined with the fact that she didn’t recall any 
inciting injury, I just didn’t think that that was the right answer at that time. 
Q.  Let me back up.  So if this tear was acute, if it had happened in 
Febuary, 11 or 12 weeks before the MRI scan, would you have expected 
there to be blood in the torn area of the rotator cuff which would show up 
on the MRI scan? 
A.  If your rotator cuff tears off of the bone – we’re talking about the tendon 
ripping off of the bone – you’re going to bleed.  You’re going to bleed.  And 
that blood takes time for your body to resorb [sic] it, or for lack of a better 
term, gobble it up.  You should be able to see it on an MRI a couple 
months later.  You should see some element of bone bruising because 
that’s where this rotator cuff would pull off from.  And you shouldn’t see 
any incorporation of the fat, arteries, or veins that were in the space where 
the rotator cuff used to exist. 
(Ex. H, internal p. 11-12) On cross-examination, Dr. Aviles agreed that on rare 
occasions were times that the MRI would show an absence of blood but that there 
would still be a full-thickness tear. (Ex. H, internal p. 22)  

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 8 
 
Dr. Davick also agreed, based on claimant’s narrative of how the incident 
occurred, that it was more probable than not her work was the cause of both the right 
and left rotator cuff tears. (Ex 2:2) Claimant’s narrative called the vendor trays heavy but 
did not define heavy by weight. (Ex 2:4) She stated that she was working three times as 
hard as a typical workday and that she would be lifting these heavy vendor pans on the 
tops of carts. (Ex. 2:4)  
Claimant started to miss work beginning May 17, 2018, and was terminated on 
December 21, 2018. (JE 19:73) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 9 
 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
Claimant denies she had a pre-existing condition based on the lack of pre-injury 
treatment and problems. (See Cl. Brief, p. 5) The defendants argue that claimant’s 
injury is not a traumatic one and the medical evidence supports this. Dr. Aviles 
convincingly described the condition of a shoulder if there was a traumatic, full-
thickness tear. There would be blood, bruising and vascular trauma viewable on an 
MRI. There was none in this case. Further, while claimant was in pain following the 
February 25, 2018, incident she continued to work without restrictions or 
accommodations and sought out no health care until March 15, 2018. These are all 
facts that support a finding that there was no traumatic injury.  
However, the lack of a traumatic injury does not mean there is no substantial 
evidence supporting an injury. There is no requirement that the injury be caused by a 
special event.  
Just a few months before her alleged traumatic incident, claimant had received 
treatment for a right shoulder condition. MRI studies in 2000 also revealed rotator cuff 
tendinitis. The evidence shows she did have a pre-existing condition that was worsened 
by work she performed on or about February 25, 2018. She was consistent in her 
reports to her medical doctors that claimant’s pain started on February 25, 2018. Dr. 
Harbach noted that the pain began on February 25, 2018, and then worsened. Dr. 
Aviles initially believed by history and by examination that claimant’s condition was work 
related. He later changed his mind. 
Dr. Davick, claimant’s treating surgeon, opined that claimant’s condition was 
work-related. Defendants might argue that a finding that claimant’s condition was not 
traumatic but still casually related to claimant’s work is not consistent based on the 
medical testimony. Dr. Davick, signed off on a statement that identified the claimant’s 
injury as traumatic whereas the undersigned concluded it was cumulative.  Moreover, 
one disagreement does not wholly invalidate the rest of Dr. Davick’s opinions. Dr. 

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 10 
 
Davick agreed that the nature of the work performed by claimant was consistent with 
the type of activity resulting in rotator cuff/supraspinatus tears. (Ex. 2:2) The narrative in 
the letter that he relied on to form his decisions did vary from the findings of fact. In the 
narrative, the weight of the trays ranged from just a few pounds to up to 30 pounds or 
more. Specifically, it was noted that vendor pans were heavier than regular sterilization 
trays and all those who testified agreed that was true. (Ex. 2:4-5) These variations are 
measured against the overall evidentiary picture and the weight to be afforded Dr. 
Davick’s opinions. 
However, the claimant had some pre-existing complaints which did result in 
treatment, therapy and time off of work. Claimant returned to work after her complaints 
in March and continued to work until May when the pain was of such a nature she could 
not continue. 
Defendants argue, primarily based on the opinions of Dr. Aviles, that the rotator 
cuff tears are the result of normal wear and tear. Yet there is nothing in claimant’s 
regular day-to-day life that matches the work she did 8 hours a day, 5 days a week 
which included lifting of approximately 100 trays between 25 and 27 pounds on a 
repetitive basis. The regular wear and tear on her shoulders came from her work. That 
is the common sense conclusion to draw from these facts rather than a presumption 
that the degeneration in her shoulders and the ultimate full-thickness tears came from 
regular activities of daily living.  
Dr. Aviles’ opinions are based on his examination of the claimant that occurred 
four months after the alleged injury and five months before claimant first saw Dr. Davick. 
Dr. Davick, however, performed surgery on both claimant’s shoulders and has not 
vacillated in his opinions. While Dr. Aviles did provide a detailed explanation for why 
there could not have been a traumatic tear, he did not provide a similar reason why 
there was not a cumulative trauma to the shoulders other than the pans were not 
greater than 25 pounds and that the majority of rotator cuff tears are caused through 
regular wear and tear. These are generalizations and not specific applications to the 
claimant’s circumstance.  
Moreover, claimant was able to do her job with no accommodations prior to 
February 25, 2018.  Following that date, she struggled with the essential functions of 
her job, needed surgery and ultimately had to leave her position. 
It is found that claimant’s pre-existing condition was lit up or aggravated on 
February 25, 2018, from lifting pans weighing up to 25 pounds, some at or above 
shoulder height.  
Based on the foregoing, it is determined claimant’s bilateral shoulder injuries 
were the result of her work which manifested on or about February 25, 2018. She is 
entitled to healing period benefits beginning May 17, 2018. Further, claimant is entitled 

LUND V. MERCY MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 11 
 
to an assessment of costs. Iowa Code section 86.40; Iowa Administrative Code Rule 
876—4.33(86).  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant temporary total disability benefits at the weekly 
rate of three hundred eighty-three and 07/100 dollars ($383.07) from May 17, 2018, 
through the date of the arbitration hearing and into the future during the period of 
claimant’s continued healing period. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
That defendants are to be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
That defendants shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33. 
Signed and filed this      10th      day of January, 2020. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE 
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Robert McKinney (via WCES) 
Charles Cutler (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
