Case Number: 24001066.01
Case Title:  TOWNS, LATOYIA V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Towns Latoyia-24001066.01K.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
LATOYIA TOWNS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 24001066.01 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
SILVER OAKS NURSING AND 
  : 
      ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             REMAND DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  :          
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
CCMSI, 
  :  
 
 
  :                        
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
              Head Note:  2701 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
On September 7, 2023, the claimant filed a petition for alternate medical care 
pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27(4) and 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48.  The 
defendants filed an answer admitting liability for injuries related to claimant’s right upper 
extremity and right shoulder. 
The undersigned presided over the hearing held via telephone and recorded 
digitally on September 19, 2023.  That recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48(12).  Claimant participated 
personally, and through her attorney, Dennis Currell.  The defendants participated 
through their attorney, Tyler Block.   
Prior to the hearing, the claimant submitted ten pages of exhibits, marked as 
Exhibits 1-5.  The defendants submitted seven pages of exhibits labeled A.  The 
evidentiary record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5 and Defendants’ Exhibit A.   
On September 22, 2023, the claimant filed a notice of judicial review and request 
for transmission of the contested case record to the district court.   
The district court held a hearing regarding the claimant’s petition for judicial 
review on March 15, 2024.  On June 3, 2024, the district court issued a ruling 
remanding the matter for “…more specific findings as to the issue of Towns’ notice to 
Silver Oaks, Silver Oaks’ notice to Towns, and whether Sharma was deemed an 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-18  07:44:46     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 2 
 
authorized provider by Silver Oaks.”  The district court subsequently granted a motion 
from the claimant that the agency conduct additional hearing and receive “supporting 
documents.”   
On September 6, 2024, the claimant filed a request for scheduling of further 
hearing on remand and for an award of alternate medical care.  The undersigned 
granted the motion, setting the matter for a remand hearing on October 7, 2024, and 
initially ruled that only testimonial evidence would be considered, based upon the rules 
concerning alternate care contested case proceedings.  Specifically, the undersigned 
ruled: 
     Iowa Code section 85.27(4) establishes the basis for an alternate 
medical care proceeding, and provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obligated [sic] to 
furnish reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured 
employee, and has the right to choose the care … The 
treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited 
to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with 
the care offered, the employee should communicate the basis 
of such dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, 
following which the employer and the employee may agree to 
alternate care reasonably suited to treat the injury.  If the 
employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 
562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 1997).   
     Iowa Code section 17A.3(1)(b) allows the agency to “[a]dopt rules of 
practice setting forth the nature and requirements of all formal and informal 
procedures available to the public…”  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.1 
identifies various contested case proceedings before the agency.  This 
includes applications for alternate medical care.  876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.1(15).  Thus, the agency adopted specific procedures for conducting 
an alternate care proceeding in 876 Iowa Administrative Code section 4.48.  
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48(9) states: 
All discovery must be completed prior to the contested case 
hearing. …  Any written evidence to be used by the employer 
or the employee must be exchanged prior to the hearing.  All 
written evidence must be filed with the agency before the date 
of the hearing.  Written evidence shall be limited to ten pages 
per party.   

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 3 
 
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48(9)(emphasis added).  In this case, the 
parties previously each submitted ten pages of written evidence prior to the 
commencement of the alternate care proceeding in September of 2023.   
     In remanding the matter for additional consideration, the district court 
directed the agency to consider additional documentary evidence.  This 
contravenes the rules concerning written evidence in alternate medical care 
proceedings.  The district court made no explicit reference to the rules in 
remanding the matter to the agency, nor did the district court outline any 
applicable exception to the rule that would allow the parties to submit 
additional documentary evidence.   
     A remand proceeding is not a new contested case proceeding, it is 
simply a reconsideration of the issues presented by the district court relating 
to the alternate medical care contested case proceeding.  Therefore, 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.48(9) would apply to the matter on remand.  
Since the parties previously submitted ten pages of written evidence, it 
would not be appropriate to consider additional written evidence based on 
the applicable, longstanding rules.   
See Order Setting Matter for Hearing on Remand. 
The claimant filed a motion for reconsideration.  While the undersigned disagrees 
with the claimant’s interpretation of the district court’s order and the fact that the district 
court made no mention of the applicable rules pertaining to alternate care proceedings, 
the undersigned granted the motion.  In doing so, the length of the hearing was limited 
to 40 minutes, with each side being granted 20 minutes for testimony and/or argument.  
Each party was also limited to one page of additional exhibits.  This decision was made 
consistent with my interpretation of the rules as noted above.  Additionally, the hearing 
was solely to review three issues presented by the district court on remand: 1. The 
claimant’s notice to the defendants; 2. The defendants’ notice to the claimant as to 
selecting a treating provider; and, 3. Whether “Sharma” was deemed an authorized 
treating provider by the defendants.   
The record in the remand proceeding contains Claimant’s Remand Exhibit 1 and 
Defendants’ Remand Exhibit B.  Tiffany Sapp, a claims representative from CCMSI, 
testified at the remand hearing. 
 
On July 21, 2023, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care.  
Consequently, this decision constitutes final agency action, and there is no appeal to 
the commissioner.  Judicial review in a district court pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 17A 
is the avenue for an appeal. 
 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 4 
 
ISSUES 
The issues under consideration are those presented by the district court on 
remand: 
1. The claimant’s notice of dissatisfaction to the defendants. 
 
2. Whether “Sharma” was deemed an authorized treating provider by the 
defendants. 
 
3. The defendants’ notice to the claimant as to selecting a treating provider. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Latoyia Towns, alleges that she sustained an injury to her right 
shoulder and right upper extremity that arose out of, and in the course of her 
employment with the defendant-employer on April 18, 2023.  She alleges that she lifted 
a heavy patient and felt pain in her right upper extremity.  She testified that she told her 
supervisor of her injury, along with her charge nurse, human resources representative, 
administrator, and corporate director of nursing.  (Testimony).  According to the 
claimant, the employer told her that they would move forward with filing a workers’ 
compensation claim.  (Testimony).   
The claimant told her employer that she was going to seek care with the 
emergency room at the end of her shift, which she did.  (Testimony).  She initially went 
to a walk-in clinic, who recommended that she seek emergent care.  (Testimony; 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1).  At the emergency room, Ms. Towns complained of right arm pain 
and right shoulder pain.  (CE 1).  She noted that she felt a pop in her right shoulder 
while she was lifting a very heavy patient.  (CE 1).  The examination in the emergency 
room showed mild pain to palpation of the AC joint.  (CE 1:3).  The emergency 
physician opined that the claimant may have torn her rotator cuff muscle or “just caused 
a sprain of her AC joint or caused tendinitis.”  (CE 1:3).  The emergency room physician 
ordered physical therapy.  (Testimony; CE 1:3).   
Ms. Towns began physical therapy.  (Testimony).  She testified that there were 
problems with some of her physical therapy appointments, as there was an issue with 
authorization and identification of the proper workers’ compensation insurance carrier.  
(Testimony).   
Ms. Sapp confirmed that, prior to her involvement in the matter, a “medical only” 
adjuster named Gail Paxton, was the CCMSI claims handler for Ms. Towns’ workers’ 
compensation claim.  (Testimony).  Ms. Paxton was empowered to make decisions 
regarding medical care provided to Ms. Towns until June of 2023.  (Testimony).  This 
included authorization for physical therapy with Mercy Medical Center (“Mercy”).  
(Testimony).  There was a dispute during Ms. Sapp’s testimony as to whether or not a 
note in the Mercy records represented her authorization of treatment with Ms. Sharma 
as her primary care physician.  (Testimony).  Ms. Sapp testified that any referral to Ms. 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 5 
 
Towns’ primary care physician in the Mercy record was from the physical therapist.  
(Testimony).   
On June 8, 2023, Ms. Towns underwent physical therapy at Mercy.  (Claimant 
Remand Exhibit 1).  It was noted that she was referred to physical therapy by Matthew 
Aucutt, D.O., of Mercy Emergency Department – Hiawatha.  (CRE 1).  As of this visit, 
Ms. Towns completed 6 sessions out of 10 authorized.  (CRE 1).  There is a note by the 
therapist at the end of the record indicating she spoke with Ms. Paxton who authorized 
6 physical therapy visits and to “…contact [her] if more is needed.”  (CRE 1).  There is 
then a note that appears to be from the physical therapist, “Pt is to F/U with PCP/ [sic] 
for further imaging/ortho consult.”  (CRE 1).  Based upon the undersigned’s experience 
this is a note indicating that Ms. Towns was to follow-up with her primary care provider 
for additional imaging and/or an orthopedic consult.  (CRE 1).   
As of June of 2023, she completed seven visits of physical therapy.  (CE 1:4).  
She was not improving at that time.  (CE 1:4).  The therapist recommended further 
imaging to rule out a rotator cuff or pectoral tear.  (CE 1:4).   
On June 19, 2023, at 9:50 a.m., Ms. Sapp sent an email to Mr. Currell.  
(Defendants’ Remand Exhibit B).  She indicated that there was an “acknowledgment 
letter” attached to the email.  (DRE B).  Ms. Sapp then indicated that “…treatment with 
PCP will not be authorized.  We will direct her to an MD of our choosing.  I will keep you 
posted with where that will be.”  (DRE B).  
 
Mr. Currell responded to Ms. Sapp’s email stating: 
Hi Tiffany, 
Thanks for your email.  I understand by your email that CCMSI is accepting 
this claim as work-related in order to be able to select the provider per Trade 
Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119 (Iowa 2003).   
Please provide me with a status on the requested information and an 
explanation why there’s been a delay of two months in getting any care 
directed by the carrier. 
(DRE B).    
 
Ms. Sapp then responded to Mr. Currell arguing that “[t]here was no delay in 
directing treatment, the medical only adjuster was fine with the initial provider that she 
was treating with.  A referral has been made for a specialist so we would like to make 
that choice as to who is going to take over her care.”  (DRE B).   
 
Between June of 2023, and August of 2023, Ms. Sapp confirmed that the 
defendants were attempting to set an appointment for Ms. Towns with Dr. Bollier.  
(Testimony).  Further, Ms. Sapp indicated that an initial call to Dr. Bollier’s office in order 
to arrange for an examination of Ms. Towns was made on June 19, 2023.  (Testimony).  

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Bollier was chosen because, according to Ms. Sapp, he is a highly respected 
orthopedic physician.  (Testimony).  Ms. Sapp confirmed that she sent an email dated 
August 18, 2023, in which it was indicated that the defendants wished Ms. Towns to see 
a provider of their choosing for an evaluation.  (Testimony).  She also confirmed that Mr. 
Currell responded to this email with a question as to whether or not the scheduled 
examination by Dr. Bollier was scheduled pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Sapp testified that an examination by Dr. Bollier was not an 
independent medical examination (“IME”).  (Testimony).  However, she also testified 
that she never responded to Mr. Currell’s e-mail of August 18, 2023, regarding his 
questions as to an examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 except to indicate 
that medical care was directed by the employer.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Towns testified that she did not hear from the workers’ compensation carrier 
as to scheduling any appointments.  (Testimony).  Thus, she returned to her own 
primary care provider, on her own volition, and requested that the MRI be ordered.  
(Testimony).  This visit occurred on June 28, 2023, with Anita Sharma, PA-C.  (CE 2).  
Ms. Towns complained of an injury to her right arm with associated arm weakness, 
painful range of motion, and tingling or numbness.  (CE 2).  Ms. Sharma opined that the 
claimant had an injury to her shoulder and upper arm.  (CE 2).  She recommended an 
MRI.  (CE 2).  The MRI was completed in July of 2023.  (Testimony).   
Dr. Bollier performed an examination of the claimant in August of 2023 on the 
claimant, though she testified that “he didn’t say much.”  (Testimony; DE A; CE 4).  Dr. 
Bollier recounted the claimant’s treatment to date.  (DE A).  Ms. Towns had pain in her 
anterior shoulder which traveled into her pectoralis and down her right arm.  (DE A).  
The MRI obtained in July showed no labral or rotator cuff tear, but showed rotator cuff 
tendinopathy.  (DE A).  Ms. Towns expressed frustration about her continued right 
shoulder pain to the doctor.  (DE A).  She also told the doctor that she developed 
numbness and tingling in her 4th and 5th fingers following cessation of her physical 
therapy in May.  (DE A).  Dr. Bollier opined that the claimant’s work injury was “a 
significant factor in our causation assessment regarding her shoulder pain.”  (DE A).  
Dr. Bollier recommended that the claimant have corticosteroid injections into her 
subacromial and glenohumeral spaces to reduce inflammation and improve her pain.  
(DE A).  Dr. Bollier also recommended she continue strengthening exercises on her 
own.  (DE A).  Dr. Bollier recommended a 10-pound lifting restriction for the claimant.  
(DE A).   
Ms. Sapp also testified that Mr. Currell sent an e-mail on September 7, 2023, 
indicating that the claimant had dissatisfaction with the lack of a prompt provision of 
medical care.  (Testimony).  Ms. Sapp responded to this e-mail requesting further 
information from Mr. Currell, but never received a response with more specificity as to 
the claimant’s dissatisfaction.  (Testimony).   
The injections recommended by Dr. Bollier were scheduled for October of 2023, 
with a subsequent follow-up visit scheduled with Dr. Bollier in early November of 2023.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Towns testified to a dissatisfaction with Dr. Bollier’s care.  
(Testimony).   

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 7 
 
Ms. Sharma saw the claimant again on an unidentified date.  (CE 5).  After 
examination, Ms. Sharma diagnosed the claimant with tendinitis of her right rotator cuff.  
(CE 5).  She noted that “[w]ork comp is fighting against cortisone injection.”  (CE 5).  As 
a result, she provided a referral to an orthopedic surgeon.  (CE 5).  Ms. Sharma also 
diagnosed the claimant with numbness in her finger.  (CE 5).  She ordered an EMG and 
nerve conduction study due to numbness in the claimant’s 4th and 5th fingers.  (CE 5).   
Ms. Towns confirmed that her primary care physician recommended a nerve 
conduction study and an orthopedic referral at PCI.  (Testimony).  The primary care 
physician scheduled a nerve conduction test for September 18, 2023; however, Ms. 
Towns could not attend this evaluation, as she was working.  (Testimony).  It has since 
been rescheduled.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Towns testified was never advised that care with her primary care physician 
or the emergency room, or physical therapist was not authorized.  (Testimony).   
 
Ms. Sapp confirmed that, prior to her involvement in the matter, a “medical only” 
adjuster named Gail Paxton, was the CCMSI claims handler for Ms. Towns’ workers’ 
compensation claim.  (Testimony).  Ms. Paxton was empowered to make decisions 
regarding medical care provided to Ms. Towns until June of 2023.  (Testimony).  This 
included authorization for physical therapy with Mercy.  (Testimony).  There was a 
dispute during Ms. Sapp’s testimony as to whether or not a note in the Mercy records 
represented her authorization of treatment with Ms. Sharma as her primary care 
physician.  (Testimony).  Ms. Sapp testified that any referral to Ms. Towns’ primary care 
physician in the Mercy record was from the physical therapist.  (Testimony).   
 
  Ms. Sapp agreed that there was no indication that any recommendations made 
by Ms. Towns’ primary care provider were excessive, unreasonable, or unnecessary.  
(Testimony).  However, Ms. Sapp noted that she never reviewed any recommendations 
of Ms. Towns’ primary care provider until after Ms. Towns saw Dr. Bollier.  (Testimony).  
 
  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 8 
 
Iowa Code 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 
1997).   
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.”  Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)).  “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), 
our legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the 
competing interests of their employers.”  Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing Bell 
Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 202, 207; IBP, Inc. v. Harker, 633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 
2001)).   
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27; Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select 
the provider of medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to 
determine how an injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other 
matters of professional medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 
866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 18, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary 
to diagnose the condition, and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical 
judgment of its own treating physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-
Reopening Decision, June 17, 1986).   
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.”  Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003)(emphasis in original).  Such 
employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Iowa Code section 85.27(4).   
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack thereof) may 
share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties cannot reach an 
agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order the care.”  Id.  “Determining what care 
is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123; Pirelli-
Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436.  As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable.  Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 
N.W.2d at 436.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such care 
unreasonable.  Id.   

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 9 
 
Issue 1: Whether the claimant provided adequate notice of dissatisfaction of care 
to the defendants. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) requires an employee to communicate the basis of 
dissatisfaction with care to the employer.  This basis may be communicated either orally 
or in writing.  The statute provides a proviso that the dissatisfaction may be 
communicated “…in writing if requested…”  See Iowa Code section 85.27(4).   
 
In their brief, the claimant alleges that Ms. Towns provided verbal notice to the 
defendant-employer on a number of occasions as to her dissatisfaction with medical 
care provided (or not provided) to her in this matter.  I reviewed the cited portions of the 
transcript of the alternate care hearing filed with the district court, specifically page 8, 
lines 16-23, and page 9, lines 2-4, and do not find this to be credible evidence of an 
expression of a dissatisfaction with medical care.   
 
The claimant then points to the testimony of Ms. Sapp in support of the 
proposition that a notice of dissatisfaction with care was provided to the defendants.  
More specifically, Ms. Sapp testified during the hearing that she received an email from 
Mr. Currell on September 7, 2023, indicating that the claimant was dissatisfied with the 
prompt provision of medical care.  It is important to note that Ms. Towns was under the 
care of Dr. Bollier at the time of the email expressing dissatisfaction.  Ms. Sapp testified, 
credibly, that she responded to Mr. Currell’s email requesting the basis for the 
claimant’s dissatisfaction with care provided by the defendants.  She further testified 
that she never received an email with an explanation of the basis for the claimant’s 
dissatisfaction.   
 
The claimant must show that they provided the defendant with notice of their 
dissatisfaction with care and the basis for their dissatisfaction.  Ms. Towns’ testimony 
does not indicate that she provided notice to the defendants that she was dissatisfied 
with the care provided, nor did she provide the basis for her dissatisfaction.  While Mr. 
Currell emailed Ms. Sapp indicating that the claimant was dissatisfied with the care 
provided by the defendants on September 7, 2023, he did not provide a basis for the 
dissatisfaction pursuant to the requirements of the statute.   More specifically, at the 
time of the September 7, 2023, email, Ms. Towns was under the care of Dr. Bollier.  
There is no evidence in the record that the claimant expressed dissatisfaction to the 
defendants of the care provided by Dr. Bollier.   
The claimant may attempt to point to the June 19, 2023, e-mail to Ms. Sapp in 
which her counsel requested an explanation for “…why there’s been a delay of two 
months in getting any care directed by the carrier…” as evidence of an expression of, 
and basis for, dissatisfaction.  (DRE B).  However, this argument would be 
unsuccessful.  Clearly, Mr. Currell uses language to request an explanation rather than 
express a dissatisfaction.   
The claimant did prove that they expressed a dissatisfaction with care provided 
by the defendants; however, the claimant did not provide notice of the basis for their 
dissatisfaction, as required by the statute.  Simply stating that one is dissatisfied with 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 10 
 
the care offered is not sufficient to also meet the claimant’s burden that they provided 
the defendants with the basis for their dissatisfaction.  There is not adequate evidence 
in the record to show that the claimant provided the basis for their dissatisfaction.  In 
fact, the testimony of Ms. Sapp indicates to the contrary.  Therefore, the claimant failed 
to meet their burden as to this issue.  Even though this means the claimant’s petition is 
necessarily denied, I will analyze the remaining two issues presented by the district 
court on remand. 
Issues 2 and 3: Whether Ms. Sharma was an authorized treating provider and the 
defendants’ notice to the claimant as to selecting a treating provider.   
 
I am analyzing these two issues together, as they seem to be intertwined. 
Ms. Towns sustained injuries to her right shoulder and right upper extremity, 
which she claims arose out of and in the course of her employment with the defendant-
employer on April 18, 2023.  She reported the injury to her employer almost 
immediately.  For unknown reasons, the employer and/or their insurer did not 
immediately send Ms. Towns for medical care under a workers’ compensation claim.  
Ms. Towns first sought care at a walk-in clinic, who recommended she report to an 
emergency room.   At the conclusion of her visit in the emergency room, the examining 
physician ordered physical therapy.   
 
Ms. Towns began physical therapy, and by June 8, 2023, it appears that she 
completed 6 sessions.  Ms. Paxton authorized the physical therapy visits.  At the end of 
a record on June 8, 2023, a physical therapist with Mercy noted that Ms. Towns should 
follow-up with her primary care provider for additional imaging and/or an orthopedic 
consultation.  After completing her seventh visit, the therapist recommended further 
imaging to rule out a rotator cuff or pectoral tear.   
 
At some point in time, Ms. Towns retained the services of Mr. Currell.  Upon his 
sending a letter of representation to CCMSI, the claim was transferred from a medical 
only adjuster to Ms. Sapp.  In Ms. Sapp’s initial email to Mr. Currell on June 19, 2023, at 
9:50 a.m., Ms. Sapp indicated that “…treatment with PCP will not be authorized.  We 
will direct her to an MD of our choosing.  I will keep you posted with where that will be.”  
(DRE B).  Mr. Currell acknowledged Ms. Sapp’s e-mail on June 19, 2023, indicating that 
he understood her email to be CCMSI “…accepting this claim as work-related in order 
to be able to select the provider…”  (DRE B).  Ms. Sapp then responded to Mr. Currell 
indicating that Ms. Paxton “…was fine with the initial provider that she [Ms. Towns] was 
treating with…” and that CCMSI wanted to choose which specialist saw Ms. Towns due 
to the referral from Mercy physical therapy.  (DRE B).   
 
Ms. Towns had not heard from CCMSI regarding scheduling of any 
appointments, so she, on her own volition, chose to see her own primary care provider, 
Ms. Sharma, on June 28, 2023.  She requested that Ms. Sharma order an MRI, which 
Ms. Sharma did.  The MRI was completed in July of 2023.  

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 11 
 
 
Subsequent to this, Ms. Towns was referred to, and examined by, Dr. Bollier.  
Ms. Sapp noted that Dr. Bollier was selected due to his reputation and expertise.  Dr. 
Bollier examined Ms. Towns and provided certain treatment recommendations as noted 
in the record.   
 
The claimant alleges that the physical therapist was a treating provider, and thus 
any referral to Ms. Sharma made by the physical therapist was as though made by an 
authorized treating provider.  Therefore, according to the claimant’s theory, any referral 
to another provider besides Ms. Sharma was interfering in the medical judgment of the 
physical therapist.  The defendants argue that Ms. Towns had not established a 
relationship with Ms. Sharma.   
 
More specifically, the claimant cites to Iowa Code section 85.27(4), which states 
in pertinent part, “If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the 
employee harmless for the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the 
employer is no longer authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the 
change in authorization.”  The operative portion of this statutory provision as it relates to 
this case is the portion which states, “…the employer shall hold the employee harmless 
for the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no 
longer authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in 
authorization.”  See Iowa Code section 85.27(4)(emphasis added).   
 
It appears from the evidence that the defendants deemed the emergency room 
visit and subsequent physical therapy to be authorized.  Thus, the physical therapist is 
an authorized treating provider.  At the time of this recommendation, care had not been 
established by the employer or claimant with a physician.  Ms. Towns was only 
undergoing physical therapy according to the recommendations of the emergency room 
physician.  One of the recommendations made by the physical therapist was for Ms. 
Towns to follow-up with her primary care physician in order to arrange for imaging 
and/or a consultation with an orthopedic physician.   
 
Following the issuance of this note, Ms. Sapp reached out to Mr. Currell 
acknowledging his representation of Ms. Towns.  She also noted explicitly in her email 
to Mr. Currell that treatment with a “PCP” (in this case Ms. Sharma) would not be 
authorized and that CCMSI wanted to direct Ms. Towns to “…an MD of our choosing.”  
Mr. Currell acknowledged the receipt of this e-mail with an understanding that the 
defendants were accepting the claim as work related in order to be able to select the 
provider.  Ms. Sapp then responded to Mr. Currell on behalf of the defendants indicating 
that the previous adjuster was “…fine with the initial provider that she was treating with.”  
She elaborated further by noting that, “[a] referral has been made for a specialist so we 
would like to make that choice as to who is going to take over her care.”   
 
Taking each email from Ms. Sapp to Mr. Currell in isolation would indicate a 
failure on behalf of the defendants to satisfy the two requirements of Iowa Code section 
85.27(4).  However, taking these emails in isolation would be a mistake.  In Ms. Sapp’s 
first email, she noted that Ms. Towns was not authorized to treat with her primary care 
provider.  She further noted that “[w]e will direct her to an MD of our choosing.”  This 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER, LLC 
Page 12 
 
provided notice to Ms. Towns through her counsel, Mr. Currell, that there was no longer 
authorization for Ms. Towns to see her primary care physician as recommended by the 
physical therapist, thus satisfying the notice requirement of Iowa Code section 85.27(4).    
The second email from Ms. Sapp, in response to an email from Mr. Currell, elaborates 
by noting that “[a] referral has been made for a specialist so we would like to make that 
choice as to who is going to take over her care.”  This second email alone would likely 
be enough to satisfy the requirements under Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  In the second 
email, Ms. Sapp provides notice that the defendants wish to choose the physician to 
see Ms. Towns.  Taken in conjunction with the first email, it is plain that the defendants 
were not authorizing care with Ms. Sharma.  Then, in the second email, Ms. Sapp 
provides the reason for the change in authorization; that being a referral was made to a 
specialist in the therapy record.  There is no interference in the care provided by the 
physical therapist as alleged by the claimant, as the defendants were following the 
recommendations of the therapist to provide a referral for the claimant to a specialist, in 
this case, Dr. Bollier, an orthopedic physician.  The two emails from Ms. Sapp to Mr. 
Currell satisfy the statutory provision in Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  This notice was 
also provided before Ms. Towns sought care with Ms. Sharma.  Therefore, Ms. Sharma 
was never an authorized treating physician.   
 
Therefore, the claimant again failed to meet her burden that the care provided by 
the defendants is unreasonable.  The petition for alternate care remains denied based 
upon the foregoing reasons. 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
1. The claimant’s petition for alternate care is denied. 
  
Signed and filed this    18th    day of November, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dennis Currell (via WCES) 
Tyler C. Block (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
