Case Number: 20009047.01
Case Title:  LNENICKA, NICOLAS V. B.G. BRECKE, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lnenicka Nicolas-20009047.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NICOLAS LNENICKA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 20009047.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
B.G. BRECKE, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SENTINEL INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  :            Head Note Nos.:  1402.20, 1402.40, 
 
 
  : 
1803, 2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Nicolas Lnenicka, filed a petition in arbitration for workers’ 
compensation benefits against B.G. Brecke, Inc., as employer, and Sentinel Insurance 
Company, as insurer, both as defendants.  The hearing occurred before the 
undersigned on January 25, 2022, via CourtCall.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those 
stipulations were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ 
stipulations will be made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.   
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 14, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 3, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through N.  Claimant testified on his own behalf.  
Christian Schwartzhoff testified on behalf of the defendants.  The evidentiary record 
closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   
Counsel for the parties requested the opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  
Their request was granted.  All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on or before March 
3, 2022, at which time the case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned.   
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-22  14:25:41     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 2 
1. Whether claimant sustained a left shoulder injury arising out of and in the course 
of employment on July 15, 2020; 
2. Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
3. Claimant's gross weekly earnings and the applicable weekly worker's 
compensation rate at which benefits should be paid; 
4. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for overpayment of benefits pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.34(4) and (5); and  
5. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Nicolas Lnenicka, claimant, filed an Original Notice and Petition on February 15, 
2021, for injuries he allegedly sustained to his neck and left shoulder on July 15, 2020.   
An evidentiary hearing occurred before the undersigned on January 25, 2022.   
Mr. Lnenicka was 43 years old at the time of the evidentiary hearing. (Hearing 
Transcript, page 9)  He was raised in Olin, Iowa and graduated from Olin High School in 
1996.  He did not pursue any post-secondary education; rather, he immediately entered 
the workforce as a general laborer. (Hr. Tr., pp. 9-11)  Since 2007, Mr. Lnenicka’s 
primary source of employment has been boilermaker and millwright assignments 
through Boilermakers Local Union 83. (See Hr. Tr., p. 15)   
Due to a lack of consistent assignments through the union, Mr. Lnenicka sought 
and obtained employment as a millwright with the defendant employer on May 5, 2020. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 21; Exhibit C, page 5)  His job duties largely consisted of welding and other 
general labor activities. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 21-23)  Mr. Lnenicka considered his millwright 
duties to be less physically demanding than the work he performed as a boilermaker. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 23)   
On the date of injury, Mr. Lnenicka and his crew were assigned to work at 
International Paper in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (Hr. Tr., pp. 24-25)  The crew was tasked 
with replacing or positioning a new bearing on an industrial paper dryer.  In order to 
position the bearing, the crew first had to lift the bearing onto a scaffold.  From there, 
the crew used a hoist to pull the bearing up to its proper elevation.  Mr. Lnenicka 
estimated that the bearing weighed between 350 to 400 pounds. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  
Unfortunately, the bearing was approximately a quarter-inch short of where it needed to 
be after using the hoist.  Instead of lowering the bearing and reconfiguring the hoist, the 
crew attempted to push/pull the bearing on their own.  Mr. Lnenicka positioned himself 
under the bearing so he could push while another crew member pulled from above.  Mr. 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 3 
Lnenicka did not recall whether he felt any immediate sensations in his neck or left 
shoulder area while pushing the bearing into place; however, he did recall that his neck 
and left shoulder area became sore and stiff at some point during his shift. Mr. Lnenicka 
testified he did not think anything of it at the time and decided to keep working.  He 
completed his approximately 15-hour shift and returned home. (Hr. Tr., pp. 25-26) 
The next morning, Mr. Lnenicka reported to work for an assignment in Amana, 
Iowa.  Mr. Lnenicka asserts he was “sore as could be” but still reported for work as he 
had a lot of welding to take care of in Amana. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  After his shift, Mr. 
Lnenicka presented to his personal chiropractor for an adjustment. (Joint Exhibit 2, page 
3) 
Despite his pain, Mr. Lnenicka continued to work, presenting for an assignment 
in Dubuque, Iowa on July 17, 2020. (Hr. Tr., p. 28) 
On Saturday, July 18, 2020, Mr. Lnenicka presented to the emergency room at 
Mercy Medical Center in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (JE12, p. 125)  He reported left shoulder 
pain after pushing an object at work three days prior. (Id.)  When x-rays of the left 
shoulder returned no acute bony findings, Mr. Lnenicka was provided a sling and told he 
may require an MRI if his symptoms continued or worsened. (JE12, p. 128) 
The next day, Mr. Lnenicka called the defendant employer and reported his 
alleged work injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  After reporting his injury, Mr. Lnenicka consented to 
a drug test and defendants directed Mr. Lnenicka’s care to Nicholas Bingham, M.D. 
(JE13, p. 143)   
Mr. Lnenicka first presented to Dr. Bingham on July 20, 2020. (Id.)  Mr. Lnenicka 
described the work injury to Dr. Bingham, noting he used his left shoulder to push the 
bearing into place. (Id.)  On examination, Mr. Lnenicka demonstrated decreased range 
of motion, tenderness, and pain in the left shoulder and neck. (See JE13, p. 144)  Dr. 
Bingham diagnosed a sprain of the left shoulder girdle and prescribed physical therapy. 
(JE13, p. 145) 
At his July 29, 2020, follow-up appointment with Dr. Bingham, Mr. Lnenicka 
reported radiating pain in his upper arm and numbness of the left thumb. (JE13, p. 147)  
Mr. Lnenicka requested an MRI, noting “something is not right.” (Id.)  Dr. Bingham 
assured claimant that he would order the proper diagnostic imaging if conservative 
treatment failed. (JE13, p. 148) 
When physical therapy failed to alleviate claimant’s complaints, Dr. Bingham 
ordered MRIs of the cervical spine and left shoulder. (JE13, p. 150)   
The imaging of the cervical spine, dated August 28, 2020, revealed a disc 
protrusion with possible crowding of the C6-C7 nerve roots and central right foraminal 
stenosis at C6-C7. (See JE13, p. 152)   

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 4 
The left shoulder MRI revealed mild rotator cuff tendinopathy, AC joint 
degeneration, and evidence of Parsonage-Turner syndrome, a rare disorder that can be 
consistent with trauma to the brachial plexus. (See JE13, p. 152)  Dr. Bingham opined 
that treatment for Parsonage Turner syndrome is nonsurgical with physical therapy and 
time, with most cases resolving within one (1) year. (JE13, p. 152)  To further evaluate 
the potential for Parsonage-Turner syndrome, Dr. Bingham ordered an EMG and 
recommended Mr. Lnenicka present for an additional stint of physical therapy. (JE13, p. 
152) 
The EMG, dated October 1, 2020, returned findings consistent with carpal tunnel 
syndrome, as well as moderate C-6 radiculopathy on the left. (JE7, p. 20; see JE13, p. 
154)   
Mr. Lnenicka returned to Dr. Bingham’s office to discuss the EMG results on 
October 6, 2020. (JE13, p. 153)  Mr. Lnenicka complained of pain from the neck 
extending down into the upper border of the trapezius, as well as numbness in his left 
thumb.  He did not complain of shoulder joint pain at this appointment. (JE13, p. 154)  
Dr. Bingham relayed that the EMG revealed findings consistent with carpal tunnel 
syndrome and C6 radiculopathy. (Id.)  He opined the carpal tunnel syndrome was 
probably not related to the acute injury on July 15, 2020. (Id.)  He further opined that the 
EMG results did not resemble Parsonage-Turner syndrome as initially suggested by the 
left shoulder MRI. (Id.)  In light of these findings, Dr. Bingham referred Mr. Lnenicka for 
an orthopedic evaluation, noting the orthopedic surgeon could “consider/sort out” 
causation with respect to carpal tunnel syndrome, Parsonage Turner syndrome, and the 
C6 radiculopathy. (Id.)   
Mr. Lnenicka presented to Cassim Igram, M.D. on October 14, 2020. (JE8, p. 21)  
Mr. Lnenicka reported that the pain in his neck and left shoulder waxed and waned, and 
he experienced occasional paresthesias of the left upper extremity. (Id.)  He also 
reported daily headaches that started in the midday and worsened throughout the 
evening. (Id.)  On the date of examination, claimant reported no radiating pain up his 
neck or down into his hand. (Id.)  Based on Mr. Lnenicka’s improvement to date, and his 
findings on examination, Dr. Igram opined it was unlikely that claimant would need 
surgery to repair his cervical spine. (JE8, p. 23)  However, given claimant’s ongoing 
complaints of left shoulder pain and his limited range of motion, Dr. Igram 
recommended a referral to an orthopedic shoulder specialist. (JE8, pp. 23-24)   
Pursuant to Dr. Igram’s recommendation, defendants referred claimant to 
Matthew Bollier, M.D. (See JE8, p. 25)  Dr. Bollier documented good range of motion 
and strength in claimant’s left shoulder, but pain in the neck with range of motion 
testing. (JE8, p. 29)  Contrary to Dr. Igram’s findings, Dr. Bollier opined that claimant 
had full and normal range of motion of the left shoulder, normal sensation, no neurologic 
dysfunction, and no instability. (Id.)  He also opined the mechanism of injury described 
does not correlate with shoulder pathology and placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement for the left shoulder as of November 9, 2020. (Id.)  He opined claimant 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 5 
could return to work without restrictions and assessed zero percent left upper extremity 
impairment. (Id.) 
Following his orthopedic evaluations, Mr. Lnenicka returned to Dr. Bingham on 
November 17, 2020. (JE13, p. 155)  Mr. Lnenicka reported improvement in his pain 
symptoms; however, he continued to complain of numbness in the left thumb and index 
finger. (Id.)  On examination, Mr. Lnenicka continued to demonstrate decreased range 
of motion, tenderness, and pain in the cervical spine. (JE13, p. 156)  Dr. Bingham 
summarized claimant’s recent treatment, noting: 
To recap, patient’s EMG/NCV showed both evidence of a C6 radiculopathy 
which would explain thumb numbness as well as left carpal tunnel 
syndrome which would better explain the thumb and index finger combined. 
I would like to maximize the function of the neck and shoulder girdle, to see 
if it has any effect on the numbness. Think C6 radiculopathy could be 
related to this incident.  If it proves to be more likely carpal tunnel syndrome, 
I do not think it relates to the incident described as the original injury. 
(Id.)  Dr. Bingham subsequently referred claimant for work hardening. (Id.) 
Mr. Lnenicka began his work hardening program on December 1, 2020. (JE9, p. 
79)  The notes from his initial appointment provide that Mr. Lnenicka was back to 
working full-time. (JE9, p. 80)  Indeed, personnel records provide that Mr. Lnenicka 
began working for Jamar in December 2020. (Ex. M, p. 33)   
On December 16, 2020, Mr. Lnenicka presented to the emergency room with 
complaints of headaches and left arm weakness.  He reported his belief that he had 
overdone it at work, presumably for Jamar. (JE12, p. 130; Hr. Tr., p. 55)  At hearing, 
claimant confirmed that it was a work assignment through Jamar that caused him to 
present to the emergency room. (Hr. Tr., p. 55)  Despite this flare-up in symptoms, 
medical notes from a December 23, 2020, work hardening session provide that claimant 
demonstrated the ability to perform 79 percent of the physical demands of a millwright 
and boilermaker. (JE9, p. 100) 
Given the opinions of Drs. Igram and Bollier that claimant was not a surgical 
candidate, Dr. Bingham opined “The single treatment option left”  for claimant was a 
consultation with a pain management specialist.  He then referred Mr. Lnenicka to Tork 
Harman, M.D. (See JE13, p. 158; JE11, p. 116)   
Mr. Lnenicka first presented to Dr. Harman on January 4, 2021, with complaints 
of pain in the left side of his neck, radiating up to his head and down towards his left 
shoulder. (JE11, p. 116)  Dr. Harman recommended and administered the first of two 
cervical epidural steroid injections on January 4, 2021. (JE11, pp. 117-118)  Dr. Harman 
administered the second cervical ESI on February 15, 2021. (JE11, p. 122)  Despite the 
ESI, claimant continued to complain of numbness in the left thumb and index finger. 
(JE13, p. 160)   

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 6 
Claimant underwent a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) with Mark Smalling, 
P.T. on January 25, 2021. (JE10, p. 114)  According to the report, Mr. Lnenicka 
demonstrated the capabilities and tolerances to function in the heavy physical demand 
level, which included the ability to lift up to 100 pounds. (Id.)   
Based on the results of the FCE, Dr. Bingham released claimant to full-duty work 
without restrictions on January 26, 2021. (JE13, pp. 161, 163)  Shortly after releasing 
claimant back to work, Dr. Bingham left Mercy Occupational Health.  Mr. Lnenicka’s 
care was subsequently transferred to Jeffrey Westpheling, M.D. (See JE13, p. 164) 
Despite Dr. Bingham’s departure, Mr. Lnenicka continued to present to Mercy 
Occupational Health. He presented to Dr. Westpheling for the first and last time on 
March 5, 2021. (JE13, p. 164)  Mr. Lnenicka reported improvement following the second 
cervical ESI; however, he continued to report some neck discomfort with radiating pain 
into the left upper extremity. (Id.)  Dr. Westpheling assessed claimant with cervical 
radiculitis and recommended no further treatment.  He placed claimant at MMI and 
released him to return to work without restrictions. (JE13, p. 165) 
Outside of independent medical examinations, Mr. Lnenicka has not sought out 
or requested any additional medical treatment since March 5, 2021. (Hr. Tr., p. 49) 
On March 15, 2021, Dr. Westpheling addressed claimant’s permanent 
impairment.  Dr. Westpheling placed claimant’s cervical spine condition in DRE 
Category II and assigned 5 percent whole person impairment. (JE13, p. 167)   
In response, claimant sought an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Mark 
Taylor, M.D. (Ex. 1)  The evaluation occurred on July 21, 2021. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Following 
an examination of claimant and a review of the medical records, Dr. Taylor opined that 
claimant’s cervical spine condition fell between DRE Category II (5-8 percent 
impairment) and III (15-18 percent impairment) and assigned 11 percent whole person 
impairment. (Ex. 1, p. 9)  He explained that his rating, when compared to the rating 
assigned by Dr. Westpheling, is justifiable due to claimant’s ongoing symptoms, 
objective test results, persistent weakness associated with grip strength, the decreased 
size of his forearm, and decreased range of motion in the left shoulder. (Id.)  Notably, 
Dr. Taylor did not assign a separate impairment rating for the left shoulder. (Id.) 
With respect to additional treatment, Dr. Taylor recommended Mr. Lnenicka 
undergo additional evaluation with Dr. Sunny Kim for the size disparity between 
claimant’s forearms, as well as the decreased grip strength on the left, and persistent 
paresthesias. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  Dr. Taylor opined claimant’s symptoms could possibly be 
explained by his carpal tunnel syndrome, which would not be directly related to the July 
15, 2020, work injury. (Ex. 1, pp. 8-9) 
In a letter, dated December 14, 2021, Dr. Westpheling offered a critique of Dr. 
Taylor’s impairment rating, noting examiners are only allowed to award up to 3 percent 
additional impairment if the corresponding DRE Category does not adequately 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 7 
encompass the claimant’s amount of impairment. (Ex. J, p. 22)  He further provided 
alternative explanations as to why claimant’s forearms might not be equal in size. (Id.)  
The remainder of the December 14, 2021, letter addresses Dr. Taylor’s 
recommendations regarding permanent restrictions and additional treatment. (Ex. J, pp. 
22-23) 
Mr. Lnenicka was laid off by the defendant employer on July 20, 2020, five days 
after the alleged date of injury.  He has not worked for the defendant employer since. 
(Ex. H, p. 17)  Mr. Lnenicka first returned to work as a boilermaker for Jamar Company 
in approximately December 2020.  Although he was physically able to perform the job 
duties required of him, he eventually experienced an increase in neck and left shoulder 
pain and sought additional treatment. (JE12, p. 130; see Hr. Tr., p. 34)   
Mr. Lnenicka believes he next worked for Austin Industrial in a non-union 
millwright position in May of 2021. (Hr. Tr., pp. 35-36)  Prior to working for Austin 
Industrial, Dr. Westpheling reviewed the job duties of the non-union millwright position 
and determined claimant could perform the essential job functions without 
accommodation. (JE13, p. 169)  While working for Austin Industrial, Mr. Lnenicka 
developed low back pain and eventually underwent surgery to address the same in 
October 2021. (See JE14, p. 188) 
The first issue to be addressed in this decision is whether claimant sustained an 
injury to his left shoulder as part of the July 15, 2020, work injury. Defendants stipulate 
that claimant sustained an injury to his neck; however, they dispute whether claimant 
sustained a separate injury to the left shoulder. (Hearing Report).   
The only physician to specifically address causation with respect to the alleged 
left shoulder injury is Dr. Bollier.  He opined, “The mechanism of injury to include lifting a 
heavy weight while resting on the shoulder along with his location of pain over the left 
trapezius muscle belly and cervical spine does not correlate with shoulder pathology” 
and “review of MRI shows no labral or rotator cuff tear.” (JE8, p. 29)  I find Dr. Bollier’s 
causation opinion credible and convincing.  Claimant’s expert, Dr. Taylor, did not 
address causation, but similarly opined there is no permanent impairment attributable to 
the left shoulder.   
Given these opinions, I find claimant failed to prove he sustained a permanent 
left shoulder injury as a result of the July 15, 2020, work incident.  
Defendants further assert that claimant’s current complaints are not causally 
related to the stipulated neck injury.  More specifically, defendants assert the pain, 
weakness, and atrophy in claimant’s left upper extremity, as well as the numbness in his 
left hand, stem from personal conditions not related to the July 15, 2020, work injury.   
Throughout the course of claimant’s medical treatment, the authorized physicians 
have largely linked the above complaints to diagnoses of carpal tunnel syndrome, 
Parsonage-Turner syndrome, or C6 radiculopathy.   

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 8 
As a preliminary matter, I note that all physicians seemingly agree that claimant’s 
left carpal tunnel diagnosis is not directly related to the July 2020 work injury. (See 
JE13, p. 154; Ex. J, p. 22; Ex. 1, pp. 8-9)  As such, I find that claimant failed to prove his 
carpal tunnel syndrome is causally related to the July 15, 2020, work incident.  
However, such a finding does not preclude a determination that claimant’s current 
complaints, including numbness in the thumb and index finger, are causally related to 
the original work injury.   
In reviewing the medical records in evidence, I note that the October 1, 2020, 
EMG revealed C6 radiculopathy on the left. (JE7, p. 20; see JE8, p. 24)  Dr. Bingham 
opined that the EMG showed evidence of C6 radiculopathy “which would explain thumb 
numbness.” (JE13, p. 156)  Dr. Bingham also opined that claimant’s carpal tunnel 
syndrome could explain the numbness in claimant’s thumb and index finger. (Id.)  In 
other words, Dr. Bingham felt that both diagnoses could be contributing to the 
numbness in the left thumb, while the numbness in claimant’s index finger would only 
be explained by the carpal tunnel syndrome.  
In comparison, Dr. Taylor opined that the disc protrusion at C5-C6, with crowding 
of the C6 and C7 nerve roots, is consistent with claimant’s complaint of paresthesias 
impacting both the left thumb and index finger. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  Dr. Taylor acknowledged 
that carpal tunnel syndrome could be contributing to the same. (Id.)  However, Dr. 
Taylor ultimately diagnosed claimant with intermittent cervicalgia and secondary 
headaches with abnormal MRI and radiculopathy, and persistent paresthesias 
impacting the left thumb and index finger.  He causally related the cervical spine injuries 
and associated symptoms to the July 15, 2020, work incident. (Ex. 1, p. 8)   
Dr. Westpheling opined that carpal tunnel syndrome was a likely cause of 
claimant’s ongoing paresthesias in the left thumb and index finger. (Ex. J, p. 22)  He did 
not specifically rule out the possibility of the paresthesias being related to C6 
radiculopathy.  He also did not comment on Dr. Bingham’s recommendation with 
respect to maximizing the function of the neck and shoulder girdle to see if it had any 
effect on the numbness. (JE13, p. 156)  Given his lack of analysis, and his limited 
interactions with claimant, it is difficult to accept the causation opinions of Dr. 
Westpheling as convincing in this matter.  Instead, I accept the causation opinion of Dr. 
Taylor and find claimant’s numbness in the left thumb and index finger are to some 
extent attributable to the July 15, 2020, work injury.  I further accept the opinions of Dr. 
Bingham to the extent they support the conclusions of Dr. Taylor. 
Defendants also attribute claimant’s current pain, weakness, and atrophy to 
Parsonage-Turner syndrome. (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, pages 11-12)  In doing 
so, they prematurely dismiss such a diagnosis as a wholly personal condition, unrelated 
to the July 15, 2020, work injury.  As explained by Dr. Bingham, Parsonage-Turner 
syndrome can be caused by a traumatic injury to the brachial plexus.  (See JE13, p. 
152)  That being said, it is unclear from the evidentiary record whether any physician 
attributes claimant’s ongoing complaints to Parsonage-Turner syndrome. 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 9 
After initially suspecting Parsonage-Turner syndrome, Dr. Bingham ordered an 
EMG and later opined that the results did not resemble Parsonage-Turner syndrome as 
initially suggested by the left shoulder MRI. (JE13, p. 154)  However, Dr. Bingham also 
provided that, “I think [it] is something for the surgeon to consider/rule out.” (Id.)  
Unfortunately, neither Dr. Igram nor Dr. Bollier addressed the Parsonage-Turner 
syndrome in their reports.  It is possible their silence on the issue is an indication that 
they did not reach the same diagnosis as Dr. Bingham. 
Dr. Westpheling similarly noted that claimant’s MRI of the left shoulder revealed 
findings consistent with Parsonage-Turner syndrome which can cause weakness and 
atrophy in an upper extremity and not necessarily defined on EMG/nerve conduction 
studies unless specifically looking for the same. (Ex. J, p. 22)   
Like Dr. Bingham and Dr. Westpheling, Dr. Taylor diagnosed Mr. Lnenicka with 
an abnormal shoulder MRI with concern for acute Parsonage-Turner syndrome, but with 
negative EMG with regard to the brachial plexus. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  He did not specifically 
diagnose claimant with Parsonage-Turner syndrome.  He did, however, note that the 
diagnostic imaging in this case has provided mixed results, and, as such, he 
recommended further evaluation of radiculopathy versus a brachial plexus injury. (Id.)   
Dr. Taylor broadly opined that given claimant’s history and the currently available 
medical records, the left-sided cervical spine and trapezius and parascapular injury is 
directly and causally related to the July 15, 2020, incident at work. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  I find 
this broad opinion would necessarily include the potential diagnosis of Parsonage-
Turner syndrome.   
Given the above opinions, it appears claimant’s ongoing complaints could be 
causally related to the original date of injury regardless of whether they stem from 
Parsonage-Turner syndrome or C6 radiculopathy.  That being said, Dr. Taylor’s 
impairment assessment is based on the “paresthesias consistent with the MRI findings 
and consistent with the EMG study.”  The only diagnosis consistent with both studies is 
the radiculopathy impacting C6, not the Parsonage-Turner syndrome.  Ultimately, I 
accept the causation opinion of Dr. Taylor and find claimant’s ongoing complaints are 
attributable to the July 15, 2020, work injury.   
The next issue to be addressed is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits for the stipulated neck injury.  
In total, two physicians have assessed claimant’s permanent impairment with 
respect to the neck.  Both physicians utilized the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
Dr. Westpheling, an occupational medicine specialist who briefly served as 
claimant’s authorized treating physician following Dr. Bingham’s departure from Mercy 
Occupational Health, placed claimant’s cervical spine condition in DRE Category II and 
assigned 5 percent whole person impairment. (JE13, p. 167)   

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 10 
Dr. Taylor, a certified independent medical examiner and board certified 
occupational and environmental medicine physician, placed claimant’s cervical spine 
condition between DRE Category II and III and assigned 11 percent whole person 
impairment. (Ex. 1, p. 9)  Dr. Taylor’s impairment rating is based on the “paresthesias 
consistent with the MRI findings and consistent with the EMG study.”  The only 
diagnosis consistent with both studies is the radiculopathy impacting C6.  He explained 
that his higher rating, when compared to the rating assigned by Dr. Westpheling, is 
justifiable because of claimant symptoms, objective test results, persistent weakness 
associated with claimant’s grip strength, the decreased size of claimant’s forearm, and 
the slightly decreased range of motion in the left shoulder. (Id.) 
In a letter, dated December 14, 2021, Dr. Westpheling offered a critique of Dr. 
Taylor’s impairment rating, noting examiners are only allowed to award up to 3 percent 
additional impairment if the DRE Category does not adequately encompass the 
claimant’s amount of impairment. (Ex. J, p. 22) 
I do not find Dr. Westpheling’s critique to be particularly convincing.  In fact, his 
opinion only reinforces the applicability of Dr. Taylor’s impairment rating.  Dr. 
Westpheling explained that an examiner is allowed to award up to 3 percent additional 
impairment if a category does not adequately encompass the amount of an individual’s 
impairment.  Dr. Taylor assigned 11 percent impairment.  According to Page 392 of the 
AMA Guides, DRE Category II ranges from 5 percent to 8 percent whole person 
impairment.  Given Dr. Westpheling’s explanation, Dr. Taylor was justified in awarding 
11 percent whole person impairment, which is 3 percentage points greater than the 
maximum rating provided in DRE Category II.   
As I weigh the competing medical evidence and consider the evidentiary record 
as a whole, I find the medical opinions of Dr. Taylor to be the most convincing.  Dr. 
Taylor’s report provides a comprehensive analysis of claimant’s condition and provides 
opinions that are easy to follow and consistent with the evidentiary record.  More 
importantly, Dr. Taylor is the only physician to consider claimant’s persistent 
paresthesias when assessing claimant’s permanent impairment.  As such, I accept Dr. 
Taylor’s 11 percent whole person impairment rating and find the same resulted from the 
July 15, 2020, work injury.   
With respect to permanent restrictions, I accept the recommendations outlined in 
claimant’s January 2021 FCE report. The undersigned is cognizant of the fact Dr. 
Bingham released claimant to return to work without restrictions after analyzing the 
January 2021 FCE report.  However, this is not conclusive evidence that claimant 
returned to a baseline with respect to his functional abilities or that he does not require 
some form of permanent restrictions.  Rather, as noted in Dr. Bingham’s January 26, 
2021, addendum, claimant was returned to full duty work without restrictions because 
his job as a millwright was classified as a heavy demand position and the January 2021 
FCE found claimant was capable of operating at the heavy level of function. 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 11 
Despite claimant’s arguments to the contrary, these permanent restrictions will 
not substantially interfere with his ability to obtain employment in the future.  Indeed, 
claimant passed a pre-employment physical prior to accepting a full-time millwright 
position with Austin Industrial in May, 2021. (See Ex. L, p. 28)  Claimant is no longer 
employed with Austin Industrial due to an unrelated low back injury. 
Defendants challenge Mr. Lnenicka’s credibility in this case.  Indeed, I note 
several instances in which claimant provided inconsistent or contradicting testimony.  
For instance, claimant testified that he only worked two days for Jamar in December 
2020 due to an increase in his neck pain.  While the contemporaneous medical records 
support an increase in claimant’s neck pain following his work for Jamar, claimant 
testified at the evidentiary hearing that he only worked two days for Jamar because the 
job assignment ended and he was subsequently laid off, not because of an increase in 
his neck pain. (Hr. Tr., pp. 34-35)   
Claimant also made a number of claims that are unsubstantiated by the 
evidentiary record.  For instance, claimant asserted for the first time at hearing that he 
failed three welding tests following the July 15, 2020, work injury.  While claimant 
referenced failing a welding test at his deposition, he did not mention why he failed the 
test, or whether he failed the welding test before or after the date of injury.  Moreover, 
when asked about failing the welding test at his deposition, claimant seemingly 
shrugged it off by providing, “it happens.” (Ex. N, Depo. p. 13)  At hearing, claimant 
testified that he failed these three welding tests because he was uncomfortable and 
sore, attributing the same to the effects of the July 15, 2020, work injury.  Claimant did 
not provide the dates of the failed tests or who he was working for when he failed the 
tests.  Further, these tests are not documented in personnel or medical records.  
Presumably, claimant would have failed the tests while working for either Jamar or 
Austin Industrial.  That being said, claimant testified that he only worked two days for 
Jamar, and approximately 45 days for Austin Industrial before he suffered an unrelated 
injury to his low back. Moreover, claimant testified that he was hired by Austin Industrial 
to “basically run around with a grease gun greasing zerks.” (Hr. Tr., p. 17; see Ex. N, 
Depo. p. 44)  While possible, it seems unlikely claimant failed three welding tests while 
working brief stints for Jamar and/or Austin Industrial. 
While I have my concerns regarding claimant’s credibility, his concerns do not 
detract from his consistent reporting of the July 15, 2020, work injury or his ongoing 
complaints documented in the contemporaneous medical records.   
Considering claimant's age, educational and employment histories, his 
subsequent employment, his ability to return to past employment opportunities, the situs 
and severity of his injuries, his permanent work restrictions, permanent impairment, 
motivation to continue working, as well as all other factors of industrial disability outlined 
by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find claimant proved a 15 percent loss of future earning 
capacity as a result of the July 15, 2020 work injury. 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 12 
 
The parties dispute Mr. Lnenicka’s gross weekly earnings.  More specifically, the 
parties dispute whether his per diem pay should be included in his rate calculation.  Mr. 
Lnenicka received per diem pay when he worked out-of-town jobs.  According to payroll 
records, Mr. Lnenicka received $950.00 of per diem between May 5, 2020, and July 20, 
2020. (Exhibit D, page 6)  He did not receive per diem when working within the Cedar 
Rapids area. (Hr. Tr., p. 68-69)  Mr. Lnenicka testified that when he was working out of 
town, he generally stayed in his fifth wheel and brought his own meals from home. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 42)  Initially, Mr. Lnenicka testified that he never spent any of his per diem pay on 
lodging or food. (Hr. Tr., p. 65)  However, he later recalled defendant employer paying 
for a motel room. (Hr. Tr., pp. 41, 62)  When asked if he always stayed at a motel or out 
of town lodging, Mr. Lnenicka responded, “Not always[,]” implying that he, at times, 
stayed in motels. (Hr. Tr., p. 42)  He further testified that he occasionally used per diem 
to buy things like soda or a piece of pizza. (Hr. Tr., p. 43) 
Whether claimant was successful in asserting the per diem he received should 
be classified as earnings will be addressed in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute between the parties is whether claimant proved he sustained a 
left shoulder condition as a result of the July 15, 2020, work injury.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 13 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 
2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, I found the only physician offering a causation opinion pertaining to 
claimant’s alleged left shoulder condition was Dr. Bollier.  I found his unrebutted 
causation opinion credible and convincing.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant failed to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained an injury to the left 
shoulder which arose out of and in the course of his employment on July 15, 2020. 
The next disputed issue between the parties is the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent disability benefits.  The parties stipulate that Mr. Lnenicka 
sustained permanent disability as a result of the July 15, 2020, work injury and that the 
injury should be compensated with industrial disability pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: “It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term ‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere “functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man.” 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Claimant did not return to work for the defendant employer following the July 15, 
2020, work injury.  There is no evidence that the defendant employer offered to return 
claimant back to work at equal or greater wages.  As such, I find claimant’s entitlement 
to permanent disability benefits is not limited to his functional impairment rating. 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 14 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Iowa Code section 85.34. 
Having considered the relevant industrial disability factors outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I found that claimant proved a 15 percent loss of future earning 
capacity as a result of the July 15, 2020, work injury. This is equivalent to a 15 percent 
industrial disability and entitles claimant to an award of 75 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
The parties dispute the proper workers’ compensation rate.  Claimant asserts 
gross earnings were $1,499.33 per week, resulting in a workers’ compensation rate of 
$878.35. Defendants assert claimant’s gross earnings were $1,326.30 per week, 
resulting in a workers’ compensation rate of $789.02.  The difference in the rate 
calculations is attributable to the inclusion of per diem pay in claimant’s 
calculation.  Defendants argue the per diem should not be included in the rate 
calculation, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.61(3). 
Iowa Code section 85.61(3) provides a definition of “gross earnings” and holds 
that “reimbursement of expenses” and “expense allowances” should be excluded from 
calculation of gross earnings. 
In this case, claimant received $950.00 of “per diem” during the 13 weeks leading 
up to the date of injury. Claimant alleges these “per diem” payments should be added to 
his gross weekly earnings because these payments were not used as reimbursement 
for expenses or an expenses allowance. 
Claimant's argument was previously recognized in Premium Transp. Staffing, 
Inc., v. Bowers, 872 N.W.2d 199 (Iowa Ct. App. 2015) (table). In Bowers, the claimant 
received $52.00 per diem as compensation. The claimant testified at hearing he spent 
only $12.00 per day for food and expenses and pocketed the remainder. The deputy 
commissioner concluded the claimant showed by a preponderance of the evidence only 
a portion of his per diem was reimbursement for expenses. The deputy commissioner 
found $12.00 of the per diem payment was an expense allowance under Iowa Code 
section 85.61(3) but included the remaining $40.00 of the per diem in calculating the 
weekly rate. The Iowa Court of Appeals eventually affirmed the deputy commissioner's 
inclusion of the $40.00 per diem in calculating the rate. 
In this case, claimant testified that he consistently underspent or entirely kept his 
per diem amounts. However, this testimony was vague and not based on actual receipts 
or assignments.  Claimant testified that he did, occasionally, spend his per diem 
allowance on food and lodging.  He submitted no additional evidence to provide the 
specific amounts he spent or kept.  Because claimant offered no evidence to 
substantiate his testimony, such as receipts or invoices, I did not find claimant's 
testimony regarding the use of his per diem allowance credible. Claimant has not met 
his burden to prove that the true nature of the per diem payments was to increase his 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 15 
compensation, as opposed to truly being meant for expenses.  I therefore conclude 
claimant failed to carry his burden to establish that his living expenses were lower than 
the “per diem” allowance. See Tammen v. Echo Powerline Leasing, LLC, File No. 
5053791 (Arb. December 8, 2017) 
Thus, without the per diem allowance, I adopt defendants’ calculation and 
conclude claimant's average gross weekly wage is $1,326.30. (Ex. F, p. 11)  Having 
accepted the parties' stipulations that claimant was single and entitled to one exemption 
on his date of injury, and having concluded that claimant's gross average weekly wage 
was $1,326.30, I conclude claimant's rate is $789.02 using the rate book with effective 
dates of July 1, 2020, through June 30, 2021. 
Defendants assert a credit for overpayment of benefits due to overpaying the 
weekly rate of compensation.  Iowa Code section 85.34(4) addresses credits for excess 
payments. For injuries occurring on or after July 1, 2017, an employer can claim a credit 
for excess payments of temporary total disability, healing period, or temporary partial 
disability benefits against any future weekly benefits due for any injury to that employee. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(4)   
Prior to hearing, claimant was paid 31 weeks of temporary total disability benefits 
at the rate of $950.99 per week. (Ex. E)  I found the proper rate of compensation to be 
$789.02 per week.  This creates an overpayment of $161.97 per week. 
Under the plain meaning of Iowa Code section 85.34(4), defendants are entitled 
to a credit for the excess $5,021.07 paid in temporary benefits based on the incorrect 
rate. 
Prior to hearing, claimant was also paid 22 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of $950.99 per week. (Ex. E)  Defendants assert that claimant was 
not paid out the entire 25 weeks of PPD benefits corresponding with Dr. Westpheling’s 
impairment rating because they discovered claimant was working in December 2020 
while also collecting TTD benefits without notifying defendants of the same.   
Again, defendants assert a credit for the overpayment of PPD benefits based on 
the incorrect rate.  I found the proper rate of compensation to be $789.02 per week.  
This creates an overpayment of $161.97 per week.  Under the plain meaning of Iowa 
Code section 85.34(5), defendants are entitled to a credit for the excess $3,563.34 paid 
in permanent partial disability benefits based on the incorrect rate. 
Defendants further assert a credit for 25 weeks of PPD benefits.  It is undisputed 
that defendants paid 22 weeks of PPD benefits prior to the evidentiary hearing.  
Defendants assert they are entitled to an additional three weeks of PPD benefits.  More 
accurately, defendants are asserting a credit for an alleged overpayment of TTD 
benefits during the month of December, 2020.  Defendants argue they are entitled to a 
credit for the month of December, 2020 because claimant failed to present W2s, 1099s, 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 16 
or any tax records to prove how much he worked or didn’t work.  Defendants’ argument 
disregards the burden of proof on this issue. 
The burden of proving entitlement to a credit falls upon the employer seeking the 
credit. Albertsen v. Benco Manufacturing, File No. 5010764 (App. July 27, 2007).  There 
is no evidence in the evidentiary record to support a finding that claimant worked for 
three weeks in December, 2020, or throughout the entire period in which he received 
TTD benefits in the month of December, 2020.   
The evidentiary record fails to definitively establish how much work claimant 
performed throughout the month of December, 2020.  Medical records note that 
claimant was back to working full-time; however, claimant testified that he only worked 
two days in December, 2020.  Union records produced by defendants seemingly 
support claimant’s testimony and provide that claimant worked 25 hours in December, 
2020. (Ex. M, p. 33)   
Given this information, I find defendants have carried their burden of proving 
entitlement to a credit for a one-week overpayment of TTD benefits in the month of 
December, 2020.  Iowa Code section 85.34(4)   
In summary, defendants are entitled to credit for the overpayment on the weekly 
rate, an overpayment of one week of temporary total disability benefits from December, 
2020, and 22 weeks of permanency benefits.  Iowa Code 85.34(4), (5)   
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion 
of the deputy commissioner or workers' compensation commissioner hearing the case.  
876 IAC 4.33.   
Mr. Lnenicka seeks the costs associated with his filing fee.  The cost of the filing 
fee is appropriate and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay seventy-five (75) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on the stipulated commencement date of March 5, 2021. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of seven hundred eighty-nine and 
02/100 dollars ($789.02).   
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date 
consistent with this decision.   
 
 

LNENICKA V. B.G. BRECKE, INC. 
Page 17 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits, including but not limited to the 
underpayment of the weekly rate, in a lump sum together with interest at an annual rate 
equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the 
most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.   
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs totaling one hundred three and 
00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __22nd __ day of July, 2022. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Matthew Petrzelka (via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
