Case Number: 24011806.02
Case Title:  RATH, SCOTT V. PMX INDUSTRIES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Rath Scott-24011806.02m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SCOTT RATH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
       File No. 24011806.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
PMX INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  : 
 
ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
 
  :                        
    DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND INSURANCE CO.,  
  : 
 
 
  : 
                     Headnote:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE   
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Scott Rath. Claimant 
appeared telephonically and through his attorney, Gregory Taylor. Defendants 
appeared telephonically through their attorney, Jaime Watts. Jennifer Meadows, human 
resources and safety director for PMX Industries, was also present on behalf of 
defendants.   
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on April 25, 2025. The 
proceedings were digitally recorded. That recording constitutes the official record of this 
proceeding. Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023 Order, the undersigned has 
been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
The record consists of claimant’s exhibits 1 through 4, consisting of eight pages, 
and defendants’ exhibits A through E, consisting of ten pages. Claimant provided 
testimony. Jennifer Meadows testified on behalf of defendants. Counsel also offered 
oral arguments to support their positions. 
ISSUE 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care consisting of authorization for physical therapy at Progressive 
Rehabilitation in North Liberty, Iowa. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Apr-25  13:29:15     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RATH V. PMX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned having considered all of the testimony and evidence in the 
record finds: 
Claimant sustained a work-related injury to his left shoulder on August 9, 2024. 
(Claimant’s testimony) He works as an industrial electrician in the foundry at PMX 
Industries. He was injured when he tripped and fell hard, landing on his left shoulder 
and hip. His workers’ compensation claim was initially denied, but he did receive 
physical therapy through the employer’s on-site physical therapy service, CIS. (Cl. 
Testimony; see also Defendants’ Exhibit E, pp. 8-10) He testified that he saw therapist 
Chris on numerous occasions prior to his eventual surgery. 
While the claim was still denied, claimant sought treatment on his own at PCI 
Orthopedics, where he saw Jeffrey Nassif, M.D. (Cl. Testimony; See also Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1, pp. 1-2) He testified that an MRI showed a torn rotator cuff, torn labrum, and 
detached biceps, among other findings. He had surgery on March 3, 2025, with Dr. 
Nassif. Claimant testified that Dr. Nassif’s policy required that he have post-operative 
physical therapy arranged prior to surgery, so that his office could make the appropriate 
arrangements and ensure he would receive the proper treatment. Claimant chose 
Progressive Rehabilitation in North Liberty, which is about a ten-minute drive from his 
home in North Liberty. Dr. Nassif’s office approved therapy to take place at Progressive. 
Prior to surgery, defendants accepted liability for the left shoulder claim. Claimant 
testified that after accepting liability, defendants wanted to transfer his care to the 
University of Iowa Health Clinics, but since he already established care with Dr. Nassif 
and had surgery and physical therapy scheduled, he was allowed to proceed with PCI.  
After surgery, claimant had his initial two physical therapy sessions with 
Progressive, which he paid for out of pocket. He was then informed that defendants 
wanted his therapy to continue with CIS, the on-site physical therapy service at PMX. 
He testified that he had concerns, as he had already started therapy at Progressive as 
arranged by Dr. Nassif. He was also concerned because he was told to take a pain pill 
one hour prior to his therapy sessions, which rendered him unable to drive. CIS is 
around 16 to 20 miles from his home, depending on the route, and it takes about 30 
minutes to drive there. His significant other, Dawn, had to drive him to and from his 
appointments, which was inconvenient. He also had financial concerns due to the 
additional gasoline it would take to drive the further distance. Regardless, he began 
attending therapy at CIS as directed, believing he had no other choice.  
Claimant continued physical therapy sessions at CIS twice weekly through March 
and the beginning of April. He testified that he saw two physical therapists, Chris and 
Phil. He testified that the scheduling was irregular, and at one point he mentioned to 
Sheila, the CIS scheduler, that consistent evening sessions would be more convenient 
for him. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 4) He was told the scheduling depends on the therapist’s 
schedule, but Sheila said she would see if she could get Phil to stick with the same 
times in the evenings going forward.  

RATH V. PMX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Claimant testified that at his last session with Phil, he expressed concerns about 
his progress, and Phil told him to give himself a break and that he was progressing fine 
for where he was in his recovery. The record from that visit, dated April 8, 2025, states 
that claimant needs to be more aggressive at home with his AAROM activities, and that 
his shoulder capsule is very tight with little, if any, component motion from the GH head. 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 5) The therapist noted they “might want to increase our frequency with 
him to keep the shoulder from freezing down.” Under plan, he wrote to continue therapy 
2 to 3 times a week until goals were met or progress ceased.  
 Two days later, claimant had a session with Chris, who told him he was making 
good progress and his range of motion was where it should be at that point. However, 
the next day, claimant got a message from Sheila indicating that Phil wanted to increase 
his visits to three time per week to help him get more mobility in his shoulder. At that 
point, claimant was concerned that this decision was not discussed with him, and was 
contrary to what both therapists had expressed to him earlier that week. He did not trust 
that Sheila had accurate information, and was concerned that the two therapists at CIS 
did not appear to be on the same page regarding his progress. He felt the treatment 
relationship had been damaged, and advised he would return to physical therapy at 
Progressive and pay for it on his own. (Cl. Testimony; See also Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 5-6)  
Claimant testified that he re-started physical therapy at Progressive the next day, 
and there has been no interruption in his therapy due to the change. He continues to 
make progress with Progressive, and believes the quality of care he receives there is 
superior to the care at CIS. He is able to pay for the therapy using his medical savings 
account, to which he had added funds to pay for surgery prior to defendants accepting 
the claim. He testified that the therapy sessions are longer and more intense than the 
sessions he had at CIS, and he has the same therapist each time. He also noted that he 
is able to attend sessions at 7:00 a.m., which works well for him given the closer 
location to his home. He is able to drive himself at this time. He testified that he can tell 
the therapy is helping and he is progressing.  
Claimant testified that he received a call from PCI a few days prior to hearing. 
They were told he was no longer attending physical therapy, and asked whether the 
doctor would release him to return to work full duty as a result. They had apparently 
already sent a letter indicating he could return to work since he was no longer in 
therapy, but could not use his left arm. He advised that he was still in therapy at 
Progressive. 
Claimant testified that while he was not unhappy with the treatment he received 
through CIS, he never believed they had his best interests in mind, as they are paid by 
the employer, PMX. He expressed his dissatisfaction with the lack of communication 
regarding the increase in the frequency of his sessions, especially since he had just 
been told he was making good progress. He also noted the longer distance to drive to 
the CIS appointments versus Progressive, and the inconsistent scheduling. CIS did 
offer to come to his home for his therapy appointments, which claimant declined. He 
said he values his privacy, and he is not the only person who lives at his house, which is 
why he did not want in-home sessions. He testified that he distrusts PMX and West 

RATH V. PMX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Bend when it comes to his health care, and he believes they “pull CIS’s strings,” 
meaning they are not working for him, they are working for PMX. He believes the best 
health care is with a provider he knows is working for him one hundred percent, and he 
trusts Progressive in that regard. He also believes the quality of therapy at Progressive 
is superior, as his sessions are longer and he always sees the same therapist. 
Claimant expressed that he works very hard at therapy, including his home 
exercises, as he wants to get his shoulder back to where it was before surgery as soon 
as he can. He said that not being included in decisions about his care when Phil 
unilaterally decided to increase the frequency of his sessions resulted in a breakdown of 
trust, and the therapist-patient relationship had been damaged as a result. He made it 
clear that regardless of the decision today, he would not be returning to therapy at CIS, 
and would stay with Progressive even if he has to continue to pay for it on his own. 
Jennifer Meadows testified on behalf of defendants. She is the human resources 
and safety director for PMX. She testified that PMX has used CIS for on-site physical 
therapy for 20 to 25 years, and the therapists have knowledge of the job duties of the 
employees there. There is a fitness facility on-site, and in addition to providing therapy 
for injured employees, they also help employees use the fitness equipment. She 
testified that the therapy they provide is tailored to the work each employee does at 
PMX, and they are also able to coordinate sessions around work for employees who are 
still working during their therapy. She does not see the employees when they come for 
therapy sessions, and they are not required to check in with her. She receives a 
schedule from CIS each week detailing who has appointments, but other than that, she 
has little involvement, and has no influence over the frequency of therapy sessions.  
Ms. Meadows testified that she and the insurance adjustor were involved in the 
initial decision to change claimant’s physical therapy from Progressive to CIS 
immediately after surgery. They changed because the CIS therapists are used due to 
their knowledge of the equipment and job duties, and have more hands-on experience 
with treatment that is tailored to the employees’ job duties.  
Ms. Meadows testified that she wrote to Dr. Nassif on April 17, 2025. The letter is 
similar to letters she writes on all workers’ compensation claims. She did not write the 
letter as an attempt to influence claimant’s care, but in order to clarify the care Dr. 
Nassif ordered, and make sure there was no issue with the recommended increase in 
therapy to three times per week. She testified that at PMX they try to get injured 
employees back to work as quickly as possible so they can return to their usual salaries 
and schedules. She testified that she had not received a response to her letter at the 
time of hearing. 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 

RATH V. PMX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.” Id. 
Similarly, an application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained 
because claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere 
dissatisfaction with the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for 
alternate medical care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered 
promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly 
inconvenient for the claimant. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Thus, by challenging the 
employer’s choice of treatment and seeking alternate care, claimant assumes the 
burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 14(f)(5); 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.   
Claimant asserts there has been a breakdown of the therapist-patient 
relationship. He also asserts that the care provided by Progressive is superior to that 
which he received at CIS.  
This agency has held that a breakdown in the physician-patient relationship is 
sufficient reason and basis to find offered medical care is no longer reasonable. See 
Seibert v. State of Iowa, File No. 938579 (September 14, 1994); Neuaone v. John 
Morrell & Co., File No. 1022976 (January 27, 1994); Williams v. High Rise Const., File 
No. 1025415 (February 23, 1993); Walech v. FDL, File No. 1020245 (September 3, 
1992) (aff’d Dist Ct June 21, 1993) (holding that alternate care can be granted when 
there is a breakdown in a physician-patient relationship). 
In this case, the claimant’s distrust of the CIS therapists stems from the fact that 
the decision to increase the frequency of his physical therapy sessions was not 
discussed with him or communicated to him prior to being implemented. He also has 
concerns that CIS is not acting in his best interest because CIS is paid by the employer, 
PMX. He was not unhappy with the care he received there, but does believe the care he 
is receiving at Progressive is superior. This leads to the conclusion that claimant’s 
distrust of CIS has nothing to do with his treatment or the qualifications of the physical 
therapists. Rather, it is more akin to a misunderstanding or miscommunication. Based 

RATH V. PMX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
on that, I cannot conclude that claimant has proven a breakdown in the therapist-patient 
relationship sufficient to warrant an order of alternate medical care.  
Additionally, there is nothing to suggest the treatment offered by the defendants 
is not reasonable. While it may be true that the care claimant is receiving at Progressive 
is superior, the standard for alternate care is whether the care offered by the defendants 
is reasonable. In this case, defendants have offered physical therapy with on-site 
therapists who are familiar with the job duties of the employees, and who claimant has 
seen on prior occasions. Claimant was making progress with the CIS therapists, and 
had no complaints about the actual care provided. While it is a greater distance from his 
home, 16 to 20 miles or a 30-minute drive is not unreasonable, especially since 
claimant is now able to drive himself. Claimant speculates that CIS does not have his 
best interests in mind due to the arrangement with PMX regarding payment, but there is 
no evidence this is true. The record from therapist Phil on April 8, 2025, notes he 
wanted to increase the frequency of therapy to keep claimant’s shoulder from freezing. 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 5) Perhaps if he had discussed this with claimant prior to simply 
increasing the sessions with no explanation, claimant would have had an opportunity to 
ask questions and would have felt more included in his own care. However, claimant’s 
dissatisfaction with how this change was communicated to him is not ample grounds for 
alternate medical care.  
Ultimately, determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact.  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. Claimant’s feelings about the situation are 
valid and understandable, and he clearly cares a great deal about his recovery. To that 
end, he has chosen to seek physical therapy at Progressive on his own, which is his 
right. However, based on the above findings of fact, I cannot find that the care being 
offered by defendants is unreasonable. There has not been a sufficient breakdown in 
the therapist-patient relationship to warrant an order of alternate care as it relates to the 
therapists at CIS. Additionally, there is nothing to suggest that the therapy at CIS was 
not offered promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was 
unduly inconvenient for the claimant, especially now that he is able to drive again.  
Having found that the care offered by defendants is reasonable and reasonably 
suited to treat claimant’s work injury, I conclude that the petition for alternate medical 
care should be denied. This does not mean that claimant is forced to accept the care 
offered by defendants. Claimant is free to continue with therapy at Progressive at his 
own expense, and seek reimbursement for that treatment using the regular claim 
proceedings before this agency. 
ORDER 
Therefore it is ordered: 
The claimant's petition for alternate medical care is denied. 
 

RATH V. PMX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
Signed and filed this ___25th ____ day of April, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Gregory Taylor (via WCES) 
 
Terri Davis (via WCES) 
 
Jaime Watts (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
