Case Number: 5068237
Case Title:  CRAWFORD, THELMA V. ALL CITY MNGMT/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Crawford Thelma-5068237d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
THELMA CRAWFORD, 
  : 
a/k/a ROSIE CRAWFORD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                     File No. 5068237 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
ALL CITY MANAGEMENT, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
REDWOOD FIRE & CASUALTY, 
  :      Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 2502, 3202 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Thelma Crawford a/k/a Rosie Crawford, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration 
against All City Management, as the employer and Redwood Fire & Casualty Insurance 
Company as the insurance carrier.  Claimant also filed a claim against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on June 9, 2020, in Des Moines. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal conclusions relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 10, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through H and Second Injury Fund Exhibits AA 
thru JJ. 
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  No other witnesses were called to testify 
live at the hearing.   
The evidentiary record was suspended at the conclusion of the arbitration 
hearing for receipt of additional medical evidence.  Pursuant to discussions on the 
record, the parties were permitted to obtain additional treatment records and submit 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Sep-04  13:24:41     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 2 
 
 
those no later than June 30, 2020.  Depending on the substance of those records, any 
party had the opportunity to request additional evidence on or before July 7, 2020.  No 
party requested additional evidence.  Therefore, the evidentiary record officially closed 
on July 7, 2020.   
However, counsel for the parties requested the opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  Their request was granted.  The case was deemed fully submitted to the 
undersigned upon the parties’ simultaneous filing of post-hearing briefs on July 17, 
2020.   
ISSUES 
The parties completed a hearing report and submitted the following disputed 
issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether the March 7, 2019 work injury caused permanent disability and, if 
so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability 
benefits for a scheduled member injury to the left leg. 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to payment, reimbursement, or an order for 
defendants to otherwise satisfy all past medical expenses contained at 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 
3. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation fees pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
5. 
Whether claimant proved the March 7, 2019 work injury is a qualifying 
injury for purposes of Second Injury Fund benefits. 
6. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to Second Injury Fund benefits, if any. 
7. 
The proper commencement date for Second Injury Fund benefits, if any 
are awarded. 
8. 
Whether costs should be assessed against any party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
At the commencement of hearing, the parties were able to resolve the pending 
dispute about past medical expenses.  The undersigned entered a verbal order at the 
time of hearing, delineating the extent of defendants’ obligation for claimant’s past 
medical expenses.  No additional factual findings, conclusion of law, or comments will 
be entered.  The verbal order found on pages 9 and 10 of the hearing transcript is 
adopted in this decision through this reference.  Defendants will be liable for past 
medical expenses totaling $646.62, as contained and delineated in claimant’s 
itemization contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 3 
 
 
Also at the commencement of the hearing, the parties were able to resolve any 
dispute about the proper date for commencement of benefits from the Second Injury 
Fund, if benefits are awarded.  Claimant effectively stipulates to the dates asserted by 
the Second Injury Fund on the hearing report.  This stipulation is accepted and no 
findings of fact or conclusions of law will be made with respect to the commencement of 
any benefits awarded against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The parties stipulate that Ms. Crawford sustained a left leg injury that arose out of 
and in the course of her employment with All City Management on March 7, 2019.  Ms. 
Crawford explained that the left knee injury occurred when she was working as a school 
safety crossing guard.  She slipped on ice and fell on March 7, 2019, while performing 
her job duties.  Subsequent MRI’s disclosed that Ms. Crawford sustained a partial tear 
of her medical collateral ligament (MCL) as a result of this slip and fall. 
Defendants admitted the injury and directed Ms. Crawford’s medical care.  They 
initially authorized care with an occupational medicine physician and subsequently 
authorized an orthopaedic referral to Wesley Smidt, M.D.  Defendants urge a finding 
that claimant selected the orthopaedic surgeon.  Claimant had previously been treated, 
including surgically, by Dr. Smidt for a pre-existing right knee injury.  Regardless of how 
she got to Dr. Smidt, defendants authorized care for the left knee through Dr. Smidt. 
Dr. Smidt first evaluated claimant after this work injury on March 26, 2019.  At 
that time, Dr. Smidt was concerned about a meniscal injury to the left knee and ordered 
an MRI.  (Joint Ex. 2, pp. 30-31)  Claimant followed-up with Dr. Smidt on April 9, 2019, 
after the MRI was performed.  Dr. Smidt read the MRI as demonstrating a partial tear of 
the MCL and recommended continued use of a left knee brace.  (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 33)  
On April 30, 2019, Dr. Smidt recommended claimant commence physical therapy for the 
left knee.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 35) 
By July 2, 2019, Dr. Smidt noted that claimant had finished physical therapy.  He 
documented that Ms. Crawford was “doing well” and that she was “doing full activities 
without restrictions or limitations.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39)  He formally declared claimant to 
have achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) at the July 2, 2019 appointment 
and indicated that claimant required “No restrictions or limitations in the open labor 
market.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39)  Dr. Smidt recommended that claimant be allowed to 
follow-up with orthopaedics in the future, if needed, but doubted that additional 
treatment would be necessary.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39) 
In a September 9, 2019 report, Dr. Smidt indicated that he “considered MMI as of 
July 2, 2019.” (Second Injury Fund Ex. AA, p. 1)  He further opined that claimant was 
capable of returning to full duty work without restrictions or limitations.  Dr. Smidt further 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 4 
 
 
opined, “there is no impairment rating warranted for the work-related injury.”  (Second 
Injury Fund Ex. AA, p. 1) 
Unfortunately, claimant’s left knee symptoms did not entirely resolve and she 
followed up with Dr. Smidt on May 18, 2020.  At that time, she reported ongoing pain as 
well as trouble with stairs, planting or twisting of her left knee.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39a)  Dr. 
Smidt recommended a repeat MRI given the length of time between his evaluations.  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 39b) 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Smidt shortly after the trial date.  The evidentiary 
record was suspended pending receipt and filing of those records.  At his follow-up 
evaluation on June 15, 2020, Dr. Smidt noted resolution of the edema in claimant’s MCL 
and in the femur and tibia of around claimant’s left knee.  However, the repeat MRI 
confirmed the partial tear of the MCL.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d) 
Dr. Smidt noted that claimant “has a stable ligament on exam” and indicated that 
the partial tear of the MCL is not causing claimant’s current or ongoing left knee 
symptoms.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d)  Dr. Smidt noted mild chondromalacia in the medial 
compartment of claimant’s left knee, but indicated that he “cannot directly attribute that 
to the injury.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d)  Claimant declined further physical therapy or 
injections for her left knee chondromalacia according to Dr. Smidt’s note of June 15, 
2020.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d)  Dr. Smidt did not impose work restrictions after the June 15, 
2020 evaluation and released claimant to return for further medical care on an as 
needed basis, given that she declined physical therapy or injections for the left knee.  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 39e) 
Dr. Smidt also provided a written report to defense counsel dated June 30, 2020.  
In that report, Dr. Smidt opines that no future treatment for the left knee would be 
related to the March 7, 2019 work injury.  He indicated that he would offer no changes 
to his prior September 9, 2019 impairment rating.  (Defendants’ Ex. I, p. 18) 
At claimant’s request, Sunil Bansal, M.D., performed an independent medical 
evaluation on October 1, 2019.  Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with a partial tear of the 
medial collateral ligament, similar to the diagnosis provided by Dr. Smidt.  Dr. Bansal 
also noted partial tear of the medial retinaculum.  Dr. Bansal noted “positive valgus 
stressing with mild ligamentous laxity” of the left knee during his examination.  
Claimant’s Ex. 5, p. 24)  He opined that Ms. Crawford sustained seven percent 
permanent impairment of the left lower extremity as a result of medial collateral ligament 
laxity.  (Claimant’s Ex. 5, p. 26) 
Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating is derived from Table 17-33, found on page 546 of 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Table 17-33 
provides for a seven percent permanent impairment of the lower extremity for mild laxity 
of either the cruciate or the collateral ligament.  As noted, this is juxtaposed to the 
opinion and findings of Dr. Smidt, who indicated that claimant “has a stable ligament on 
exam.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d)  Therefore, the fighting issue in this case is whether 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 5 
 
 
claimant has medial collateral ligament instability that would result in permanent 
impairment of the left leg. 
Dr. Smidt is the treating surgeon in this case.  He evaluated claimant on multiple 
occasions.  Diagnosing ligament tears is also part of his orthopaedic specialty.  Dr. 
Smidt also evaluated Ms. Crawford both before and after Dr. Bansal.  An office note 
from Dr. Smidt on March 15, 2016, documents that he performed ligament stress testing 
on a prior right knee injury and suggests that Dr. Smidt performs thorough orthopaedic 
evaluations such that he likely performed valgus stress testing on claimant’s left knee 
after this work injury.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 25)  At his initial evaluation after this work injury, 
on March 26, 2019, Dr. Smidt specifically noted he evaluated and found the collateral 
ligaments to be “stable.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 30)  He reiterated that finding again on April 30, 
2019.  (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 35)  In these respects, Dr. Smidt’s opinions deserve significant 
respect and garner significant credibility. 
Dr. Bansal evaluated Ms. Crawford only one time.  The evaluation lasted 
approximately 30 minutes and Dr. Bansal evaluated claimant’s left knee, right knee, and 
both arms.  Dr. Bansal did not recommend any operative intervention for the ligament 
laxity he diagnosed.  Instead, he recommended only potential future intermittent 
viscosupplementation injections, which would potentially be helpful for chondromalacia 
symptoms.  On the other hand, two MRIs of the left knee diagnose a partial tear of the 
medical collateral ligament, which would potentially be consistent with the ligament 
laxity diagnosed by Dr. Bansal.  I also note that the treating physical therapist noted a 
positive valgus test of the left knee on March 8, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 9, p. 98) 
Review of other medical providers’ notes demonstrates that the treating physical 
therapist noted on March 8, 2019 a positive valgus test, which is an objective finding 
that would support the ligament laxity reported by Dr. Bansal.  However, on June 26, 
2019, Ms. Crawford reported to her physical therapist that she was “able to do ‘almost 
everything’ around her house without increased knee pain experienced afterwards.”  
(Joint Ex. 10, p. 109)  This therapy record suggests that there were not reported 
symptoms of ongoing ligament laxity in June 2019 and more likely suggests Dr. Smidt is 
correct. 
Ultimately, I note that Dr. Smidt re-evaluated claimant on June 15, 2020.  His 
evaluation appears to have specifically included and considered medial collateral laxity 
or instability.  Dr. Smidt opines:  
I reviewed the MRI scan, as well as with physical exam, I do not 
believe that there is any persistent pathology of the MCL that is 
accounting for symptoms.  She has a stable ligament on exam and the 
partial tearing seen on the most recent MRI scan I believe is residual from 
prior injury, but does not represent an incompetent ligament or a ligament 
that is giving persistent pain.  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d) 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 6 
 
 
Dr. Smidt specifically obtained the second MRI in 2020 to determine whether the 
work injury caused degenerative changes due to a bone contusion.  He explained that 
there were not degenerative changes noted due to the bone contusion.  Instead, he 
noted claimant has mild chondromalacia of the medial compartment, which he opined 
he “cannot directly attribute that to the injury.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39d)  Ultimately, Dr. Smidt 
is the treating orthopaedic surgeon.  He had the most opportunities and the last 
opportunity to evaluate claimant in this situation.  He specifically considered whether the 
medial collateral ligament demonstrated laxity and found that the ligament was stable 
without laxity.   
I find the opinion of Dr. Smidt to be the most credible and convincing in this 
evidentiary record.  He provided an explanation for the claimant’s current symptoms, but 
indicated those symptoms were not directly attributable to the work injury.  Claimant has 
not proven that she sustained a permanent injury or any permanent functional loss to 
the left knee as a result of the March 7, 2019 slip and fall at work. 
Ms. Crawford seeks an award, or reimbursement, of her independent medical 
evaluation fees.  With respect to this request, I find that Dr. Smidt offered an opinion 
that claimant sustained no permanent impairment related to the work injury in his report 
dated September 9, 2019.  (Second Injury Fund Ex. AA, p. 1)  Claimant obtained an 
evaluation with Dr. Bansal on October 1, 2019.  Ms. Crawford sustained a compensable 
injury to the extent that there is an admitted injury and some healing period benefits and 
medical benefits were paid.  I find that defendants authorized Dr. Smidt as the treating 
orthopaedic surgeon and, in that sense, defendants retained Dr. Smidt in this case.  I 
find the independent medical evaluation fee ($ 3,694.00) charged by Dr. Bansal is 
reasonable and consistent with fees for similar services in this area. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute submitted for resolution is whether claimant proved she 
sustained a permanent disability of the left leg as a result of the March 7, 2019 work 
injury.  The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 7 
 
 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, I found the medical opinions of Dr. Smidt, the treating orthopaedic 
surgeon, to be most convincing and credible.  As such, I also found that Ms. Crawford 
failed to prove she sustained a permanent disability, or permanent functional 
impairment, of the left leg as a result of the March 7, 2019 slip and fall at work.  Having 
reached this finding of fact, I conclude that claimant failed to prove entitlement to an 
award of permanent partial disability benefits against the employer. 
Ms. Crawford also seeks an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa.  Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal Co., 
274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970). 
In this case, the parties stipulate that claimant sustained a first qualifying injury.  
However, the Second Injury Fund disputes whether claimant sustained a qualifying 
second injury.  The parties stipulated that claimant sustained a left leg injury on March 
7, 2019.  However, both the employer and the Second Injury Fund disputed whether 
that injury resulted in permanent disability.  Having found and concluded that claimant 
failed to prove permanent disability to her left leg as a result of the March 7, 2019 work 
injury, I similarly conclude that Ms. Crawford failed to prove a qualifying second injury.  I 
conclude that claimant failed to prove a compensable claim against the Second Injury 
Fund.  Iowa Code section 85.64. 
Claimant also sought an award of alternate medical care on the hearing report.  I 
perceive no basis for award of alternate medical care given my findings and conclusions 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 8 
 
 
in this case.  Claimant has not established that her ongoing left knee symptoms, or any 
future treatment, are related to the March 7, 2019 work injury. 
Ms. Crawford also sought an award of her independent medical evaluation.  Iowa 
Code section 85.39(2) (2017), as recently amended, provides: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination. 
However, the employer is only liable for claimant’s evaluation expense if “if the 
injury for which the employee is being examined is determined to be compensable 
under this chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.”  Iowa Code section 85.39(2) (2017).  In this 
case, the parties stipulated that claimant sustained a compensable work injury.  Having 
found that Dr. Smidt was authorized and retained by defendants to provide claimant’s 
treatment and that he rendered an impairment rating before claimant obtained an 
independent medical evaluation by Dr. Bansal, I conclude that claimant has established 
entitlement to reimbursement of her independent medical evaluation fees. 
I also found that Dr. Bansal’s independent medical evaluation fee was 
reasonable in the locale of his practice.  Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of the entirety of Dr. Bansal’s independent medical evaluation fee, or 
$3,694.00.  Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
Finally, claimant seeks an award of costs.  Costs are assessed at the discretion 
of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  In this instance, claimant filed a petition and 
recovered unpaid medical expenses and reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation fees.  Claimant did not recover permanent partial disability benefits or 
Second Injury Fund benefits, however.  Exercising the agency’s discretion, I conclude 
that it is appropriate and reasonable to assess claimant’s filing fee ($100.00).  All other 
requested costs are denied. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes no permanent disability benefits from the employer and insurance 
carrier. 
Claimant takes no benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 

CRAWFORD V. ALL CITY MANAGEMENT 
Page 9 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall be liable and shall hold claimant 
harmless for past medical expenses totaling six hundred forty-six and 62/100 dollars 
($646.62), as outlined in claimant’s itemization of past medical expenses contained in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s independent 
medical evaluation fee in the amount of three thousand six hundred ninety-four and 
00/100 dollars ($3,694.00). 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the 
amount of one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00). 
The employer and insurance carrier shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) 
as required by this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __4th ___ day of September, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Nicholas Shaull (via WCES) 
Alison Stewart (via WCES) 
Sarah Timko (via WCES) 
 
