Case Number: 20011683.01
Case Title:  LAIRD, KRISTEN V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Laird Kristen-20011683.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
KRISTEN LAIRD, 
No. 20011683.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION 
D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO, 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
HEAD NOTE NOS.: 1108, 1803,  
2204, 2501, 3001, 3800 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
 
Defendant. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
Claimant Kristen Laird seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the defendant, 
self-insured employer Trinity Health Corporation, doing business as MercyOne Waterloo 
(Trinity). The undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing on October 16, 2024. 
Laird participated personally and through attorney Corey J. L. Walker. Trinity 
participated by and through attorney Lee P. Hook. 
Due to the unique circumstances of this case, the undersigned issued an order 
bifurcating the question of whether Laird is entitled to penalty and setting that issue for 
hearing at a later date. However, the parties later determined a separate hearing was 
unnecessary because the submission of documentary evidence on the penalty issue 
would suffice and they could argue the issue in their post-hearing briefs. The 
undersigned consequently issued an order consolidating the penalty issue, cancelling 
the hearing scheduled on penalty, and extending the deadline for post-hearing briefs to 
allow ample time for including argument on penalty in the parties’ briefs. The Hearing 
Report is hereby amended to include the penalty issue. 
II.  
ISSU ES  
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) Did Laird sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of her employment 
with Trinity? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-25  15:15:39     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 2 
 
2) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
3) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded? 
4) If Laird is entitled to workers’ compensation, what is the weekly rate? 
5) Is Trinity entitled to credit for workers’ compensation paid? 
6) If Trinity is entitled to a credit for workers’ compensation paid, what is the 
amount? 
7) Is Laird entitled to interest? 
8) Is Laird entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical examination 
(IME)? 
9) Is Laird entitled to payment of the medical expenses itemized in Exhibits 7 
and 8? 
10) With respect to the itemized medical expenses: 
a) Are the listed expenses causally connected to the work injury? 
b) Did Trinity authorize the medical care related to the listed expenses? 
11) Is Laird entitled to a penalty? 
12) Is Laird entitled to taxation of the costs? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Laird and Trinity at the 
time of the alleged injury. 
2) Laird sustained an injury on August 7, 2020, which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment with Trinity. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, but Laird’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits is no 
longer in dispute. 
4) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5) At the time of the stipulated injury: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 3 
 
a) Laird was married. 
b) Laird was entitled to three exemptions. 
6) With respect to the itemized list of medical expenses: 
a) The fees or prices charged by providers are fair and reasonable. 
b) The treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c) Although a causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot 
be stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to 
the medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury arose. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE18; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 8;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through F; and 
 Hearing testimony by Laird.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
 
Laird was 52 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hearing Transcript, page 18) 
She lived in Waterloo, Iowa, where she had resided for the prior decade. (Hr’g Tr. p. 18) 
She is right-hand dominant. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19)  
 
Laird graduated from high school. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 19–20) She then enrolled in a 
three-year nursing program and earned her degree. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19) As of the hearing 
date, Laird had been a registered nurse (RN) in Iowa since 1995. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19)  
 
Factor V Leiden is a “variant of the protein factor V (5), a clotting factor. Factor V 
Leiden gene is present in 3% of the general population. People who carry the factor V 
Leiden gene have a fivefold greater risk of thrombosis than the rest of the population. 
The factor V mutation (factor V Leiden) is the most common genetic cause of venous 
thrombosis. The factor V Leiden mutation causes resistance to activated protein C, 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 4 
 
yielding a defect in the natural anticoagulation system.” “Factor V Leiden,” Stedman’s 
Medical Dictionary, 318320 (accessed using Westlaw on April 15, 2025). 
 
In the year 2000, Laird had health problems caused by pulmonary emboli. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 24; Joint Exhibit 3, page 14) In 2001, Laird was diagnosed with Factor V Leiden 
after genetic testing. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 24–25) Doctors implanted an intra vena cava filter to 
help prevent the recurrence of pulmonary emboli. (Hr’g Tr. p. 25) Laird still had the filter 
at the time of hearing. (Hr’g Tr. p. 25) After the pulmonary emboli and surgery to implant 
the filter, Laird returned to work with no permanent restrictions. (Hr’g Tr. p. 25) Before 
the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Laird had a prescription for the medication 
Eliquis. (Hr’g Tr. p. 102)  
There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude the 
pulmonary emboli, factor V Leiden, or the implanted filter caused a doctor to assign 
Laird permanent work restrictions. The evidence does not support a finding by a 
preponderance of the evidence that a doctor evaluated any potential permanent 
impairment or disability that Laird sustained because of the pulmonary emboli, factor V 
Leiden, or implanted filter. Consequently, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence 
from which to find it is more likely than not Laird sustained a permanent impairment or 
disability caused by the pulmonary emboli, factor V Leiden, or implant. 
 
Trinity hired Laird in or around December 2011 as a registered nurse (RN). 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 2; Hr’g Tr. pp. 20–21) The Trinity job description for RN 
identifies the essential functions of the position that lists the following “Physical and 
Mental Requirements and Working Conditions”: 
1. Performs duties that may involve exposure to hazardous substances 
and is subject to normal risks associated with handling of narcotics. In 
patient care areas, may perform or demonstrate patient care tasks 
which may expose the clinical nurse to infectious or communicable 
disease, or possibility of injury from irrational or confused patients and 
visitors or from instruments or equipment. 
2. Lift/Carry; Push/Pull 76–100% of the time, avg 50–100 lbs. 
3. Stand; Walk/Move About 76–100% of the time 
4. Must possess the ability to comply with Trinity Health Policies and 
procedures. 
(Ex. 3, p. 10) Laird testified the description of the RN job’s lifting restrictions were 
accurate. (Hr’g Tr. p. 21) Trinity authored the lifting restrictions. Laird performed them 
while working in the position. The evidence establishes the RN job description section 
“Physical and Mental Requirements and Working Conditions” accurately describes the 
physical requirements of the position Laird worked for Trinity as well as the working 
conditions. 
 
Trinity has a far more thorough understanding of the RN position, what is 
required of the people working as RNs within its organization, what is a requirement of 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 5 
 
the job, what is an essential function, and what may be accommodated at a given job 
site. Trinity wrote the RN job description. Trinity deemed it appropriate to include the 
above list of four “requirements” relating to mental and physical ability and the work 
environment as distinct from the essential functions of the job. The weight of the 
evidence shows that the four requirements itemized under the heading of “Physical and 
Mental Requirements and Working Conditions” in the RN job description are distinct 
from the essential functions of the position, which are listed under a separate heading in 
the job description. (Ex. 3, pp. 7–10)  
The list of essential functions in the Trinity RN job description consists of the 
following: 
1. Conducts an initial assessment to gather data. 
 
Makes an initial assessment of new admissions within 30 minutes 
of the patient’s arrival to the unit. 
 
Completes all areas of the admission assessment database within 
24 hours of admission. 
2. Identifies patient problems and develops them into an outcome/goal-
based plan of care. 
 
Initiates the patient problem list and incorporates relevant medical 
history into the plan of care. 
 
Analyzes and interprets the assessment data to identify desired 
patient outcomes/goals. 
 
Determines nursing interventions to achieve those outcomes/goals. 
 
Prioritizes patient care needs/activities. 
 
Identifies and makes appropriate referrals (i.e., Patient/Family 
Services, Nutritional Services, Spiritual Care, Diabetic Educator, 
etc.), and education needs. 
 
Collaborates with other health care disciplines to plan 
interventions/patient outcomes/goals. 
3. Implements the outcome/goal-based plan of care. 
 
Assigns and coordinates patient care incorporating patient acuity 
and the skills, knowledge and abilities of the team members. 
 
Organizes and prioritizes care for the patients within the team. 
 
Delegates tasks appropriately to other team members. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 6 
 
 
Implements the plan of care including procedures, treatments, 
physicians orders, nursing orders, education plan and medications. 
 
Coordinates implementation of plan of care with the Case Manager, 
Social Worker and other health care disciplines. 
 
Assists to decrease the patient’s length of stay by helping the 
patient and family identify and secure appropriate services to 
satisfy health-related needs upon discharge. 
 
Uses nursing judgment to determine the appropriate frequency and 
components of reassessment. 
 
Reassesses at regular intervals to determine patient response(s) to 
interventions (minimum RN reassessment every 24 hours). 
 
Focuses ongoing reassessment on actual and potential 
problems/needs of the patient including education and discharge 
needs. 
 
Participates in develop [sic] discharge plan. 
 
Documents discharge instructions for patient and/or significant 
other and/or other care provider. 
4. Evaluates patient progress and revises the outcome/goal-based plan 
as needed. 
 
Evaluates patient response(s) to interventions. 
 
Review/modifies/revises the outcome based plan of care based on 
ongoing reassessments. 
 
Updates the problem list and outcomes/goals. 
5. Communicates relevant clinical information to the team to optimize 
patient outcomes/goals. 
 
Communicates relevant clinical information to physicians regarding 
the patient’s condition. 
 
Reports progress toward outcomes/goals and/or changes in 
condition to other health team members. 
 
Maintains ongoing communication with interdisciplinary team 
members throughout the shift, at shift change, and transfer of care. 
 
Communicates with other team leaders and members throughout 
the shift to reassess and prioritize the needs of the unit. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 7 
 
 
Documents completely, comprehensively and legibly and in 
accordance with policy. 
6. Demonstrates clinical competence. 
 
Utilizes the Patient Care Policies and Procedure as references to 
guide nursing practice. 
 
Assures medication safety by following the “5 Rights” of medication 
administration. 
 
Prioritizes and implements intervention according to patient 
assessment. 
 
Demonstrates competency in computer systems and applications 
required for role. 
 
Receives, transcribes and processes and implements physician 
orders per policy including dating, timing and verifying accuracy. 
 
Maintains communication with the manager/house supervisor and 
staffing office regarding admissions, unit needs, acuity numbers 
and significant events. 
 
Completes assigned shift duties and assures resolution of 
discrepancies. 
7. Based on principles of growth and development, provides care 
appropriate to the age related needs of the patients served on his/her 
assigned unit, which may include: 
Birth–28 days: Neonate 
1–18 Months: Infant 
18 Mo–3 Yrs: Toddler 
3–6 Yrs: Pre-School Aged 
6–12 Yrs: School-Aged 
12–18 Yrs: Adolescents 
18–65 Yrs: Adults 
65+ Yrs: Geriatrics 
 
Collects, analyzes, interprets and applies age-specific data. 
 
Performs tasks/procedures, uses equipment in an age appropriate 
manner. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 8 
 
 
Communicates and works with others in an age appropriate 
manner. 
8. Adheres to all safety, infection control and colleague health policies 
and procedures. 
 
Attends required safety programs. 
 
Appropriately and consistently uses the personal protective 
equipment required of the job. 
 
Knows and can demonstrate departmental emergency procedures 
for fire, disaster and other emergency situations. 
 
Reports and removes unsafe equipment/furniture. 
 
Asks for assistance when needed to assure safety for all involved. 
 
Maintains a safe working environment and practices safe working 
habits. 
9. Maintains a working knowledge of applicable Federal, State, and local 
laws and regulations, Trinity Health’s Organizational Integrity Program, 
Standards of Conduct, as well as other policies and procedures in 
order to ensure adherence in manner that reflects honest, ethical, and 
professional behavior. 
(Ex. 3, pp. 7–9)  
 
As an RN for Trinity, Laird was considered a floor nurse on the third floor, 
referred to as “3 Floor” by staff. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) She worked the night shift on “3 
General.” (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) Laird credibly testified that what Trinity considered base 
employment for the RN position she held was three 12-hour shifts per week but that 
there were only two stretches of time during her over 11 years on the job that Trinity did 
not have her work required overtime. (Hr’g Tr. p. 49)  
Trinity has implemented a Performance Excellence Program (PEP) that includes 
a Performance Planning and Review Form (PPR Form). (Defendant’s Exhibit D, pages 
34, 44, 55) The PPR Form does not contain a reference to the four items listed under 
“Physical and Mental Requirements and Working Conditions” in the RN job description 
and quoted above. (Ex. D, pp. 34–64) Because none of the four items itemized in the 
RN job description under the Heading “Physical and Mental Requirements and Working 
Conditions” are referenced in the PPR Form, the weight of the evidence establishes that 
Trinity does not include those requirements as part of the PEP. 
Section 2 of the PPR Form is titled, “Essential Job Duties” and describes how 
management should use it as follows: 
During performance planning, the leader identifies (and shares with the 
colleague) up to five of the most important job duties based on the job 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 9 
 
description. Each essential job duty should be SMART – Specific, 
Measurable, Agreed upon, Realistic but challenging, and Tied to a 
timetable. Job duties can also include special projects as appropriate. 
During the review, the leader assigns a rating for each essential job duty, 
using the rating definitions as defined in the Leadership and Colleague 
Guides. The numeric score or Average Rating is the sum of each value 
rating divided by the total number of essential job duties. 
(Ex. D, pp. 35, 45, 56)  
Thus, the PPR Form details a process that does not focus on all of the essential 
functions of a job at Trinity but up to five of the most important job duties. As part of the 
PEP, leader Jewell Jones identified three essential functions of the RN job that would 
be used to assess Laird’s performance. (Ex. D, pp. 35–40, 44) Jones then reviewed 
Laird’s performance in each and rated it for scoring purposes in accordance with the 
PPR Form’s instructions. (Ex. D, pp. 35–64)  
On August 13, 2019, Jones performed a review of Laird’s job performance as an 
RN using the Trinity PPR. (Ex. D, pp. 55–64) The first essential function identified for 
assessment is, “Utilizes the nursing process (assessment, nursing diagnosis, planning, 
implementation and evaluation).” (Ex. D, p. 56) Jones rated Laird’s performance at five 
out of five and commented: 
Kristen completes her assessments timely and accurately. She is 
conscientious, efficient and is attentive to her patients. She serves as a 
patient advocate and assists in coordinating the plan of care for the 
patient. She thinks critically to anticipate care needs for the patient. 
Kristen serves as an effective team leader, directing other nurses, PCAs, 
and HUCs appropriately and effectively. She is able to work well with the 
rest of the care team, including physicians, therapists, and pharmacy. 
Kristen does a nice job at precepting new nurses. She is able to effectively 
lead the team when it comes to staffing needs and team assignments. 
She makes sure assignments are appropriate and she makes sure the 
daily safety huddle board is complete. It is always evident when Kristen 
works, because things are organized and ready for the next shift. Thank 
you Kristen for your stewardship and your dedication toward excellence. 
(Ex. D, p. 57) 
 
Jones rated Laird’s performance of the essential function of "Communicates and 
documents pertinent information” at four out of five and commented: 
Kristen has done a nice job getting acclimated to the Cerner Compass 
application. She completes her documentation in the E.H.R. timely and 
accurately. She documents the majority of her work at the point of care. 
Continue to find ways to participate with the bedside report.  

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 10 
 
Kristen communicates her concerns with the physicians and follows up as 
needed. Her reports are always clear and concise. She is able to verbally 
communicate to co-workers, and the other team members. She is 
respectful, firm, and professional [in] her communication. Be sure to watch 
the tone in which you handle concerns. At times your firmness can be 
mistaken. 
Kristen does a great job at reporting and documenting critical values. 
Thank you for all of your hard work and dedication to excellence. 
(Ex. D, p. 59) 
 
The next essential function on the PPR is, “Educates patients/clients and 
families.” (Ex. D, p. 60) Jones rated Laird’s performance of this function four out of five 
and commented: 
Kristen completes her education documentation in the E.H.R. timely and 
accurately. She is able to tailor her patient teaching to the level of the 
patient and the family. She teaches the patient about the most important 
issues during the hospital stay and other needs addressed by the patient. 
She uses teach-back to make sure her patients and families understand 
the instruction. She completes her mandatory requirements in a timely 
fashion, including Healthstream modules. 
Kristen does a great job at anticipating the needs of her patients. She has 
excellen[t] critical thinking skills. She keeps the patient and physician 
informed of any changes in the patient[’]s condition. She utilizes creative 
strategies to engage her patients in their plan of care. She is a “go to” 
person among her peers especially when it comes to providing patient 
education and providing educational needs beyond their diagnosis. 
(Ex. D, p. 60) 
 
The PPR also assesses the consumer experience. (Ex. D, p. 61) Laird’s in-
patient Press-Ganey score for the time period reviewed fell in the 49th percentile. (Ex. 
D, p. 61) Jones commented, “This is great! Let’s keep moving toward excellence!” (Ex. 
D, p. 61) She rated Laird’s performance in this area at four out of five. (Ex. D, p. 61) 
 
Section 3 of the PPR is entitled, “Values-based behaviors.” (Ex. D, p. 62) Jones 
rated Laird on a scale of one to five at three out of five in the areas of justice and 
stewardship. (Ex. D, p. 62) She rated her at four out of five in the areas of integrity, 
commitment to the poor, excellence, and reverence. (Ex. D, p. 62) And in compassion, 
Jones rated Laird at five out of five. (Ex. D, p. 62) Laird’s average rating was 3.9 out of 
five. (Ex. D, p. 62) Jones commented on Laird’s values-based behaviors as follows: 
Kristen has missed 8 days. Attendance is of concern. She has attended 3 
of the unit staff meetings. This is a great way to stay up to date on the 
education/information of the unit. Please make extra efforts to attend staff 
meetings. Kristen follows the dress code. Cell phone use is not a problem. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 11 
 
She follows the rules of the organization. She is loyal to the organization in 
her words and deeds. Kristen is a team player and helps others prior to 
being asked. 
Kristen is a great nurse. She is an important contributor to the success of 
the unit. She continues to demonstrate a high level of initiative in ensuring 
smooth transitions of patient care. Kristen has the quality of knowing what 
has to be done and she effectively carries out tasks without supervision. 
Kristen makes decisions with confidence and she develops resourceful 
solutions when assisting her peers with difficult issues. 
Kristen takes action without undue haste or delay to ensure the shift runs 
smoothly. She faces conflict with confidence and is very performance 
conscious. 
Thank you Kristen for all that you do! You do make a difference in the 
success of our team! 
(Ex. D, p. 62) 
 
Section 6 of the PPR requires the reviewer to weigh performance factors. 
(Ex. D, p. 64) Jones applied the Trinity formula to Laird’s ratings. (Ex. D, p. 64) 
Laird’s final rating was 4.2, which placed her within the second highest category 
of “Exceeds Expectations.” (Ex. D, p. 64) 
The evidence shows that during Laird’s employment as an RN at Trinity before 
the COVID-19 pandemic, she worked overtime as required, satisfied the job’s physical 
and mental requirements, performed its essential functions, and performed those duties 
in the working conditions required of an RN. It also shows that Laird exceeded 
expectations in the three essential functions of the RN job covered in her performance 
review. 
 
After COVID-19 became a pandemic, Laird had concerns about treating patients 
with the virus because of her health conditions due to scientific research on the risk the 
virus posed to individuals with pre-existing health conditions. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 102–05) 
Specifically, Laird read research showing that patients with factor V Leiden or clotting 
disorders had a higher risk of experiencing complications if they contracted COVID-19. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 103) When she asked her primary care provider about the studies, he 
dismissed her concerns because he did not think her factor V Leiden or history of blood 
clots increased her risk of health complications if she contracted the virus. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
103) So, Laird sought out a second opinion and asked if she should seek an exemption 
from treating patients with COVID-19 or different work because of her medical history 
and got the same answer. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 103–05) Subsequent events have proven Laird’s 
concerns had merit.  
In Laird’s position, Trinity scheduled her to work three 12-hour shifts per week. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 49) She also earned paid time off that she could use. (Ex. 6, p. 15) During all 
but two periods of time during Laird’s tenure at Trinity, she worked mandatory overtime, 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 12 
 
the amount of which varied and was set by Trinity. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 49–50) Typically, Laird 
worked a 48-hour workweek for Trinity. (Hr’g Tr. p. 50) 
Like many healthcare providers during the COVID-19 pandemic, Trinity 
experienced a staffing shortage. (Hr’g Tr. p. 60) To help ensure adequate staffing 
levels, Trinity put in place a short-staffing bonus that nurses such as Laird could earn for 
volunteering to work extra hours. (Hr’g Tr. p. 60) Under the short-staffing bonus 
program, nurses earned $50.00 per hour extra on top of their overtime pay for every 
four hours worked. (Hr’g Tr. p. 60) For example, if a nurse worked eight hours, their 
bonus amount would be $100.00. (Hr’g Tr. p. 60)  
Laird’s Biweekly Earnings:  December 17, 2019 – August 21, 2020 
 
HOURS 
PAY 
 
Date 
Regular  
OT 
PTO 
Bonus 
Gross 
Citation 
12/27/19 
61.50 
- 
4.00 
$50.00 
$2,808.23 
Ex. 6, p. 16 
1/10/20 
64.25 
16.75 12.00 
- 
$3,833.38 
Ex. 6, p. 16 
1/24/20 
75.25 
- 
- 
- 
$2,629.78 
Ex. 6, p. 16 
2/7/20 
61.75 
- 
12.00 
- 
$3,036.92 
Ex. 6, p. 17 
2/21/20 
62.25 
- 
12.00 
- 
$2,710.06 
Ex. 6, p. 17 
3/6/20 
69.75 
3.25 
6.00 
$50.00 
$2,991.56 
Ex. 6, p. 17 
3/20/20 
67.25 
- 
8.00 
- 
$2,670.41 
Ex. 6, p. 18 
4/3/20 
61.25 
- 
12.00 
- 
$2,594.76 
Ex. 6, p. 18 
4/17/20 
50.25 
- 
24.00 
- 
$2,648.45 
Ex. 6, p. 18 
5/1/20* 
62.50 
- 
- 
$2,618.21 
Ex. 6, p. 19 
5/15/20** 
54.00 
- 
4.09 
- 
$2,897.77 
Ex. 6, p. 19 
5/29/20 
76.25 
- 
- 
- 
$3,348.09 
Ex. 6, p. 19 
6/12/20 
62.50 
- 
12.00 
- 
$2,659.68 
Ex. 6, p. 20 
6/26/20 
63.00 
- 
12.00 
- 
$2,630.79 
Ex. 6, p. 20 
7/10/20 
38.50 
10.84 
- 
$3,020.71 
Ex. 6, p. 20 
7/24/20 
61.75 
- 
8.01 
- 
$3,135.57 
Ex. 6, p. 21 
8/7/20 
63.50 
2.25 
9.02 
$100.00 
$3,540.32 
Ex. 6, p. 21 
8/21/20 
61.75 
- 
9.67 
- 
$2,968.21 
Ex. 6, p. 21 
*Laird was summoned and served 12.00 hours of jury duty, for which she received jury pay. 
**Laird was summoned and served 24.00 hours of jury duty, for which she received jury pay. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 13 
 
Laird testified that with mandatory overtime, she was often exhausted but she 
nonetheless agreed to work extra hours and earn the short-staffing bonus periodically. 
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 60–61) In the nine months leading up to the stipulated injury date, Laird 
earned the short-staffing bonus three times. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) In the 13 weeks prior to the 
stipulated injury date, Laird earned $100.00 in short-staffing bonus for working eight 
hours in addition to those Trinity required. (Ex. 6, pp. 15, 19–21) 
The parties stipulated that Laird contracted COVID-19 while working for Trinity. 
(Hr’g Rpt. § 2) They have also stipulated that the date of injury is August 7, 2020. (Hr’g 
Rpt. § 2) In the weeks leading up to the stipulated injury date, the evidence shows Laird 
earned $33.45 per hour and a shift differential on top of that. (Ex. 6, p. 15) She received 
$100.00 under short-staffing bonus during the 13 weeks prior to the stipulated injury 
date. (Ex. 6, p. 15) 
Initially, Laird felt fatigued with achiness and the sniffles. (Hr’g Tr. p. 22) When 
she lost her sense of taste and smell, she knew she likely had COVID-19 and went to 
the emergency room at Covenant, the Trinity hospital where she worked. (Hr’g Tr. p. 23) 
On her way to the ER, she notified the staffing department that she was going to the ER 
to be tested for COVID-19. (Hr’g Tr. p. 23) At the time, Laird’s symptoms were not bad 
enough to merit hospitalization so she returned home to convalesce. (Hr’g Tr. p. 23)  
Laird’s symptoms worsened and within a few days of her diagnosis, she was very 
short of breath, weak, and had a fever. (Hr’g Tr. p. 23) Her husband took her back to the 
ER at Covenant, where she was admitted for care. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 23, 25–26; Ex. JE3, p. 
22) Notes from subsequent appointments with Dr. Shaikh summarize Laird’s course of 
care thusly: 
[H]ospitalization MercyOne Waterloo Medical Center 08/31/20 through 
09/20/20, then trans[f]er to Mayo Clinic 09/20/20 through 11/10/20, for 
acute hypoxic respiratory failure secondary to COVID-19 with subsequent 
myopathy from prolonged ICU stay with ventilator usage, spontaneous 
right-side pneumothorax s/p chest tube, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation 
(requiring amiodarone), acute kidney injury, MRSA bacteremia secondary 
to central line infection, new eosinophilic pneumonia requiring prednisone 
taper, bilateral lower extremity DVTs while on rivaroxaban, and adjustment 
disorder with anxiety; other problems during the hospitalization included 
mild cognitive impairment and hypomagnesemia. 
(Ex. JE3, pp. 22, 27)  
 
Laird experienced persistent left upper extremity discomfort during her stay at the 
Mayo Clinic which prompted testing. (Ex. JE5, p. 90) The Mayo Clinic diagnosed Laird 
with left carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. JE5, p. 90) On February 15, 2021, Dr. Shaikh 
referred Laird to Richard Naylor, D.O., for consultation on carpal tunnel release surgery. 
(Ex. JE3, p. 37) Dr. Naylor performed carpal tunnel release surgery on April 8, 2021. 
(Ex. JE3, p. 46) On May 10, 2021, Dr. Naylor noted decreased grip strength in Laird’s 
left hand of 10 percent, found her to have reached maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) from the surgery, and released her to return to full-duty work. (Ex. JE3, p. 48) 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 14 
 
 
On April 23, 2021, Dr. Malicka-Rozek released Laird to return to work at Trinity, 
with instructions to gradually increase the number of hours per day and days per week 
she worked. (Ex. JE3, p. 47) The Mayo Clinic gave Laird a work restriction prohibiting 
her from working with COVID-19 patients. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29) The evidence shows it is more 
likely than not this restriction applies to directly caring for individuals with COVID-19 
who are contagious. Laird submitted forms to Jewell Jones, her immediate supervisor at 
Trinity, regarding the restriction and need for accommodation. (Ex. 1, p. 2) After Laird 
did so, Trinity accommodated Laird’s work restriction of not providing direct care to 
COVID-19 patients who were contagious.  
As of May 12, 2021, Dr. Naylor had lifted all work restrictions necessitated by her 
left carpal tunnel release surgery but Laird had not returned to full-duty work relative to 
the work restrictions necessitated by her bout with COVID-19. (Ex. JE3, p. 50) Laird 
was working 12-hour shifts without any discomfort or pain, but she did experience 
fatigue on occasion while doing so. (Ex. JE3, p. 50) She saw Dr. Malicka-Rozek that 
day to discuss medical release to return to work without accommodation. (Ex. JE3, p. 
50)  
Dr. Malicka-Rozek observed that Laird was “doing well” and “able to ambulate 
without any assistive device.” (Ex. JE3, p. 50) Dr. Malicka-Rozek noted that Laird was 
“not complaining of any discomfort or pain” at the time of the appointment. (Ex. JE3, p. 
50) At this point in time, Laird had good days and bad days with respect to pain and was 
not pain free in the time around the appointment even though May 12, 2021, was a 
good day. (Hr’g Tr. p. 77) 
Dr. Malicka-Rozek noted that Laird was scheduled to undergo a pulmonary 
function test by Dr. Mehta, her treating pulmonologist later that year, in September, 
which he would comment on and would contribute to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment caused by COVID-19. (Ex. JE3, pp. 50, 53) Laird informed Dr. Malicka-
Rozek that she wanted to return to full-duty work at Trinity. (Ex. JE3, p. 50)  
Dr. Malicka-Rozek opined that Laird had recovered from her COVID-19 infection 
and her general condition was improved. (Ex. JE3, p. 53) She believed that Laird was 
ready to return to work as a nurse without accommodation. (Ex. JE3, p. 53) Dr. Malicka-
Rozek opined that Laird’s “mentation is back to normal, motor function is back to 
normal, her endurance is not back to baseline yet, but she has reached maximum 
medical improvement in physical, mental and emotional areas. I will see her 1 more 
time with possible order for functional capacity evaluation.” (Ex. JE3, p. 53) Despite Dr. 
Malicka-Rozek leaving open the possibility of ordering a functional capacity exam 
(FCE), she issued to Laird a release to return to full duty immediately with no 
restrictions. (Ex. JE3, p. 55) 
Laird returned to full-duty work at Trinity after Dr. Malicka-Rozek released her to 
do so. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 77–78) She was able to perform the essential functions listed in the 
RN job description and recited above from that date through the end of her employment 
with Trinity. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 77–78) Laird self-accommodated when necessary. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
77–78) Her self-accommodations included making lists to help her overcome her 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 15 
 
memory issues. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 36–37) There is no indication in the record that Trinity took 
issue with Laird’s self-accommodations. In fact, the evidence establishes the opposite. 
Exhibit D contains multiple of Laird’s job reviews. When reviewing Exhibit D, the 
undersigned experienced initial confusion because the job reviews are not in 
chronological order. The August 15, 2022 review occurs first in Exhibit D, from pages 34 
through 43, even though it was second in time and the September 30, 2021 review 
occurs second in Exhibit D, from pages 44 through 54, even though it took place first in 
time. With this in mind, the undersigned considers Laird’s assertions regarding the 
contents of the job reviews during her hearing testimony and whether they generate a 
negative inference. 
 
During the hearing, defense counsel and Laird disagreed on whether Jones rated 
Laird at three out of five in a performance review. At one point, Laird testified, “There 
were a number of 5s, yes. There were 3s in there also.” (Hr’g Tr. p. 78) Laird also 
stated, “So I hadn’t been back to work but a few months.” (Hr’g Tr p. 83) The questions 
from defense counsel dealt with her August 15, 2022 review, not the one on September 
30, 2021, during which she received two ratings of three out of five and which occurred 
about three and one-half months after her release to work. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 83–85; Ex. D, 
pp. 34–54)  
The evidence shows that Laird confused the dates of the reviews during the 
hearing. Her testimony was accurate about the contents of her September 30, 2021 
review and inaccurate about her August 15, 2022 review. Her statement that she had 
only been back to work for a few months plainly establishes misunderstanding and 
readily allows one to identify the job review she was referencing. This shows that Laird’s 
misunderstanding during her hearing testimony was in good faith and she did not intend 
to deceive. The undersigned draws no negative inference about Laird’s credibility due to 
her misunderstanding. 
 
On September 30, 2021, Jones performed Laird’s first performance review after 
she returned to work from her bout with COVID-19. (Ex. D, pp. 44–54) Jones completed 
the review over the telephone. (Ex. D, p. 54) The first essential function on the PEP for 
this job review was, “Utilizes the nursing process (assessment, nursing diagnosis, 
planning, implementation, and evaluation).” (Ex. D, p. 45) Jones reviewed Laird’s 
performance of this essential function as follows: 
Kristen is an amazing nurse! She is conscientious, efficient and very 
attentive to her patients. Kristen completes all of her assessments and is 
able to critically think. She works well with the healthcare team. 
Kristen assumes team lead whenever she works. She is always fair in her 
assignments. She makes sure assignments are appropriate. It is certainly 
a pleasure to have her on our team. 
(Ex. D, p. 47) Using the PEP rating scale of one through five, Jones rated Laird’s 
performance of this essential job function at four out of five. (Ex. D, p. 47) 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 16 
 
The second essential function listed is, “Communicates and documents pertinent 
information.” (Ex. D, p. 48) Jones reviewed Laird on this function thusly: 
Kristen completes all of her documentation timely and accurately. Her 
reports are always clear and concise. She doesn’t leave any guesswork 
for the nurse coming on shift. Kristen does a nice job documenting her 
work at the point of care. She does not spend long hours trying to catch up 
her work. She is very efficient. 
Kristen communicates with a high level of professionalism and she will 
advocate for her team. 
Kristen scans her medications 82% of the time. The goal is 90%, continue 
to work toward that to prevent med errors from occurring.  
(Ex. D, p. 49) Jones rated Laird’s performance of this function at four out of five. (Ex. D, 
p. 49) 
 
The third and final essential RN function on the PPR is, “Educates 
patients/clients and families.” (Ex. D, p. 50) Jones assessed Laird’s performance in this 
area as follows: 
Kristen does a great job documenting her patient education. She is able to 
tailor their education to their learning style. She does a great job at making 
sure her patients understand the plan of care. She keeps them informed of 
all test, procedures and any changes made to the care plan. She utilizes 
her resources well and is very resourceful to her co-workers. She is the 
“go to” person on the unit for troubleshoot and assessing circumstances 
that may arise. 
(Ex. D, p. 50) Jones rated Laird’s performance four out of five. (Ex. D, p. 50) 
Next on the PPR for review is, “Values-based behaviors,” with each being rated 
on a scale from one to five. (Ex. D, p. 52) Jones rated Laird at five out of five in integrity, 
compassion, excellence, and stewardship. (Ex. D, p. 52) She rated Jones at four out of 
five in reverence. (Ex. D, p. 52) In justice and commitment to the poor, Jones rated 
Laird three out of five. (Ex. D, p. 52) Her ratings averaged out to 4.29 out of five. (Ex. D, 
p. 52)  
Jones included the following under, “Illustrations of Behaviors Demonstrated”: 
Kristen had a remarkable year! She is a survivor! It is such a blessing and 
honor to have her as a continued part of our team. Kristen doesn’t have 
any attendances issues over the last year. She is always on time and 
prepared for duty. She [is] certainly a contributor to the success of our 
unit. She has a high level of initiative and she is always looking for ways to 
work toward excellence both personal and professionally. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 17 
 
Kristen is a great nurse! Great teamplayer and always willing to go the 
extra mile. Thank you Kristen! 
(Ex. D, p. 52) 
 
Under “Performance Factors,” Jones followed the weighting system on PPR for 
Laird’s ratings. (Ex. D, p. 53) Doing so resulted in a final rating of 4.0. (Ex. D, p. 53) This 
is the lowest possible rating for “Exceeds Expectations, which is the second highest 
level of rating and spans from 4.0 to 4.5. (Ex. D, p. 54) 
The next review of Laird’s job performance by Jones is dated August 15, 2022. 
(Ex. D, pp. 34–43) The first essential function chosen by Jones as part of the PEP was, 
“Utilizes the nursing process (assessment, nursing diagnosis, planning, implementation, 
and evaluation).” (Ex. D, pp. 35–36) Jones reviewed Laird’s performance as follows: 
Kristen does an amazing job! She shows so much compassion for her 
patients. It is clear that she is doing what she was called to do. She is 
conscientious, efficient and very attentive to her patients. Her assignments 
are always complete[d]. She has great critical thinking skills and her peers 
often rely on her level of knowledge. Although we don’t have a charge 
nurse on our unit Kristen does a nice job taking charge and leading the 
team. She works well with the healthcare team and they respect her 
decision making skills. She is always fair in her assignments. She makes 
sure assignments are appropriate. It is certainly a pleasure to have her on 
our team. 
(Ex. D, p. 37) Jones rated Laird at five out of five, with one the lowest possible rating on 
the PPR Form and five the highest, with respect to this essential job function. (Ex. D, p. 
37) 
 
The second essential function of the RN job in Laird’s PEP was, “Communicates 
and documents pertinent information.” (Ex. D, p. 38) She reviewed Laird’s performance 
of this essential function as follows: 
Kristen completes all of her documentation timely and accurately. Her 
reports are always clear and concise. She doesn’t leave any guesswork 
for the nurse coming on shift. Kristen does a nice job documenting her 
work at the point of care. She does not spend long hours trying to catch up 
[on] her work. She is very efficient. 
Kristen communicates with a high level of professionalism and she will 
advocate for her team. 
(Ex. D, p. 39) Jones rated Laird’s performance of this essential function during the 
review period at four out of five. (Ex. D, p. 39) 
 
The third and final essential function Jones identified for Laird’s PEP was, 
“Educates patients/clients and families.” (Ex. D, p. 39) She reviewed her performance of 
this function thusly: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 18 
 
Kristen does a great job documenting her patient education. She is able to 
tailor their education to their learning style. She does a great job at making 
sure her patients understand the plan of care. She keeps them informed of 
all test [sic], procedures and any changes made to the care plan. She 
utilizes her resources well and is very resourceful to her co-workers. She 
is the “go to” person on the unit for troubleshooting and assessing 
circumstances that may arise. 
(Ex. D, p. 40) Jones rated Laird at four out of five for this essential function. (Ex. D, p. 
40) 
The next section of the PPR Form is, “Values-based behaviors.” (Ex. D, p. 41) 
Jones rated Laird at five out of five in the areas of integrity, compassion, excellence, 
justice, and stewardship. (Ex. D, p. 41) She rated her at four out of five in commitment 
to the poor and reverence. (Ex. D, p. 41) Jones wrote the following under the section, 
“Illustrations of Behaviors Demonstrated”: 
Kristen is a wonderful nurse[.] It is such a blessing and honor to have her 
as a continued part of our team. Kristen doesn’t have any attendance 
issues over the last year. She is always on time and prepared for duty. 
She [is] certainly a contributor to the success of our unit. She has a high 
level of initiative and she is always looking for ways to work toward 
excellence both personal[ly] and professionally. 
Kristen is a great nurse! Great team[ ]player and always willing to go the 
extra mile. Thank you Kristen! 
(Ex. D, p. 41) 
 
Jones calculated Laird’s rating using the performance factors on the PPR Form. 
(Ex. D, p. 42) Laird received a final total rating of 4.3 out of 5.0. (Ex. D, p. 42) The 
highest overall rating equivalent category is “Role Model,” at between 4.6 and 5.0. (Ex. 
D, p. 42) The second highest is “Exceeds Expectations,” between 4.0 and 4.5. (Ex. D, p. 
42) Laird’s rating placed her in the second highest category of “Exceeds Expectations.” 
(Ex. D, p. 42)  
 
The completed PPR form shows that Jones signed it on August 15, 2022. (Ex. D, 
p. 43) Laird did not sign it; instead, Jones wrote the note, “Given via telephone,” on her 
signature line with the date filled in as August 15, 2022. (Ex. D, p. 43) Thus, it is more 
likely than not Jones read her reviews and ratings of Laird’s performance to her over the 
telephone.  
 
The PPR Form contains no reference to the items listed in the RN job description 
under the heading “Physical and Mental Requirements and Working Conditions” and 
quoted above. Jones did not discuss them when completing the PPR Form for Laird’s 
August 15, 2022 performance review under the PEP. Therefore, the weight of the 
evidence establishes it is more likely than not that Laird’s August 15, 2022 review did 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 19 
 
not consider those components of the RN job description listed under the heading 
“Physical and Mental Requirements and Working Conditions.” 
The question of whether Laird was able to perform the essential functions listed 
in the RN job description with informal accommodations is a different one from whether 
she met the requirements listed in the job description under the heading “Physical and 
Mental Requirements and Working Conditions” and quoted above. There is no dispute 
between the parties about the fact that Trinity granted Laird an accommodation with 
respect to Requirement No. 4–performing duties that may involve exposure to infectious 
or communicable disease–by authorizing her to not provide care to patients with 
COVID-19. Laird credibly gave unrefuted hearing testimony that her coworkers stepped 
in to perform more physically demanding work duties such as lifting patients because 
they knew about the physical limitations COVID-19 had caused her. The evidence 
shows it is more likely than not Trinity formally accommodated Laird’s restriction on 
working with COVID-19 patients and her coworkers effectively provided her with an 
informal accommodation by handling heavier job duties such as lifting so she would not 
have to perform them, which allowed her to perform the essential functions of the RN 
job well. 
On January 25, 2022, Laird established care with Angela Ames, A.R.N.P., at 
Covenant Clinic in Evansdale, Iowa, which is part of the MercyOne network operated by 
Trinity. (Ex. JE6, p. 95) During this visit, Laird reported mental health symptoms that 
included, “difficulty concentrating, fatigue, psychomotor agitation and racing thoughts.” 
(Ex. JE6, p. 96) Ames further noted, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) “from 
severe Covid related illnesses: sweating, palpitations, fast breathing, nausea, light-
headedness, decreased concentration, easily agitated and angered, persistent fear.” 
(Ex. JE6, p. 96)  
On examination, Ames observed Laird did not perceive auditory or visual 
hallucinations. (Ex. JE6, p. 100) Her mood was anxious, her affect was tearful, and her 
speech was rapid and pressured. (Ex. JE6, p. 100) Ames diagnosed Laird with a mood 
disorder and PTSD. (Ex. JE6, p. 102) She opined Laird’s anxiety, mood disorder, and 
PTSD was “[w]ell controlled with relaxation techniques and homeopathic interventions” 
even though, “She is an RN in the hospital, and her floor often gets Covid Pos[itive] 
Patients. This is a huge trigger for her, so I recommend she find a different job or 
request transfer to a different unit.” (Ex. JE6, p. 105) 
Laird sought mental health care at JC Christian Counseling & Life Coaching LLC, 
with John Church, LMHC. (Ex. JE10; Ex. JE13, p. 172) Laird indicated on the 
questionnaire that in the past six months she had trouble concentrating, difficulty 
sleeping, low motivation, isolation from others, fatigue/low energy, low self-esteem, 
depressed mood, tearful or crying spells, anxiety, fear, and panic. (Ex. JE10, pp. 141–
42; Ex. JE13, p. 172) She also reported headaches, shortness of breath, irritable bowel, 
and chronic pain. (Ex. JE10, pp. 141–42; Ex. JE13, p. 172) Laird attributed the majority 
of her complaints to the bout with COVID-19 that nearly killed her and the care it 
necessitated. (Ex. JE10, pp. 141–42; Ex. JE13, p. 172) After Laird’s initial session with 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 20 
 
Dr. Church, he assigned her homework in the form of a trauma timeline and a PCL-5 
PTSD Checklist. (Ex. JE10, p. 142) 
On November 2, 2023, Laird had a counseling session with Dr. Church. (Ex. 
JE10, p. 138) She reported “getting through the trauma timeline homework assignment, 
but it was harder than she expected. Once she started writing the memories down she 
realized how intense some of them were.” (Ex. JE10, p. 138)  
Laird recounted her bout with COVID-19, how she sobbed on her way to the ER 
after the onset of her symptoms and ultimately wound up stuck in her bathtub because 
she was physically unable to get up and out of it due to her symptoms. (Ex. JE10, p. 
138) Laird recalled the noises and sounds of the hospital during her treatment. (Ex. 
JE10, p. 138) At one point, Laird coughed so hard she tore a hole in her lung and 
required a chest tube; after which, she had fear of removal of the tube. (Ex. JE10, p. 
139)  
Laird experienced hallucinations that made her scared of what her mind was 
thinking. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) She recounted a hallucination in which she believed 
physicians were terrorists with machine guns after hearing metal carts banging together 
that sounded similar to gun shots. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) The experience caused Laird to 
tremble in fear to such a degree that she nearly fell out of her chair. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) 
Laird also shared that COVID-19 left her so weak she could not raise her arm to 
wave. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) She recounted an incident in which another patient was trying 
to get loose and she felt helpless because was unable to take action if she found herself 
in danger due to her weakness. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) Laird remembered having six tubes 
in her, being unable to lift her hand because of it, and waking up in the middle of the 
night unable to breathe well. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) 
After Laird’s conditions relating to COVID-19 resolved such that she was 
discharged from the hospital and returned to work, she explained that she continued to 
have issues with the whistles and beeps of ventilators due to the time she spent on one 
in the ICU. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) She also had issues with Code Blues. (Ex. JE10, p. 139) 
Guilt over not being able to help her peers care for COVID-19 patients ate her alive. 
(Ex. JE10, p. 139) 
Dr. Church explained eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) 
therapy to Laird. (Ex. JE10, p. 140) He noted that she “was able to process through her 
complete trauma timeline in order to complete the history phase of EMDR and establish 
potential targets for the Reprocessing phase.” (Ex. JE10, p. 140) Dr. Church planned to 
“begin the Safe Place installment and Reprocessing phase next session” with the 
objective to “reduce emotional distress related to traumatic thoughts, feelings, and 
images.” (Ex. JE10, p. 140) 
After their first session, Dr. Church diagnosed Laird with post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) based on the following observations: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 21 
 
 
Has been exposed to a traumatic event involving actual or perceived 
threat of death or serious injury. 
 
Experiences disturbing and persistent thoughts, images, and/or 
perceptions of the traumatic event. 
 
Describes a reliving of the event, particularly through dissociative 
flashbacks. 
 
Displays significant psychological and/or physiological distress resulting 
from internal and external clues that are reminiscent of the traumatic 
event. 
 
Intentionally avoids activities, places, people, or objects (e.g., up-armored 
vehicles) that evoke memories of the event. 
 
Experiences disturbances in sleep. 
 
Reports difficulty concentrating as well as feelings of guilt. 
 
Reports hypervigilance. 
 
Symptoms present more than one month. 
 
Impairment in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning. 
 (Ex. JE10, p. 137)  
Laird underwent one session of EMDR therapy. (Ex. JE10, pp. 144–47) EMDR 
therapy negatively affected Laird’s sleep, so she requested that she discontinue it. (Ex. 
JE10, p. 148) Dr. Church discharged her from care on December 2, 2025. (Ex. JE10, 
pp. 144–49) At hearing, Laird testified that the care worsened her condition. (Hr’g Tr. 
pp. 40–42) The worsening of her conditioning undermined her trust in the field, so she 
has not sought care since. (Hr’g Tr. p. 42) 
Laird returned to see Ames at the Covenant Clinic in Evansdale on November 9, 
2023. (Ex. JE6, p. 107) Ames noted that Laird denied anhedonia, depressed mood, 
feelings of worthlessness/guilt, hopelessness, recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal 
attempt, suicidal thoughts with specific plan and suicidal thoughts without a plan. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 107)  She also observed PTSD from her bout with COVID-19-related illness with 
ongoing symptoms that include sweating, palpitations, fast breathing, nausea, 
dizziness, light-headedness, decreased concentration, easily agitated and angered, and 
persistent fear. (Ex. JE6, p. 107) Ames assessed Laird’s anxiety, mood disorder, and 
PTSD again as “Well controlled with relaxation techniques and homeopathic 
interventions” and that she was seeing a counselor for her conditions. (Ex. JE6, p. 112) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Laird to undergo an IME with Kunal Patra, M.D., 
a board-certified psychiatrist, on April 3, 2024. (Ex. JE13, pp. 165–66) The IME included 
a records review, in-person history with Laird and her husband, and in-person 
evaluation, which Dr. Patra performed on April 3, 2024. (Ex. JE13, pp. 165–66) Laird 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 22 
 
also completed a Patient Health Questionnaire - 9 item scale (PHQ-9), Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder - 7 item scale (GAD-7), PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5), Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Structured Interview of Reported Symptoms, 2nd 
Edition (SIRS-2), and Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI). (Ex. JE13, pp. 166, 181–
85) Based on the information Dr. Patra gathered from the IME process, he authored an 
IME report dated August 21, 2024. (Ex. JE13) 
Dr. Patra diagnoses Laird with chronic PTSD. (Ex. JE13, p. 185) He explains the 
causation mechanism thusly: 
Survivors of critical illness are at risk of experiencing significant physical, 
cognitive, and psychological issues after discharge. New or worsening 
impairment in physical, cognitive, or mental health status following 
treatment in an intensive care unit (ICU) is known as post-intensive care 
syndrome (PICS). The psychopathological components of PICS are 
estimated to occur in up to a third of survivors of ICU treatment. The major 
psychological conditions described are anxiety, depression, and post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Symptoms of anxiety following critical 
illness occur in 25–46% of patients in the 3–14 months following discharge 
from an ICU. Post-ICU anxiety is associated with psychiatric symptoms, 
memories, and delusions. Depressive symptoms occur in around 29% of 
survivors at 3, 6, and 12 months post-ICU discharge. Depressive illness 
following intensive care is associated with symptoms of psychological 
distress (anxiety, stress, and anger). A recent meta-analysis (2015) 
estimated PTSD symptom prevalence at 17–34% at 12 months post-ICU 
discharge (Hatch, R., Young, D., et al. (2018). Anxiety, Depression and 
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder after critical illness: A UK-wide 
prospective cohort study. Critical Care, 22).  
Robert Hales, MD, Stuart Yudofsky, MD, Laura Weiss Roberts, MD. 
Textbook of Psychiatry. Sixth Edition. The American Psychiatric 
Publishing. 2014 supports that “many acute medical experiences qualify, 
such as those involving sudden or catastrophic events. Increasing data 
suggest that PTSD symptoms affect many medical and surgical patients.” 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition, 
American Psychiatric Publishing 2013 supports that severe medical 
illnesses can qualify as traumatic events. Perceived life threat and 
personal injury increase risk of PTSD.”  
Psychology of trauma and PTSD: Mowrer’s 2-factor theory of classical and 
operant conditioning helps explain the onset and maintenance of 
posttraumatic symptoms. Classical Conditioning explains the fear and 
distress in survivors of trauma, and Operant Conditioning explains the 
development and persistence of PTSD-related avoidance symptoms and 
fear. Interpreted within the framework of Pavlovian conditioning, the 
traumatic event serves as the unconditioned stimulus, the emotional 
response to it serves as the unconditioned response, trauma-related cues 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 23 
 
serve as conditioned stimuli, and the physiological reactions serve as 
conditioned responses (Hales RE, et al: Trauma and Stressor-Related 
Disorders. Textbook of Psychiatry. The American Psychiatric Publishing. 
6th Edition 2014; 455-491).   
(Ex. JE13, pp. 189–90 (italics in original)) 
Dr. Church diagnosed Laird with PTSD. Ames did the same. Both identified its 
cause as the COVID-19 she contracted while working for Trinity and the treatment 
necessitated by the virus. Dr. Patra’s opinion is in lockstep with theirs, accompanied by 
more in-depth reasoning underpinning it. Further reinforcing the conclusion that Laird’s 
PTSD is work related is her credible testimony of her symptoms following her discharge 
from hospital care necessitated by her work-related COVID-19. The overwhelming 
weight of the evidence establishes that Laird’s PTSD is sequela to the COVID-19 she 
contracted while working for Trinity. 
Dr. Patra also addresses Laird’s symptoms for depression and anxiety in his IME 
report: 
At the time of her evaluation on April 3, 2024, Ms. Laird reported/endorsed 
symptoms suggestive of major depressive disorder, such as a pervasive 
sense of sadness and depression, loss of interest or inability to obtain 
pleasure in doing things, changes in sleep pattern, fatigue, appetite 
disturbances, feelings of guilt and low self-esteem, and cognitive 
inefficiencies. Ms. Laird’s husband corroborated some of these symptoms. 
Ms. Laird scored 9 on the PHQ-9, indicating the presence of mild clinical 
depression over the late 2022 to early 2023 period. On the same PHQ-9 
that screens for major depressive disorder and mood-related symptoms, 
when asked to rate her mood over the past six months, Ms. Laird scored 
6, indicating the persistence of clinical depression. Ms. Laird scored 7 on 
GAD-7 for the period from late 2022 to early 2023, indicating the presence 
of mild generalized anxiety. On the same GAD-7 that screens for anxiety 
and related symptoms, when asked to rate her overall anxiety over the 
past six months, Ms. Laird scored 5 on the GAD-7, indicating the 
persistence of generalized anxiety. 
The PAI clinical profile revealed that Ms. Laird reports difficulties 
consistent with depressive symptomatology. In particular, she appears to 
have experienced a change in physical functioning in a manner often 
associated with depression, including sleep disturbances, decreased 
energy level, reduced sexual interest, changes in appetite and weight, and 
psychomotor slowing. 
(Ex. JE10, p. 190) Dr. Patra considers the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) for Major Depressive Episode to diagnose Laird based 
on her symptoms. (Ex. JE10, p. 191) He further elaborates: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 24 
 
The psychological underpinning for the respondent’s clinical depression 
and anxiety in this case, is understood from her sense of loss in several 
areas of her life from contracting COVID-19 on August 28, 2020, 
subsequent severe medical complications, fear and anxiety of going 
through a near-death experience, anxiety of being in the ICU, and 
continued sequelae even to this date, including feelings of helplessness 
and loss of control, inability to function in so many areas of her life the way 
she used to do before the severe medical illness, lifestyle limitations from 
the reported pulmonary difficulties, anger at having to go through the 
entire process, guilt about not sharing her coworkers’ burden during the 
COVID pandemic, guilt over putting her family through emotional difficulty, 
inability to return to work for several months, sense of failure and loss of 
independence from her physical and emotional symptoms, fear of dying 
from contracting Covid-19, anxiety about being back at work at MercyOne 
Medical Center, etc.   
The clinical literature in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders Fifth Edition, American Psychiatric Publishing 2013 also states, 
“If the symptom response pattern to the extreme stressor meets criteria for 
another mental disorder, these diagnoses should be given, in addition to, 
PTSD.” Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth 
Edition, American Psychiatric Publishing 2013 states, “Individuals with 
PTSD are 80% more likely than those without PTSD to have symptoms 
that meet diagnostic criteria for at least one other mental disorder, e.g., 
depressive, anxiety, or substance use disorders.”  
(Ex. JE10, pp. 191–92 (italics in original)) 
Dr. Patra utilizes three criteria to assess whether Laird’s PTSD and major 
depressive disorder are sequela to her work-related COVID-19. (Ex. JE10, pp. 192–93) 
He finds that there exists a temporal relationship between the exposure and the 
outcome, which supports a finding of causation. (Ex. JE10, p. 192) Dr. Patra also 
determines that there exists a biologically plausible link between the exposure and the 
outcome. (Ex. JE10, p. 193) Lastly, he determines that that there does not exist a more 
likely or probable alternative explanation for Laird’s symptoms. (Ex. JE10, p. 193) 
Dr. Patra had a thorough and accurate understanding of Laird’s medical history 
and her symptomology at the time he opined on causation. The reasoning behind his 
causation opinion is persuasive. The undersigned finds that it is more likely than not 
Laird’s PTSD and major depressive disorder are sequelae to her work-related COVID-
19. 
Dr. Patra’s opinion on whether Laird has reached MMI with respect to her PTSD 
or major depressive disorder, however, is unavailing. In contrast to his causation 
opinion, which he supports with thorough and persuasive reasoning, he makes a mere 
conclusory assertion on the question of MMI. And this assertion is undermined by the 
available evidence on Laird’s mental health symptoms and care.  

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 25 
 
The weight of the evidence establishes Laird sought care with Dr. Church. The 
EMDR worsened her symptoms such that she requested her release from care. It also 
undermined her trust of the psychiatry field such that she had not sought additional care 
since. Dr. Patra notes as much in his opinion on future care: 
Ms. Laird is currently not on any psychiatric medications and is hesitant to 
get on one even after her primary care provider, Angela Ames, ARNP, at 
Covenant Clinic Evansdale, had recommended a trial. Ms. Laird attempted 
psychotherapy for her PTSD, clinical depression, and anxiety but didn’t 
have a good experience and isn’t interested in returning to one. At this 
point, Ms. Laird is working on her psychiatric issues arising from her 
August 28, 2020 work injury, using a holistic approach. She has good 
support at home with her husband, and that helps. Considering that Ms. 
Laird has developed permanent psychiatric sequelae from the permanent 
physical disability she experienced from the August 28, 2020 work injury, I 
recommend that should she change her mind about seeking treatment 
and/or her August 28, 2020 work injury-related psychiatric issues 
aggravate, including but not limited to her PTSD, depression, panic 
feelings, sleep disturbances, cognitive inefficiencies, etc., provisions be 
made to allow Ms. Laird to return to psychotherapy and/or seek 
consultation with a board-certified psychiatrist in the future for evaluation 
of medication and non-medication biological treatment modalities, such as 
Ketamine infusions, rTMS, etc.   
(Ex. JE10, p. 194)  
Thus, the evidence shows it is more likely than not that Laird may be able to 
reduce her symptomology with care by a board-certified psychiatrist. Such care would 
not be maintenance care as it has the potential to improve her mental health by 
reducing her symptoms. And that improvement could materially reduce any permanent 
functional impairment from her conditions. As a result, the question of what, if any, 
permanent impairment or disability has resulted from Laird’s PTSD or major depressive 
disorder is not ripe for determination at this time. Therefore, the undersigned does not 
consider Dr. Patra’s permanent impairment rating using the Second Edition of the 
Guides under Garcia v. Smithfield Foods, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner No. 1657969.01, 2022 WL 17170655, *8–*15 (App., Oct. 28, 2022).  
Defense counsel arranged for Laird to undergo a defense medical examination 
(DME) under Iowa Code section 85.39(1) with Robert Broghammer, M.D., on December 
5, 2022. (Ex. JE7, p. 114) The DME included the review of approximately 1,800 pages 
of medical records, an in-person examination, and a detailed history with Laird. (Ex. 
JE7, p. 116) Dr. Broghammer then authored a report that included answers to questions 
posed by defense counsel. (Ex. JE7, pp. 125–28) 
Dr. Broghammer opines within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that 
Laird contracted COVID-19 while at work in the employ of Trinity. (Ex. JE7, p. 125) 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 26 
 
However, he also opined on whether specific health conditions related to Laird’s work 
as follows: 
First, permanent and partial impairment, we need to know which diseases 
are reasonably related to Ms. Laird’s COVID-19 infection. In my medical 
opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, Ms. Laird’s 
obstructive sleep apnea is unrelated to her COVID-19 infection and 
instead due to personal pre-existing factors including history of super 
morbid obesity. 
In my medical opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, Ms. 
Laird’s carpal tunnel syndrome is also not related to her COVID-19 
infection and is more likely than not related to her super morbid obesity as 
her female gender and advancing age. 
In my medical opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, the 
worker’s restrictive lung disease is most likely related to her COVID-19 
infection. As you are likely aware many consider COVID-19 to be a 
respiratory illness. While there is truth that COVID has significant effects 
on the lungs, it can affect other areas of the body as well with 
inflammation and swelling with lungs appear to be the primary site of 
image as well as the primary cause of death. 
(Ex. JE7, pp. 125-126) He further states, “Ms. Laird’s need for [a] C-PAP machine is 
due to personal and pre-existing factors including super morbid obesity.” (Ex. JE7, p. 
128) 
Dr. Broghammer opines Laird reached MMI on May 12, 2021, when Dr. Malicka-
Rozek released her to return to work without restrictions. (Ex. JE7, p. 125) On the 
question of permanency, Dr. Broghammer used the Fifth Edition of the American 
Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides) to 
opine on Laird’s permanent impairment for multiple conditions. 
Chapter 5 of the Guides “provides criteria for evaluating permanent impairment of 
the respiratory system as it affects overall lung function and the ability to perform the 
activities of daily living.” Guides, p. 87. Dr. Broghammer references Chapter 5 of the 
Guides when opining on the impairment caused by Laird’s restrictive lung disease. (Ex. 
JE7, p. 126) Section 5.4d, “Forced Expiratory Maneuvers (Simple Spirometry),” states: 
Forced expiratory maneuver measurements are made from at least three 
acceptable spirometry tracings that demonstrate uniformity pertaining to 
both the expiratory flow pattern and concordance of at least two of the test 
results within 5% of each other. Measurements include the following: 
forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in the first second 
(FEV1), and the ratio of these measurements (FEV 1/FVC). Use the tracings 
with the highest FVC and FEV1 to calculate the FEV1/FVC ratio, even if 
these measurements occur on different efforts. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 27 
 
Guides, § 5.4d, p. 93. 
Section 5.10 of the Guides, “Permanent Impairment Due to Respiratory 
Disorders,” provides in pertinent part: 
Table 5-12 lists criteria for estimating the permanent impairment rating 
due to respiratory disorders, using pulmonary function and exercise test 
results. Perform spirometry and DCO on each person being evaluated. 
VO2max may provide additional information in selected individuals when 
indicated. Determine the predicted values for FVC, FEV 1, and DCO, using 
Tables 5-2a through 5-7a, and calculate the percent predicted 
(observed/predicted values). Determine the lower limit of normal for FVC, 
FEV1, and DCO using Tables 5-2b through 5-7b. The person must meet all 
of the listed criteria except for VO2max in order to be considered 
nonimpaired. At least one of the listed criteria must be fulfilled to place an 
individual in any class with an impairment rating. 
Guides, § 5.10, p. 107. 
Table 5.12 has four classes of impairment based on an individual’s pulmonary 
function test results. Guides, p. 107. To fall under Class 2, an individual must rate 
greater than 60 percent of predicted and less than the lower limit of normal on either 
FVC, FEV1, or DCO, or have a VO2max that meets criteria not implicated in this case. See 
Guides, Table 5-12, p. 107. In Dr. Broghammer’s DME report, he opines Laird fits the 
Class 2 criteria because: 
 
Laird’s most recent pulmonary function test on April 1, 2022, showed she 
had a FVC of 2.39 compared to a predicted FVC of 3.24, which equals 73 
percent of predicted value and under Table 5-3a, her FVC is less than the 
predicted normal; and 
 
According to Dr. Mehta’s clinical note from April 2022, Laird’s FEV 1 is less 
than the predicted lower limit of normal under Table 5-4b. (Ex. JE7, p. 126) 
In Dr. Broghammer’s DME report, he evaluates the permanent impairment 
caused by Laird’s restrictive lung disease as follows: 
Given that Ms. Laird has returned to normal occupational activities and is 
unrestricted, I would assign an impairment at the lower end of this and 
assign a 10% whole person impairment. In addition, it is also highly likely 
that Ms. Laird’s super morbid obesity has contributed to the restrictive lung 
disease as well. However, the contribution of this is unknown and 
therefore, I would stand by the 10% whole person impairment. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 126) He does not discuss any activities of daily living relative to this 
impairment rating. (Ex. JE7, p. 126) 
Dr. Broghammer then references Chapter 3 of the Guides, “The Cardiovascular 
System: Heart and Aorta,” to rate Laird’s arrhythmia with rapid ventricular response. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 28 
 
(Ex. JE7, p. 127) He cites to Table 3-11, “Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due 
to Arrhythmias,” in Section 3.7, "Arrhythmias," when concluding that Laird qualifies 
under the criteria for Class 2. (Ex. JE7, p. 127) The Class 2 criteria are “[a]symptomatic 
during ordinary activities and a cardiac arrhythmia is documented by ECG, or has had 
an isolated syncopal episode” in combination with either “moderate dietary adjustment, 
use of drugs, or an artificial pacemaker required to prevent symptoms related to the 
arrhythmia,” arrhythmia persists and there is organic heart disease,” or “has recovered 
from surgery or a catheter procedure to correct arrhythmia or implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator placement to treat arrhythmia and meets above criteria for impairment.” 
Guides, Table 3-11, p. 56.  
Dr. Broghammer states in his DME report that Laird qualifies for Class 2 under 
Table 3-11 because she “is asymptomatic during ordinary activities and someone that 
requires either moderate dietary adjustment or the use of drugs or artificial pacemaker 
to prevent symptoms. Given that she is using metoprolol, I would assign an additional 
10% impairment of the whole person for her arrhythmia.” (Ex. JE7, p. 127) Dr. 
Broghammer did not discuss the guidance found in the comment for Example 3-45 in 
the Guides, stating, “If medications needed to maintain ventricular response, then 
impairment estimate slightly higher.” Guides, Example 3-45, p. 57. 
Dr. Broghammer next addresses Laird’s lower extremity swelling for which she is 
prescribed Lasix. (Ex. JE3, p. 127) He references Chapter 4, “The Cardiovascular 
System: Systemic and Pulmonary Arteries.” (Ex. JE3, p. 127) Dr. Broghammer opines 
that “Laird would most clearly be rated under section 4.3 titled ‘Vascular Diseases 
Affecting the Extremities.’” (Ex. JE3, p. 127) He then uses Table 4-5, “Criteria for Rating 
Permanent Impairment of the Lower Extremity Due to Peripheral Vascular Disease,” on 
page 76 of the Guides. (Ex. JE3, p. 127) Using Table 4-5, Dr. Broghammer finds Laird 
“most clearly falls into class 1, which is a 0–9% impairment of the lower extremity” 
because her prescription for Lasix on an as-needed basis suggests transient edema. 
(Ex. JE3, p. 127) He rates Laird as having a nine percent permanent impairment of 
each lower extremity due to her swelling. (Ex. JE3, p. 127)  
Dr. Broghammer then uses the Guides to combine the ratings of Laird’s 
conditions. He first converts each of the lower extremity impairment ratings of nine 
percent to four percent of the whole body using Table 17-3, “Whole Person Impairment 
Values Calculated for the Lower Extremity Impairment,” on page 527 of the Guides. (Ex. 
JE3, p. 127) He then uses the combined values table on pages 604 and 605 of the 
Guides: 
Taking 10% for the pulmonary system combined with 10% for the 
cardiovascular system reveals a 19% whole person impairment, 19% 
combined with 4% for the right lower extremity yields a 22% whole person 
impairment, 22% combined with 4% for the left lower extremity yields a 
25% whole person impairment. Ms. Laird’s final impairment rating would 
then be 25% to the whole person. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 127) 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 29 
 
 
On the question of reasonable and necessary medical care due to Laird’s bout 
with COVID-19, Dr. Broghammer opines that she will “need metoprolol for her atrial 
fibrillation with rapid ventricular response,” follow-up with Dr. Mehta as needed, and 
Lasix and potassium for her intermittent lower extremity swelling. (Ex. JE7, p. 128) Dr. 
Broghammer further states that Laird does not need permanent work restrictions 
relating to physical activity. (Ex. EJ7, p. 128) However, he does agree with the Mayo 
Clinic that she “should be restricted from working with any patients with COVID-19 
infection” due to the risk of potential sequelae if she were to contract the virus again. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 128) 
Laird testified that Trinity triggered her concern with an email to her and some 
coworkers in her unit identifying her as an employee who needed to report to employee 
health to get fitted for N95 masks, which were used to help mitigate exposure to 
COVID-19 patients while treating them. (Hr’g Tr. p. 48) After reading the email Trinity 
sent about N95 masks, Laird asked Jones, her supervisor, about the status of her 
accommodation. (Hr’g Tr. p. 48) Jones affirmed that she submitted the paperwork for 
the accommodation in accordance with Trinity procedures and that she would not 
expect Laird to provide care to COVID-19 patients. (Hr’g Tr. p. 48) Nonetheless, Jones 
also shared that she believed Trinity would not continue to honor Laird’s 
accommodation because the organization wanted all employees to get fitted for N95 
masks. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 48–49) 
Trinity had offered Laird a job on the acute rehab floor that she had accepted. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 49) Based on Laird’s experience working at Trinity, she knew that staffing 
assignments were based on staff-to-patient ratios. (Hr’g Tr. p. 49) If the staff-to-patient 
ratio in the acute rehab floor was too high, Trinity would reassign her to a floating 
rotation to help other units. (Hr’g Tr. p. 49) Such an assignment would place her back 
on the front lines of the COVID-19 pandemic, directly treating contagious COVID-19 
patients against the directive of her treating physicians at the Mayo Clinic. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
49)  
Trinity points out in its post-hearing brief that Laird “made no apparent effort to 
contact human resource[s]” personnel to determine if the email instructing her to report 
for N95 mask-fitting and Jones’s statement meant that Trinity had decided to no longer 
honor her accommodation exempting her from treating COVID-19 patients. But the 
evidence shows Laird first obtained Trinity approval of the accommodation at issue after 
she initiated the interactive process under the federal Americans With Disabilities Act 
(ADA) and Iowa Civil Rights Act (ICRA) by submitting paperwork to Jones, her 
supervisor. This fact establishes it is more likely than not that, like many employers in 
the undersigned’s experience, Trinity has designed its management structure and 
human resources procedures in concert so that direct supervisors are conduits for the 
employees who directly report to them on human resources matters such as reasonable 
accommodations. Since Laird went through Jones to obtain approval from Trinity of the 
accommodation exempting her from treating COVID-19 patients, it was reasonable for 
her to rely on Jones’s word with respect to whether Trinity would continue to honor it—
especially after Trinity sent Laird an email directing her to report for N95 mask fitting. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 30 
 
Laird’s demeanor during this testimony was credible. But the credibility of Laird’s 
testimony is based on more than first-hand observation of her demeanor during the 
hearing. In Laird’s answers to interrogatories, she identified her belief that Trinity 
intended to cease honoring her accommodation of not treating COVID-19 patients in her 
answers to interrogatories as a motivating factor in her decision to terminate her 
employment relationship with Trinity. (Ex. 1, pp. 2–4) Moreover, the evidence shows 
Trinity investigated during the litigation of this case Laird’s account of the events 
surrounding the Trinity email directing her to get fitted for an N95 mask and her 
subsequent discussion with Jones. (Ex. 4, p. 12) Despite Trinity’s knowledge of Laird’s 
account regarding the events leading to the end of her employment with the 
organization, the defendant did not call Jones, any human resources personnel, or other 
members of management to testify in order to refute Laird’s testimony recounting 
Jones’s statements, the circumstances surrounding the email directive to get fitted for 
an N95 mask, or any of the other circumstances surrounding the end of her employment 
with Trinity. Nor did Trinity offer any documentary evidence refuting her testimony.  
Laird’s credible testimony and the lack of contravening evidence establish that it 
is more likely than not Trinity had decided to cease honoring the accommodation of not 
treating COVID-19 patients before Laird quit her job. Laird asking Jones, her immediate 
supervisor and the person through whom she initially submitted the request for the 
accommodation effectuating the permanent work restriction assigned by the Mayo 
Clinic, was reasonable. Laird’s conclusion that the email and Jones’ warning that Trinity 
would cease honoring her accommodation was reasonable and accurate. Trinity’s 
decision to cease honoring Laird’s accommodation meant that it would no longer 
observe the permanent work restriction. 
Moreover, the evidence shows it is more likely than not the Mayo Clinic and 
Trinity’s expert witness, Dr. Broghammer, assigned Laird the permanent work restriction 
of not treating COVID-19 patients to reduce the likelihood that she would contract 
COVID-19 again. As discussed below, Dr. Kuhnlein reached a similar conclusion after 
Laird terminated her employment with Trinity. There is no indication in the record that 
any doctor has opined to the contrary. The doctors’ uniform concern is that Laird’s case 
of COVID-19 nearly killed her and they wanted to mitigate the risk to her health and life 
posed by the virus. Thus, Laird’s belief that treating COVID-19 patients could result in 
her contracting the virus again and that doing so was a serious threat to her wellbeing is 
reasonable. 
Laird accurately understood Trinity’s communication ordering her to get fitted for 
an N95 mask and the warning Jones gave her that the organization would cease 
honoring her accommodation of not treating COVID-19 patients to mean that Trinity 
would no longer honor the accommodation in the near future. The reason for the 
accommodation was a doctor-prescribed permanent work restriction intended to protect 
her health. Trinity put Laird in the position of choosing to work in an unsafe environment 
because the organization chose to no longer honor the doctor-prescribed work 
restriction. It is more likely than not a motivating factor in Laird’s decision to seek a new 
job was her reasonable belief based on communication from Trinity in the form of the 
email about N95 mask fitting and her supervisor’s advisement that Trinity would cease 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 31 
 
honoring her accommodation of not treating COVID-19 patients in the near future if she 
remained employed there as an RN. 
On January 18, 2023, Laird filled out the Trinity form used to make a request for 
reference. (Ex. 5, p. 14) The form lists Laird’s ending rate of pay as $38.38 per hour. 
(Ex. 5, p. 14) Laird then looked for a new job. (Hr’g Tr. p. 51) 
Laird received two offers for remote positions and one from Cedar Valley 
Hospice for the position of RN case manager. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 51, 53) During her years as 
an RN with Trinity, Laird had worked with hospice nurses. (Hr’g Tr. p. 51) While caring 
for dying patients and working with their families could be difficult, Laird also found it 
rewarding. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 51–52) Despite the position having a lower per hour wage than 
Laird earned as an RN at Trinity, she accepted the position because she believed it 
would be less physically and mentally demanding. (Hr’g Tr. p. 54) 
Jones, her supervisor, completed Trinity’s Notice of Separation form and signed 
it on March 15, 2023. (Ex. D, p. 33) The form states, “Colleagues are required to 
provide advance notice of their intended last day of work." (Ex. D, p. 33) It further 
provides, “Adequate notice is defined as four weeks (30 days) for all colleagues . . . .” 
(Ex. D, p. 33) Jones indicated on the form that Laird gave adequate notice. (Ex. D, p. 
33) She also recommended Laird for rehire. (Ex. D, p. 33) Jones commented that Laird 
had “decided that due to some health issues that it would be best fitting to find a job that 
would be less stressful. I would definitely hire her again. She was an excellent nurse.” 
(Ex. D, p. 33) 
Trinity argues in its post-hearing brief that Laird did not give advance notice of 
her quitting to the organization. (Def. Brief, PDF p. 7) But the evidence supports the 
opposite conclusion. Jones indicates on the form Laird gave Trinity notice that she was 
quitting at least four weeks (30 days) in advance and signed the form. Moreover, Jones 
expressly states she would definitely hire Laird again. The overwhelming weight of the 
evidence establishes that Laird gave Trinity adequate notice as defined by the 
organization that she was quitting her job as an RN. 
At the time Laird quit her job with Trinity, she was earning $38.38 per hour. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 55) When she started her job with Cedar Valley Hospice, she earned $36.00 per 
hour. (Ex. E, p. 67) Thus, the evidence establishes that Laird accepted a job paying a 
lower hourly wage rate than what she earned at Trinity. Laird’s acceptance of the job 
with Cedar Valley Hospice also came with the ability to earn a $6,216.00 retention 
bonus if she stayed employed with the organization through May 31, 2024. (Ex. E, p. 
96) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Laird to undergo an IME by John Kuhnlein, D.O., 
on February 23, 2024. (Ex. JE16, p. 203) Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME consisted of a review of 
Laird’s medical records, an in-person history with Laird, an in-person physical 
examination of Laird, and a report dated August 16, 2024. (Ex. JE16, pp. 203–24) The 
contents of the IME report establish by a preponderance of the evidence that Dr. 
Kuhnlein had a thorough and accurate understanding of Laird’s medical history and 
contemporaneous complaints. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 32 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein diagnoses Laird with the following conditions: 
1. COVID infection with “long haul” residuals 
a. HEENT 
i. 
Metabolic encephalopathy 
ii. 
Subsequent anxiety 
iii. 
Mild residual cognitive impairment 
b. Chest 
i. 
Hypoxic respiratory failure-resolved 
ii. 
ARDs with residual dyspnea with exertion 
iii. 
Right side pneumothorax-resolved 
iv. 
History of centrilobular emphysema (Ames, January 30, 
2023) 
v. 
Atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and later 
supraventricular tachycardia 
c. Abdominal 
i. 
Renal failure with dialysis-resolved 
ii. 
Anasarca 
d. Musculoskeletal 
i. 
Extensive lower extremity DVT 
ii. 
Left carpal tunnel syndrome 
iii. 
Left posterior thigh friction injury-resolved 
iv. 
Deconditioning and myopathy of chronic disease 
e. Metabolic 
i. 
Septic shock with MRSA colonization-resolved 
ii. 
Electrolyte disturbances-resolved 
2. Obstructive sleep apnea 
3. COVID reinfection in January 2021-resolved 
 (Ex. JE16, p. 216)  

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 33 
 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein opines that each of the conditions he lists in the IME report are 
related to Laird’s work at Trinity. (Ex. JE16, p. 216) According to Dr. Kuhnlein, Laird’s 
initial bout with COVID-19 arose out of and in the course of her employment with Trinity 
and the other conditions are sequelae related to that infection. (Ex. JE16, p. 216) The 
parties do not dispute the work-relatedness of the vast majority of Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
diagnoses. However, they do dispute whether Laird’s obstructive sleep apnea is a 
COVID-19 sequela.  
Dr. Kuhnlein expands his opinion on causation with respect to Laird’s sleep 
apnea. He reports, “Laird said she did not have problems before the COVID infection 
with sleep apnea, and it was never brought up to her during multiple hospitalizations 
before her COVID infection.” (Ex. JE16, p. 217) Dr. Kuhnlein notes Dr. Mehta attempted 
unsuccessfully to perform a sleep study on November 4, 2020, because she was awake 
for several hours and the records from this care state she reported she snored and her 
husband said she sometimes gasped for air. (Ex. JE16, p. 217) Based on Laird’s 
medical history, Dr. Kuhnlein opines, “she clearly could have had obstructive sleep 
apnea before the 2020 COVID infection.” (Ex. JE16, p. 217) He continues: 
Even if she had the sleep apnea condition before, she developed 
significant pulmonary disease as a result of her COVID infection. ARDS 
can have somewhere between an approximate 25% to almost 50% 
mortality and is associated with significant lung stiffness that makes 
ventilation difficult. She not only had a significant COVID infection with 
COVID pneumonia, but she also had ARDS stacked on top of it, which 
together produced hypoxemic respiratory failure. 
In his report, Dr. Broghammer attributed her obstructive sleep apnea to 
her preexisting conditions, including her morbid obesity. Ms. Laird had 
preexisting morbid conditions before her COVID infection, and she was 
morbidly obese before her COVID infection. Even if she had undiagnosed 
obstructive sleep apnea before her COVID infection, she had no 
significant chronic pulmonary diseases or symptoms until after the COVID 
infection and the significant pulmonary disease it caused. 
It is more likely than not that Ms. Laird had undiagnosed obstructive sleep 
apnea before the original 2020 COVID infection, based on the notes in the 
record as quoted above, along with her risk factors. However, it is also 
more likely than not that the COVID action and subsequent ARDS 
materially aggravated her pulmonary condition, materially worsening and 
aggravating her underlying disease and making her obstructive sleep 
apnea worse than it was before her COVID infection. 
She did not gain that much weight from before her infection until this 
evaluation, as noted above, so that would not be a significant factor. I 
believe the primary aggravating factor was the significant pneumonia and 
ARDS associated with her COVID infection that damaged her lungs and 
aggravated the sleep apnea. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 34 
 
(Ex. JE16, p. 217) 
Trinity accepted liability for Laird’s carpal tunnel syndrome and paid for care, but 
Dr. Broghammer opines that it was not work related. It is unclear whether Trinity is now 
disputing the causation opinions of Dr. Malicka-Rozek and Dr. Naylor on whether Laird’s 
carpal tunnel syndrome is sequela to the care for her COVID-19 based on Dr. 
Broghammer’s DME report. This decision will nonetheless address the question as 
contested.  
Dr. Kuhnlein addresses the question, stating that while there may have been 
other contributing factors, he “agree[s] with her treating physicians, Dr. Malicka-Rozek 
and Dr. Naylor, that her prolonged static left arm positions during her long 
hospitalization at the Mayo Clinic would be a substantial more than minor factor in the 
development of her left carpal tunnel syndrome.” (Ex. JE16, p. 217) He also reiterates 
that Laird was morbidly obese and had other personal and preexisting factors before 
contracting COVID-19 of such severity that she had a prolonged hospitalization, which 
suggests these factors were unlikely to be the cause of her carpal tunnel syndrome to 
the exclusion of COVID-19 and its resultant hospitalization. (Ex. JE16, p. 218) 
Dr. Kuhnlein utilizes the Fifth Edition of the Guides when evaluating Laird’s 
permanent impairment. (Ex. JE16, p. 218) He quotes page 4 of the Guides for the 
contours of what permanent impairment means: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment percentages 
listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment on the 
individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding 
work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
(Ex. JE16, p. 218)  
Dr. Kuhnlein relies on the definition of impairment in the Guides to distinguish his 
opinion on permanent impairment from Dr. Broghammer’s, who states in his DME 
report, “Ms. Laird has returned to normal occupational activities and is unrestricted” and 
relies at least in part on this observation when opining on her impairment. (Ex. JE16, pp. 
218–19) Dr. Kuhnlein accurately observes that the text of the Guides “states that work 
activities are excluded from impairment rating, so this statement made by Dr. 
Broghammer is inconsistent with the principles outlined in [the Guides] and is irrelevant 
to this or, frankly, any other impairment rating. Work activities are excluded from 
impairment rating consideration.” (Ex. JE16, p. 219)  
Dr. Kuhnlein uses the Guides to evaluate Laird’s permanent impairment thusly: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 35 
 
Concerning Ms. Laird’s cognitive functions after her metabolic 
encephalopathy, with her mild residual cognitive impairment (she now 
keeps lists of tasks to perform where she did not before) and turning to 
Section 13.3d, page 319 and Table 13-5, Page 320, I would assign Ms. 
Laird to a CDR score of 0.5. Turning to Table 13.6, page 320, I would 
place her in Class I and assign a 2% whole person impairment. 
Concerning her pulmonary condition, including her obstructive sleep 
apnea, and when looking at Table 5-12, Page 107 and comparing values 
to the high and low normative values, Ms. Laird’s FVC value is below the 
low value for … her age and height. The FEV1 value is above her low 
value but below the high value. This outcome would place Ms. Laird in 
Class II. The range in this class is 10%–25% whole person impairment. 
When considering both the pulmonary damage from her COVID infection 
and the obstructive sleep apnea, I would assign 14% whole person 
impairment for her pulmonary condition. 
Concerning her cardiac condition with atrial fibrillation with rapid 
ventricular response and later supraventricular tachycardia, these 
conditions have resolved, but only by the use of medication, with 
preventive medication going forward. Turning to Table 3-11, Page 56, Ms. 
Laird would be placed into Class II. I would assign 10% whole person 
impairment. 
Considering the vascular disease, with bilateral lower extremity DVT and 
residual edema, and turning to Table 4-5, page 76, Ms. Laird takes 
medication regularly with a potassium supplement to counteract the 
potassium wasting from the diuretic and wears compression stockings, so 
she has persistent edema controlled by elastic supports, which would 
place her in Class II. Given the 1-2+ edema noted on physical examination 
after her legs were out of her compression socks during the examination, 
it would be appropriate to assign 15% right lower extremity impairment 
and 15% left lower [extremity] impairment for peripheral vascular disease 
related to the aftereffects of the DVT. 
When Dr. Broghammer stated that Ms. Laird only used Lasix on an as-
needed basis, that is not consistent with what she told me, as she said 
she takes Lasix and a potassium supplement because of the residual 
edema and also wears compression hose. Following the instructions on 
page 555, more than one leg is involved, so each lower extremity 
impairment is rated separately and then converted to whole person 
impairment before combination. Turning to Table 17-3, page 527, 15% 
right lower extremity impairment will convert to 6% whole person 
impairment. 15% left lower extremity impairment would convert to 6% 
whole person impairment. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 36 
 
Concerning the left carpal tunnel syndrome, Ms. Laird has no significant 
entrapment findings on physical examination and normal 2-point 
discrimination. The nerve conduction studies were unremarkable. 
Therefore, following the instructions on page 495, there would be no 
ratable impairment for her residual carpal tunnel syndrome symptoms. 
Concerning the other musculoskeletal conditions, there is no evidence in 
the currently available file that these have been adequately worked up to 
the point that they could be declared at maximum medical improvement. 
Many have not been given a formal diagnosis. Therefore, it is 
inappropriate to assign an impairment rating for the other musculoskeletal 
conditions at this time. 
Turning to the Combined Values Chart on page 604, when these values 
are combined (14% x 10% x 6% x 6% x 2%), this is a 33% whole person 
impairment. 
(Ex. JE16, pp. 219–20) 
Dr. Kuhnlein considers Laird’s need for permanent work restrictions due to her 
bout with COVID-19 and sequelae. He recognizes that COVID-19 has mutated since 
Laird contracted it while working for Trinity. (Ex. JE16, p. 220) “However, because she 
has had such a significant impact from her COVID infection with residuals that are 
sometimes called ‘Long COVID’ or post-COVID-19 syndrome symptoms, it is 
appropriate for her to have appropriate work restrictions, not only to address the effects 
of the infection but also from a preventative standpoint.” (Ex. JE16, p. 220)  
Based on this logic, Dr. Kuhnlein assigns the permanent restriction of not working 
with COVID patients. (Ex. JE16, p. 220) He also cites Laird’s dyspnea on exertion with 
physical activity and the beta-blocker she takes to prevent atrial fibrillation recurrence 
that limits her heart rate response to significant lifting strains as necessitating the 
restrictions of lifting up to 30 pounds occasionally from floor to waist, up to 30 pounds 
occasionally from waist to shoulder, and up to 20 pounds occasionally over the 
shoulder. (Ex. JE16, p. 220). Moreover, Dr. Kuhnlein opines: 
Nonmaterial handling restrictions would include sitting, standing, or 
walking on an as tolerated basis with the ability to change positions for 
comfort. She can occasionally stoop or squat, crawl or kneel. She can 
work on ladders or at height as long as she can maintain a three-point 
safety stance, and climbing the ladder does not make her significantly 
dyspneic, or she does not present a hazard to herself or others. She can 
occasionally climb stairs with a guardrail. She can work occasionally at or 
above shoulder height. She can grip or grasp occasionally. She should not 
operate fixed industrial machinery with either leg.   
There are no vision, hearing, or communication restrictions. She should be 
able to keep and generate lists to keep herself on track. She can travel for 
work, as long as she can take stretch breaks from time to time. She can 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 37 
 
use hand or power tools occasionally within the material handling 
restrictions outlined above. Ms. Laird has increased symptoms in cold 
weather, as noted in the medical record, so if working in cold weather, she 
should be able to wear a surgical mask or scarf over her face to warm air 
before she breathes it in if possible. Given the multiplicity of her post-
COVID symptoms, it would be best for her to work on a day shift job to 
avoid nocturnal rhythm issues when performing shift work. 
(Ex. JE16, p. 220) 
 
Defense counsel provided Dr. Broghammer with a copy of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME 
report. (Ex. JE8, p. 129) Dr. Broghammer took issue with Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion that 
Laird’s COVID-19 and subsequent ARDS materially aggravated her pulmonary 
condition to make her sleep apnea worse than it was before her infection as “purely 
conjectutory” [sic] without objective testing to show it. (Ex. JE8, p. 132) This assertion is 
unpersuasive. Dr. Kuhnlein’s reasoning is based on credible information from Laird, her 
husband, and the medical records regarding the lack of complaints or care suggesting 
sleep apnea on the level Laird’s experienced after her bout with COVID. The weight of 
the evidence establishes Laird’s work-related COVID-19 and subsequent ARDS 
materially aggravated her pulmonary condition which worsened and aggravated the 
underlying disease as Dr. Kuhnlein opines. 
 
On the question of whether Laird’s carpal tunnel syndrome was work related, Dr. 
Broghammer takes issue in his rebuttal report with the opinions of Dr. Malicka-Rozek, 
Dr. Naylor, and Dr. Kuhnlein that Laird’s COVID-19 and the treatment for it were a 
significant causative factor. (Ex. JE10, p. 132) Dr. Broghammer opines that prolonged 
positioning during hospitalization would not cause carpal tunnel syndrome, particularly 
in one extremity. (Ex. JE10, p. 132) Instead, according to Dr. Broghammer, the causes 
of Laird’s carpal tunnel syndrome were her female gender, advancing age, and 
supermorbid state. (Ex. JE10, p. 132) He then asserts that Dr. Kuhnlein’s accurate 
observation–that Laird’s female gender, age, and supermorbid obese state were all 
present in the time before her hospitalization and that the only change before the onset 
of symptoms was her hospitalization–was “post hoc ergo procter [sic] hoc fallacy.” (Ex. 
JE10, p. 133) 
First, it bears mentioning that the proper Latin term is post hoc, ergo propter hoc. 
Garner’s Dictionary of Legal Usage, p. 691 (3d ed., Oxford 2011). The term “denotes 
the fallacy of confusing sequence with consequence.” Id. This is a fallacy that one must 
avoid in legal disputes, especially those under our workers’ compensation law. See id. 
But Dr. Malicka-Rozek, Dr. Naylor, and Dr. Kuhnlein have avoided such a logical 
misstep because they do not opine the only cause is the hospitalization for COVID-19, 
just that it was a factor in bringing about the symptoms that created the need for 
surgery. 
There is no dispute between the parties that Laird’s gender was female in the 
time leading up to her hospitalization for work-related COVID-19. She was also morbidly 
obese and of advancing age. Yet she experienced no symptoms. Nonetheless, Dr. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 38 
 
Broghammer opines that the presence of these personal characteristics precludes 
concluding that her prolonged hospitalization was a cause of her carpal tunnel 
syndrome. This frame is legally erroneous because it misstates the question of 
causation under Iowa workers’ compensation law as binary—the cause was either the 
three personal characteristics or the prolonged hospitalization. But the hospitalization 
need only have been a significant causal factor, not the only one. And this incorrect 
framing of the causation standard under Iowa law undermines Dr. Broghammer’s 
attempt to declare Dr. Kuhnlein’s causation opinion as post hoc, ergo propter hoc. 
Because Dr. Kuhnlein properly understands and articulates the causation 
standard under Iowa workers’ compensation law, his opinion is most persuasive. Dr. 
Kuhnlein properly considers the possible causative factors personal to Laird and 
accurately notes that they did not produce symptomatic carpal tunnel syndrome before 
her bout with COVID-19 and the hospitalization it required. The fact that Laird was 
asymptomatic despite her personal symptoms prior to hospitalization, during which her 
arm was maintained in a static position for an extended period of time, and after her 
discharge she experienced symptoms, it is more likely than not Laird’s work-related 
COVID-19 is one of the causative factors that necessitated her carpal tunnel release 
surgery. The opinions of Dr. Malicka-Rozek, Dr. Naylor, and Dr. Kuhnlein on the cause 
of her carpal tunnel syndrome are therefore adopted as most persuasive. 
Dr. Broghammer also takes issue with Dr. Kuhnlein opining that Laird has 
suffered a two percent whole body impairment due to reduced cognitive function after 
metabolic encephalopathy because there had been neuropsychiatric testing and her 
complaints were subjective. (Ex. JE10, p. 133) Of particular concern to Dr. Broghammer 
was his understanding that “Laird is able to carry on normal occupational activities 
which is not consistent with any cognitive impairment in my medical opinion.” (Ex. JE10, 
p. 133) The weight of the evidence in this case shows that Laird self-accommodates by 
taking copious notes while performing her occupational activities of a nurse. Thus, Dr. 
Broghammer’s incorrect understanding of how Laird performs her job undermines his 
attack on Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion. Rendering his opinion completely unpersuasive on this 
question is the fact that Laird provided credible testimony of the limitations she has due 
to her work-related COVID-19. The evidence establishes it is more likely than not that 
Laird has cognitive limitations caused by her work-related COVID-19, that she self-
accommodates by taking notes at work to help her recall things, and that these 
limitations amount to a two percent whole person impairment under the Guides, as Dr. 
Kuhnlein opines. 
Cedar Valley Hospice has given Laird positive reviews of her job performance 
similar to those that she received at Trinity. (Ex. E, pp. 70–94) At the time of hearing, 
Laird earned $37.32 per hour at Cedar Valley Hospice. (Ex. E, p. 97) This hourly rate 
was less than the $38.38 hourly wage rate she earned at the end of her employment 
with Trinity. (Hr’g Tr. p. 55) It is more likely than not Laird would have been eligible to 
receive pay increases had she stayed at Trinity similar to those she received from 2020 
through 2023.  

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 39 
 
Laird credibly testified about her ongoing symptoms at the time of hearing. She 
continued to self-accommodate her mental limitations by taking notes. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) 
Laird experiences continuing pain on a daily basis. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) Fatigue is also an 
ongoing issue. (Hr’g Tr. p. 62) She must allow herself to take more breaks because of it. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 62) This has led Laird to develop an aversion to activities that she knows are 
likely to cause her pain and fatigue. (Hr’g Tr. p. 62)  
For example, Laird gets short of breath when using stairs. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) She 
also must use the railing when climbing stairs to help with her balance deficiency. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 63) She uses a tandem gait on stairs like a toddler uses to reduce her risk of 
falling. (Hr’g Tr. p. 63) 
Her husband and she had a contractor take out their shower-bathtub combination 
because it was difficult for her to get in and out of it. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) They had it replaced 
with a shower that has a lower entry and exit level. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) She also has to take 
her time when showering because of the exertion. (Hr’g Tr. p. 61) Laird can no longer 
balance on one foot, so she has to use adaptive equipment when bathing. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
62) They have installed a textured floor to reduce the risk of her slipping and falling due 
to the mobility issues caused by the stipulated work injury. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 61–62) 
Long rides in a vehicle are difficult. (Hr’g Tr. p. 63) She has to take a break every 
one and one-half or two hours. (Hr’g Tr. p. 63) This allows her to stretch and move 
around for 10 to 15 minutes. (Hr’g Tr. p. 63) Relatedly, Laird is unable to stand still in 
one place for extended periods of time because it is too painful. (Hr’g Tr. p. 63) 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
The parties stipulated that Laird sustained the work injury from which this case 
stems on August 7, 2020. The edition of the Iowa Code and Iowa Administrative Code 
in effect at the time of the work injury govern in cases before the commissioner. See 
Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5064673, 2020 WL 
6037539 *2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). Therefore, the 2020 editions of the Iowa Code and 
Iowa Administrative Code govern in this case. See Iowa Code (2020), Vol. I, p. iii (“This 
2020 Iowa Code includes all enactments with a January 1, 2020, or earlier effective 
date from the 2019 Regular and Extraordinary Sessions of the Eighty-eighth Iowa 
General Assembly and includes enactments from prior sessions that were effective on 
or before that date.”).1  
A .  
C a u s a t i o n  
The IWCA “covers any and all personal injuries” relating to an employee’s work. 
Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823, 824 (1920). Under section 85.3(1), 
a covered employer must “provide, secure, and pay compensation according to the 
provisions of this chapter for any and all personal injuries sustained by an 
employee arising out of and in the course of the employment.” And section 85.27(1)(a) 
requires a covered employer to promptly provide reasonable care for all compensable 
                                                 
1 Available online: https://www.legis.iowa.gov/archives/code (last viewed June 25, 2025). 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 40 
 
injuries under the Act. Thus, causation is often a threshold issue in cases before the 
agency that include a dispute regarding the claimant’s entitlement to workers’ 
compensation benefits. 
The legislature has codified a partial definition of “personal injury” in section 
85.61(4) that is not applicable in the current case. Rather, the expanded definition of 
“personal injury” as articulated by the Iowa Supreme Court in its seminal Almquist v. 
Shenandoah Nurseries, Inc. governs: 
“an injury to the body, the impairment of health, or a disease, not excluded 
by the act, which comes about, not through the natural building up and 
tearing down of the human body, but because of a traumatic or other hurt 
or damage to the health or body of an employee.... The injury to the 
human body here contemplated must be something, whether an accident 
or not, that acts extraneously to the natural processes of nature, and 
thereby impairs the health, overcomes, injures, interrupts, or destroys 
some function of the body, or otherwise damages or injures a part or all of 
the body.”  
Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 850–51 (Iowa 1995) (quoting 
Almquist, 218 Iowa 724, 732, 254 N.W. 35, 39 (1934)) (citations omitted in Dunlavey). 
“In order for an injury to be compensable in Iowa, there must be ‘a connection 
between the injury and the work.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 
2007) (quoting Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 221 (Iowa 2006)). To recover, a 
claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury for which the 
claimant is seeking workers’ compensation arose: 
1. Out of the claimant’s employment; and 
 
2. In the course of the claimant’s employment. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 
143, 150 (Iowa 1996)); see also Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 
(Iowa 1996).  
“‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an 
injury to be deemed compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this 
case, the parties dispute only whether the injury arose out of employment. 
 “An injury ‘arises out of’ employment if there is a causal connection between the 
employment and the injury.” Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 652 (citing Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 
N.W.2d 334, 338 (Iowa 1998)). “‘In other words, the injury must not have coincidentally 
occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to the working 
environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174. (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311).  

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 41 
 
Taking the words themselves, one is first struck by the fact that in the 
“arising” phrase the function of the employment is passive while in the 
“caused by” phrase it is active. When one speaks of an event “arising out 
of employment,” the initiative, the moving force, is something other than 
the employment; the employment is thought of more as a condition out of 
which the event arises than as the force producing the event in affirmative 
fashion. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. 
Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law (2005) § 3.06, at 3-7 to 3-8 (emphasis in 
original)). 
An expert opinion on causation may not be considered in isolation; rather, it must 
be considered along with all other evidence bearing upon the causal connection 
between the injury and the disability. See Schujter v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 
N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010); see also Nellis v. Quealy, 237 Iowa 507, 512, 21 N.W.2d 
584, 586 (Iowa 1946). Moreover, the Iowa Supreme Court has long held that an injured 
worker’s credible testimony regarding the onset of symptoms “must be given 
considerable weight on the issue of causal connection.” Hinrichs v. Davenport 
Locomotive Works, 203 Iowa 1395, 214 N.W. 585, 586 (Iowa 1927).  
An injured worker is not entitled to workers’ compensation “for the results of a 
pre-existing injury or disease,” but “the mere existence thereof at the time of a 
subsequent injury is not a defense.” Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 
135, 115 N.W.2d 812, 815 (Iowa 1962). “For workers' compensation purposes a cause 
is proximate if it is a cause; it need not be the only cause.” Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994). Thus, if a personal health condition such as 
osteoporosis increases a worker’s susceptibility to injury and the injury arises out of and 
in the course of the workers’ employment, it is compensable under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. See St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); 
see also Ziegler v. U.S. Gypsum Co., 252 Iowa 613, 620, 106 N.W.2d 591, 595 (Iowa 
1960); Hanson v. Dickinson, 176 N.W. 823, 824–25 (Iowa 1920). “If the employment of 
claimant resulted in a personal injury aggravating her already impaired physical 
condition, she is entitled to compensation to the extent of that injury.” Nicks, 254 Iowa at 
135,115 N.W.2d at 815. 
As found above, Laird has met her burden of proof on the question of causation 
with respect to her carpal tunnel syndrome, cognitive impairment, sleep apnea, PTSD, 
and major depressive disorder. It is more likely than not these conditions are sequelae 
to her work-related COVID-19. Each condition constitutes a compensable injury under 
Iowa law. 
B . 
P e r m a n e n cy  B e n e f i t s  
The parties dispute Laird’s entitlement to permanency benefits. Laird contends 
she is entitled to permanency benefits based on the traditional industrial disability 
analysis of lost earning capacity caused by the work injury. Trinity argues Laird is 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 42 
 
entitled to benefits based only on functional impairment under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) because she “returned to work at the same or greater salary, wages, or 
earnings than [she] received at the time of the injury” before quitting her job with Trinity 
and accepting a position at Cedar Valley Hospice, where she earns a higher hourly 
wage than she did at the time of the stipulated work injury but a lower one than she 
earned at the end of her employment with Trinity.2 At issue is the interplay between 
Iowa Code sections 86.14 and 86.16, controlling Iowa Supreme Court precedent, and 
the 2017 amendments to the IWCA. 
1 .  
S t a t u t o r y  I n t e r p r e t a t i o n  
Under Iowa’s constitutional system of ordered liberty, the legislative branch has 
the power to enact laws. Iowa Const. Art. III, §§ 1, 15, 17. When exercising this 
constitutional power, the legislature may create an executive branch agency with 
exclusive jurisdiction to decide disputes. See Hunter v. Colfax Consol. Coal Co., 175 
Iowa 245, 154 N.W. 1037 (1915). If the legislature does so, an agency’s authority is 
strictly limited to those powers expressly articulated in the statutory text. See Iowa Code 
§§ 17A.19(10); 17A.23(3); see also Renda v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 784 N.W.2d 8, 
15 n. 3 (Iowa 2010).  
The general assembly has not empowered this agency to interpret Iowa’s 
workers’ compensation statutes. Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 N.W.3d 714, 
719 (Iowa 2024). But the lack of express statutory authority does not mean the agency 
never interprets provisions of our workers’ compensation statutes. “Those who apply the 
rule to particular cases must of necessity expound and interpret that rule.” Marbury v. 
Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 177 (1803).  
The legislature has vested the commissioner with exclusive jurisdiction to hear 
and decide disputes under Iowa Code chapters 85, 85A, and 85B, 87, and Iowa Code 
chapter 10A, subchapter III. Iowa Code § 85.20. As the tribunal with exclusive 
jurisdiction to decide disputes under our workers’ compensation statutes, the agency 
necessarily must interpret those statutes when performing its duty. See Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518-19 (Iowa 2012); see also Iowa Ins. Inst. v. Core 
Group of Iowa Ass'n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 68 (Iowa 2015); Martinez v. Pavlich, 
Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5063900, 2020 WL 5412838, *4 (App., Jul. 30, 
2020). “Thus, while appellate courts have the final say, statutory interpretation by this 
agency is a necessary inevitability.” Martinez, 2020 WL 5412838, *4. 
“Words have meaning,” the late Justice Antonin Scalia remarked in a magazine 
interview. Jennifer Senior, In Conversation With Antonin Scalia, New York Mag. (Oct. 4, 
                                                 
2 The parties have not addressed whether Trinity’s decision to cease honoring the 
accommodation effectuating Laird’s permanent work restriction to not treat COVID-19 patients, which was 
necessitated by the stipulated work injury, constitutes constructive discharge. See Schore v. Amazon.com 
Serv., Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 22007160.01, 2024 WL 3973669, *8–*9 (Arb. Aug. 20, 
2024) (Dep. Grell) (interpreting “termination” as used in Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v) to include constructive 
discharge); see also Haskenhoff v. Homeland Energy Solutions, LLC, 897 N.W.2d 553, 591–99 (Iowa 
2017) (discussing constructive discharge law). 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 43 
 
2013). As simple as it is profound, this truism forms the bedrock of our democratic 
tradition. When crafting legislation, elected representatives choose words because of 
their meaning and the consensus necessary for enactment the chosen language 
creates. See New Prime Inc. v. Oliveira, 586 U.S. 105, 120–21, 139 S.Ct. 532, 543 
(2019). The same rationale informs the choice to exclude other words. See Lozano 
Campuzano v. Iowa Dist. Ct. for Polk Co., 940 N.W.2d 431, 437 (Iowa 2020). “[O]nly the 
text of a piece of legislation is enacted into law.” Doe v. State, 943 N.W.2d 608, 610 
(Iowa 2020). 
The words our general assembly codified are therefore of “paramount 
importance” when considering the meaning of a statute. Bribriesco-Ledger v. Klipsch, 
957 N.W.2d 646, 650 (Iowa 2021). If the parties dispute the meaning of a statute, the 
first step in the interpretation process is to “consider the plain meaning of the relevant 
language, read in the context of the entire statute, to determine whether there is 
ambiguity.” State v. Doe, 903 N.W.2d 347, 351 (Iowa 2017). Can reasonable minds 
disagree as to the text’s meaning? Carreras v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., Motor Vehicle 
Div., 977 N.W.2d 438, 446 (Iowa 2022). If not, the analysis ends. See Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Strable, 14 N.W.3d 742, 748 (Iowa 2024); see also Doe, 943 N.W.2d at 
610. If so, it continues under Iowa Code chapter 4 and traditional canons for the 
interpretation of legal texts. See Doe, 943 N.W.2d at 610; see also Myers v. City of 
Cedar Falls, 8 N.W.3d 171, 180 (Iowa 2024). 
The text of the IWCA is of particular importance because workers’ compensation 
is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 
1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' compensation is purely 
statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992).  And “it is 
the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the act’s benefits may be 
obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The legislature enacted the workers' compensation statute primarily for the 
benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents. Therefore, we apply 
the statute broadly and liberally in keeping with the humanitarian objective 
of the statute. We will not defeat the statute's beneficent purpose by 
reading something into it that is not there, or by a narrow and strained 
construction. 
Gregory v. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 399 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812, 815–16 (Iowa 2008) (citations omitted)).  
“Although the workers' compensation statute is to be liberally construed in favor 
of the worker, the statute is not to be expanded by reading something into it that is not 
there.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Cedar 
Rapids Community School Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). “To determine 
legislative intent, we look to the language chosen by the legislature and not what the 
legislature might have said.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 
(Iowa 2016) (citing Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 337 (Iowa 
2008)).  

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 44 
 
a .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  8 5 . 3 4 ( 2 ) ( x ) ,  I o w a  A d m i n i s t r a t i v e  R u l e  
8 7 6 — 2 . 4  &  t h e  G u i de s  
In 2017, the legislature amended the IWCA to change how permanent functional 
impairment is determined for workers’ compensation purposes. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 
23, §§ 8, 9 (now codified at Iowa Code §§85.34(2) (v), (x)); see also Saul v. BMC 
Aggregates, L.C., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 20014542.02, 2025 WL 248385, 
*32–*37 (Arb. Jan. 8, 2025) aff’d 2025 WL 451266 (App. Feb. 3, 2025); Franck v. Rudd 
Sanitation, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 1665762.01, 2024 WL 4701502, *4 
(App. Oct. 29, 2024). Before the 2017 amendments, the agency could use all evidence 
in the administrative record, as well as agency expertise, when determining the 
permanent disability of an injured worker. See, e.g., Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Under agency rules before the 2017 amendments, the 
Guides were considered a “useful tool in evaluating disability.” Seaman v. City of Des 
Moines, File Nos. 5053418, 5057973, 5057974 (App. Oct. 11, 2019) (quoting Bisenius 
v. Mercy Med. Ctr., File No. 5036055 (App. Apr. 1, 2013)); see also Westling v. Hormel 
Foods Corp., 810 N.W.2d 247, 252 (Iowa 2012).  
But in cases involving injuries on or after July 1, 2017, the Guides are more than 
a tool when determining functional impairment; they are the required authority. 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
After the 2017 amendments, section 85.34(2)(x) mandates use of the Guides as 
adopted by the commissioner under the IAPA as the sole authority for determining the 
extent of permanent impairment or permanent disability. The commissioner has adopted 
the Fifth Edition of the Guides for use in determining permanent impairment in cases 
before the agency under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—2.4. Therefore, the Fifth 
Edition of the Guides apply in this case. See Franck, 2024 WL 4701502, *4. 
In order to fulfill the requirement in section 85.34(2)(x) to determine functional 
disability or the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment “solely by 
utilizing” the Guides, one must understand how they define impairment and disability. 
The Guides provided detailed explanation of the contours delineating the meaning of 
“impairment” and “disability” for purposes of their evaluation framework: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 45 
 
The Guides continues to define impairment as “a loss, loss of use, or 
derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” 
This definition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical 
impairment can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is 
considered permanent when it has reached maximal medical 
improvement (MMI), meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change 
substantially in the next year with or without medical treatment. The term 
impairment in the Guides refers to permanent impairment, which is the 
focus of the Guides. 
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, 
and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain. Although the Guides 
emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included 
within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining 
whether an injury or illness results in permanent impairment requires a 
medical assessment performed by a physician. An impairment may lead to 
functional limitations or the inability to perform the activities of daily living. 
American Medical Association, Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, p. 2 
(5th ed., 2001) (bold-face and italics in original). 
The Guides further provide: 
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and 
functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either 
anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that 
specialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body 
structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ 
or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of 
heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or 
the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater 
emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measures such as range of 
motion. Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in the mental 
and behavioral section. 
Id. at 4 (italics in original).  
Moreover, the Guides expressly state: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases of an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment 
percentages listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 46 
 
on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, 
excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
Id. at 4 (bold-face and italics in original). Table 1-2, entitled “Activities of Daily Living 
Commonly Measured in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and Instrumental Activities of 
Daily Living (IADL) Scales,” from Page 4 of the Guides, is recreated below. 
Activity 
Example 
Self-care, personal hygiene 
Urinating, defecating, 
brushing teeth, combing 
hair, bathing, dressing 
oneself, eating 
Communication 
Writing, typing, seeing, 
hearing, speaking 
Physical activity 
Standing, sitting, reclining, 
walking, climbing stairs 
Sensory function 
Hearing, seeing, tactile 
feeling, tasting, smelling 
Nonspecialized hand 
activities 
Grasping, lifting, tactile, 
discrimination 
Travel 
Riding, driving, flying 
Sexual function 
Orgasm, ejaculation, 
lubrication, erection 
Sleep 
Restful, nocturnal sleep 
pattern 
The Guides further explain their approach to impairment in pertinent part: 
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment 
percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but 
could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not 
included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several 
reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is 
highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment 
percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and 
occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors 
as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine 
the extent of work disability. For example, an individual who receives a 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 47 
 
30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is 
considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general 
functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities 
of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no 
decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. 
Thus, 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in 
work capability. Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impairment 
rating due to pericardial disease may be completely unable to do his or 
her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability. 
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct 
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate 
work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable 
about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the 
worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment. 
Id. at 5. “The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the 
organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations.” Id. at p. 9 (bold-
face in original). 
The Guides use “impairment” and “disability” as two distinct terms, each with its 
own meaning. While “impairment” encompasses ADLs and excludes work, 
The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of an 
individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational 
demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an 
impairment. An individual can have a disability in performing a specific 
work activity but not have a disability in any other social role. Physicians 
have the education and training to evaluate a person’s health status and 
determine the presence or absence of an impairment. If the physician has 
the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities and 
needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or 
absence of a specific disability. For example, an occupational medicine 
physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace 
can provide insights on how the impairment could contribute to a 
workplace disability. 
Id. at p. 8 (bold-face in original). 
The Guides further elaborate on impairment versus disability. Under the Guides, 
“The impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of disability determination.” Id. 
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work 
disability. Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria 
do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the 
Guides’ criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 48 
 
Id. at p. 9. 
Thus, the 2017 amendments incorporate the contours of the term “impairment” 
as articulated in the Guides and mandate their use in cases before the agency. 
Impairment is “a loss, loss of use or derangement of any body part, organ system, or 
organ function.” Id. at p. 2 (internal emphasis omitted). However, “Impairment 
percentages derived according to the Guides criteria do not measure work disability.” Id. 
at 9. And with respect to determining the extent of permanent disability under the Act, 
the Guides make clear that “[t]he impairment evaluation ... is only one aspect of 
disability determination.” Id. at 9.  
It is axiomatic that the mandate the legislature codified in section 85.34(2)(x) to 
determine permanent impairment and disability by following the framework in the 
Guides requires adhering to the meaning of “impairment” and “disability” set forth 
therein. Therefore, under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) and the Guides, the 
determination of permanent disability is a two-step process: 
1) Determine the extent of permanent impairment utilizing only the Guides; and 
2) Consider the evidentiary record as a whole to determine the extent of 
permanent disability—“alteration of an individual's capacity to meet personal, 
social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements 
because of an impairment.” Guides, p. 8. 
Because of this framework, the meaning of the text the legislature added to section 
85.3(2)(v) in 2017 has a substantial impact on an injured employee’s entitlement to 
permanency benefits under the IWCA.  
b .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  8 5 . 3 4 ( 2 ) ( v )  &  P e r m a n e n cy  B e n e f i t s  
For work injuries that occurred before the amendments to the IWCA took effect 
on July 1, 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body party caused by a 
work injury was “compensated by the industrial disability method which takes into 
account the loss of earning capacity.” Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 
404, 407 (Iowa 1994) (citing Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 14-15 (Iowa 
1993); see also Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009) (quoting 
Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 1992)). An industrial 
disability analysis was used regardless of whether the injured employee returned to 
work with the defendant-employer or the level of earnings at the time of hearing relative 
to the date of injury. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009) 
(quoting Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 1992)); see 
also Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 158 (Iowa 1996); Arrow-Acme Corp. v. 
Bellamy, 500 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa App. 1993).  
In Trinity’s post-hearing brief, it block-quotes the second sentence added by the 
2017 amendments (v), adds italics for emphasis, and then ends the quote. (Def. Brief, 
PDF p. 2) By cherry-picking part of a statute and reading that part to the exclusion of 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 49 
 
other relevant provisions of the Iowa Code, Trinity invites the agency to find the statute 
means to return to work with any employer. But this approach is unavailing. 
The problem with Trinity’s argument is the 2017 legislation did not add one 
sentence to this paragraph of the statute. It added three sentences. Reading one of 
these sentences in isolation artificially limits consideration of the legislation specifically, 
the IWCA, and other relevant statutes. And doing so would violate traditional principles 
of statutory interpretation which require that “we read statutes as a whole rather than 
looking at words and phrases in isolation.” Iowa Ins. Institute v. Core Group of Iowa 
Ass’n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 72 (Iowa 2015).  
In 2017, the legislature added the underlined sentences to the statutory provision 
governing unscheduled injuries: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “t” hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee’s earning capacity. Notwithstanding section 
85.26, subsection 2 , if an employee who is eligible for compensation 
under this paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated 
from employment by that employer, the award or agreement for settlement 
for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of 
reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s 
permanent partial disability. 
2023 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v)). 
It is possible that ambiguity exists if the second sentence is read in isolation from 
those added in 2017 and the statutory text as a whole. The word “return” means “to go 
or come back, as to a former place, position, or state: to return from abroad; to return to 
public office; to return to work.” The Random House Dictionary of the English Language, 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 50 
 
“return,” 1645 (2d. ed. Unabridged, 1983) (italics in original).3 The relevant definitions of 
“work” include: “employment, as in some form of industry, esp. as a means of earning 
one’s livelihood: to look for work” and “one’s place of employment: Don’t phone him at 
work.” Id., “work,” at 2188 (italics in original). The definitions offer different possible 
interpretations to the statutory text. Does the text mean to return to the state of 
employment or the place of one’s employment?  
The next sentence reduces that ambiguity by providing, “Notwithstanding section 
85.26, subsection 2 , if an employee who is eligible for compensation under this 
paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is compensated based only 
upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the award or 
agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon 
commencement of reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent 
partial disability.” 2023 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v)) 
(emphasis added). Reading to two sentences together, the second sentence helps 
define the scope of the first. The second sentence creates a mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process independent of traditional review-reopening for determining lost 
earning capacity for injured employees who meet the mandatory criteria expressly set 
forth in the first and second sentences combined. The two sentences are inextricably 
intertwined, each helping to flesh out the meaning of the other. 
Reinforcing this reading of section 85.34(2)(v) are other provisions of the IWCA, 
Iowa Supreme Court precedent, and other statutes that create rights for workers with 
disabilities.  
c .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  8 6  &  t h e  F l i n t  R u l e   
The Iowa legislature created our workers’ compensation system over a century 
ago. See 1913 Iowa Acts ch. 147; see also Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 
672, 676–80 (Iowa 2015) (discussing the history of workers’ compensation and the 
policy considerations behind it). At its inception as now, the Act “provides for work[ers’] 
compensation for injuries received in the course of employment” and “creates a special 
tribunal” in the commissioner with exclusive jurisdiction “to hear and dispose of such 
claims.” Des Moines Union Ry. Co. v. Funk, 164 N.W. 648, 649–650 (Iowa 1917); see 
also Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 275 (Iowa 2023). The legislature also 
codified a mandate that in cases before the commissioner, “Process and procedure 
                                                 
3 The late Justice Antonin Scalia and Bryan Garner, editor of Black’s Law Dictionary and author 
of Garner’s Dictionary of Legal Usage among other works, co-authored the indispensable Reading Law: 
The Interpretation of Legal Texts. The book’s insight and utility have made it ubiquitous in the legal field. 
The duo also wrote “A Note on the Use of Dictionaries,” 16 Green Bag 2d 419, another useful tool when 
considering the meaning of text because it contains principles to remember when using dictionaries and a 
list of quality dictionaries organized by the date of publication. Id., at 422–28. This decision uses the 
unabridged Second Edition of the The Random House Dictionary of the English Language in accordance 
with the article’s recommendations. See id., at 427. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 51 
 
under this act shall be as summary as reasonably may be.” 1913 Iowa Acts ch. 147, 
§ 25.  
The Iowa Supreme Court recognized early in its workers’ compensation 
jurisprudence, “The proceedings under the Work[ers’] Compensation Act . . . are 
intended to be simple and informal.” Fischer v. W.F. Priebe & Co., 160 N.W. 48, 50 
(Iowa 1916). And in its seminal Flint v. City of Eldon holding, the court elaborated: 
The purpose, intent, and scheme of workmen's compensation legislation is 
well understood, and its historical significance has been frequently 
expressed in decisions. 
The fundamental reason for the enactment of this legislation is to avoid 
litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize appeals, and 
afford an efficient and speedy tribunal to determine and award 
compensation under the terms of this act. 
183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921). The court then quoted from a New York case for the 
following proposition, which the court has reiterated over the subsequent decades: 
It was the purpose of the Legislature to create a tribunal to do rough 
justice--speedy, summary, informal, untechnical. With this scheme of the 
Legislature we must not interfere; for, if we trench in the slightest degree 
upon the prerogatives of the Commission, one encroachment will breed 
another, until finally simplicity will give way to complexity, and informality 
to technicality. 
Id., at 345 (quoting Rhyner v. Hueber Bldg. Co., 171 App. Div. 56, 156 N. Y. Supp. 903); 
see also Cross v. Hermanson Bros., 16 N.W.2d 616, 618 (Iowa 1944) (quoting Flint, 
183 N.W. at 345); Henderson v. Iles, 82 N.W.2d 731, 764 (Iowa 1957); Nicks v. 
Davenport Produce Co., 115 N.W.2d 812, 814–15 (Iowa 1962) (quoting Cross, 16 
N.W.2d at 618); Second Injury Fund v. Hodgins, 461 N.W.2d 454, 456 (Iowa 1990) 
(quoting Nicks, 115 N.W.2d at 814–15); Zomer, 666 N.W.2d at 133 (quoting Flint, 183 
N.W. at 345); Marovec v. PMX Indus., 693 N.W.2d 779, 787 (Iowa 2005) (quoting 
Zomer, 666 N.W.2d at 133).  
Under Flint and its progeny, “the commissioner has the responsibility for deciding 
cases in an expeditious and timely manner.” Marovec, 693 N.W.2d at 787. The rule that 
simplicity trumps complexity in workers’ compensation cases has governed procedure 
for over 100 years. This precedential standard remains good law today despite 
intervening legislation.  
After enactment of the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code chapter 
17A, and other legislative changes, the statutory mandate of speediness remains 
expressly in effect today. Iowa Code section 86.18(1) provides, “Evidence, process and 
procedure in contested case proceedings or appeal proceedings within the agency 
under this subchapter and chapters 85 and 85A shall be as summary as practicable 
consistent with the requirements of chapter 17A.” And section 86.14(1) states, “In an 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 52 
 
original proceeding, all matters relevant to a dispute are subject to inquiry.” This 
language echoes that of the Flint court, when it concluded, “The authority of the . . . 
Commissioner in matters coming within his jurisdiction necessarily involves the right to 
decide all questions properly arising out of the controversy before him.” Flint, 193 N.W. 
at 346. As the Marovec court observed, the language the court used in Flint is as true 
today as it was in 1921. 693 N.W.2d at 787. 
In Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130 (Iowa 2003), the Iowa 
Supreme Court considered the Commissioner's authority to reform a workers' 
compensation insurance policy. Even though this opinion construed the scope of the 
Commissioner's authority under section 85.21, its reasoning applies here. Id. at 132-33. 
The court quoted the Flint rule and concluded a “bifurcated litigation process” that is 
drawn out “is a far cry from the efficient and speedy remedy envisioned by the general 
assembly when it adopted the workers' compensation act.” Id. at 133-34. The court held 
it would be erroneous “to read into the statute a limitation on the commissioner's 
authority to decide claims for compensation, particularly when to do so would defeat 
one of the primary purposes of the statute—the provision of a prompt and adequate 
remedy.” Id. Applying Zomer here, expanding the mandatory bifurcated litigation 
process under section 85.34(2)(v) requires reading something into the statutory text that 
is not there and would result in a more drawn-out process that would hinder the 
agency's ability to provide a prompt and adequate remedy, which would defeat one of 
the primary purposes of the IWCA. 
In Martinez, the Commissioner specifically considered on appeal whether the 
statute mandates a bifurcated litigation process when the claimant quits employment 
with the defendant-employer and then gets a higher-paying job with a different 
employer. 2020 WL 5412838, *4. The Commissioner held reading the statute to require 
a bifurcated litigation process when the claimant quits employment with the defendant-
employer and obtains a new job at higher earnings before hearing would cause absurd 
results: 
For example, [such an] interpretation would seemingly “reset” claimant's 
entitlement to benefits and limit them to functional loss any time a claimant 
returns to work or is offered work at the same or greater wages by any 
employer. This would make it virtually impossible for defendants to know 
when to volunteer benefits using the industrial disability method. 
Furthermore, using claimant's interpretation, a claimant entitled to benefits 
under subsection 85.34(2)(v) (2019) might be better off not seeking 
employment after being terminated by a defendant-employer because he 
or she would potentially risk entitlement to benefits under the industrial 
disability analysis should a different employer offer the same or greater 
earnings than the claimant was receiving at the time of the injury. Certainly 
the legislature did not intend to discourage claimants from seeking gainful 
employment after a work injury. 
Id. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 53 
 
Lastly, reading the requirement for a bifurcated litigation process to apply only 
under the circumstances expressly stated in section 85.34(2)(v) is also consistent with 
Iowa Supreme Court precedent requiring the agency and courts to “apply the workers' 
compensation statute broadly and liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective: 
the benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents.” Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. 
Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 2010). Applying the statute as written allows a 
claimant to receive a final determination on permanent disability when the issue is ripe 
for determination. Getting such a determination via a single contested case proceeding 
before the agency means the claimant will receive payment of all PPD benefits to which 
the claimant is legally entitled sooner in time and without having to go through litigation 
of a second contested case proceeding. Therefore, the result of adhering to the 
statutory text is beneficial to the injured worker and the worker's dependents. 
For these reasons, the Flint rule dictates narrowly interpreting the statutory text 
added in 2017 that creates a mandatory bifurcated litigation process. That text 
expressly applies to the “same employer” at the time of the work injury. Therefore, when 
the injured employee’s employment with the defendant-employer ends before the 
hearing in a contested case proceeding before the Commissioner, it is appropriate for 
the presiding deputy to consider it when determining lost earning capacity under the 
traditional industrial disability framework. 
d .  
I o w a  C o d e  § §  8 5 . 2 6 ,  8 6 . 1 4  &  R e v i e w - R e op en i ng  
The IWCA provides parties a mechanism to reopen an agency decision or 
agreement for settlement for agency review. See Iowa Code §§ 85.26(2), 86.14(2); see 
also Green v. N. Cent. Iowa Reg’l Waste Auth., 989 N.W.2d 144, 146–47 (Iowa 2023). 
The 2017 amendments enacted by the legislature did not make any changes to either 
Iowa Code section 85.26(3) or 86.14. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23. Therefore, the raft of 
caselaw precedent governing review-reopening of workers’ compensation cases 
remains binding in such proceedings. 
“In an original proceeding, all matters relevant to a dispute are subject to inquiry.” 
Iowa Code § 86.14(1). The “‘commissioner finds the facts as they stand at the time of 
the hearing.’” Green, 989 N.W.2d at 147 (quoting Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 
N.W.2d 387, 392 (Iowa 2009)). Therefore, the award in an arbitration decision is based 
on “the snapshot taken on the day of hearing.” Peters v. Ryder Integrated Logistics, 
Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5067874, 2021 WL 5570377, *2 (App. Nov. 18, 
2021).  
“The review-reopening proceeding . . . is a new and distinct proceeding apart 
from the original arbitration action.” Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 395. The agency's “ 
inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the employee warrants an end to, 
diminishment of, or increase of compensation so awarded or agreed upon.”' Iowa Code 
§ 86.14(2). Because “principles of res judicata . . . apply,” the agency does not “re-
determine the condition of the employee . . . adjudicated by the former award.”' 
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 391 93 (quoting Stice v. Consol. Ind. Coal Co., 291 N.W.2d 
452, 456 (Iowa 1940)). Nor does reviewing-reopening “provide an opportunity to 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 54 
 
relitigate causation issues that were determined in the initial award or settlement 
agreement. Id. at 393. Rather, the agency “must . . . evaluate ‘the condition of the 
employee, which is found to exist subsequent to the date of the award being reviewed.”’ 
Id. at 391 (quoting Stice, 291 N.W.2d at 456).  
The party petitioning the agency for review-reopening shoulders the burden to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence the requisite change in condition compared 
to the snapshot of the claimant’s condition at the time of the initial hearing at which the 
evidentiary record was made regarding the award at issue. See id.; see also Green, 989 
N.W.2d.  When an employee seeks more compensation, the employee must establish 
the original work injury is the proximate cause of additional impairment or lessening of 
earning capacity. E.N.T. Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 830 (Iowa 1994) (citing 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 350 (Iowa 1980)). When an 
employee's industrial disability is at issue, “[t]he necessary showing in a review-
reopening proceeding may be made without proof of change in physical condition.” Id. 
(citing Blacksmith, 290 N.W.2d at 350). In Stuart v. Dickten Masch Plastics, LLC, our 
court of appeals delved into situations that allow for the reopening of a workers’ 
compensation award or settlement: 
The change in condition can be physical or economic. See [E.N.T. 
Assocs. v.] Collentine, 525 N.W.2d [827,] 829 [(Iowa 1994)]. So “proof of 
change in physical condition” is not required. Id. As our supreme court has 
explained, “industrial disability is the product of many factors, not just 
physical impairment.” Id. “Other factors include age, education, 
experience, and inability, because of the injury, to engage in employment 
for which the employee is fitted.” Id. 
Thus, a physician whose income was reduced after he decided he could 
no longer safely perform surgeries was entitled to increase his benefits in 
a review-reopening proceeding. See id. at 829–30. So too was a truck 
driver whose employer transferred him to a lower-paying dock job after 
deciding he was disqualified from driving because of his original injury. 
See Blacksmith [v. All-Am., Inc.], 290 N.W.2d [348,] 354 [(Iowa 1980)]. 
And when a worker's benefit award was originally reduced by ten percent 
expressly because of an employer's promised accommodated 
employment, and the employer instead placed him on disability retirement, 
the worker was entitled to reopen the award to receive the extra ten 
percent benefits. See Gallardo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 482 
N.W.2d 393, 396–97 (Iowa 1992). But a worker's change in condition 
caused by her personal decisions unrelated to her original injury—
including caring for grandchildren and closing her unprofitable business—
does not justify reopening. Simonson v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 588 
N.W.2d 430, 435–36 (Iowa 1999). 
998 N.W.2d 192 (Iowa Ct. App. 2023) (Table). 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 55 
 
In 2017, the legislature codified the requirement in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
that an injured employee is limited to permanency benefits based on impairment for 
work injuries to the whole body if they returned to or are offered work at the same or 
greater earnings as they earned at the time of the work injury. The legislature also 
included in the amendment to section 85.34(2)(v) language providing, “Notwithstanding 
section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is eligible for compensation under this 
paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is compensated based only 
upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the award or 
agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon 
commencement of reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent 
partial disability.”  
In doing so and using the word “shall,” the legislature mandates application of the 
industrial disability analysis for lost earning capacity when the following criteria are met: 
1) The injured employee returns to work with the same employer as at the time 
of the work injury and the employee’s earnings are the same or more as at 
the time of the injury; 
2) The injured employee remains employed with the employer, earning the same 
or more as at the time of the work injury, at the time the agency issues a 
decision based on the evidence collected at a hearing or approves a 
settlement; and 
3) The employer terminates the employee after the agency decision or order 
approving settlement. 
The text codified by the legislature bypasses application of the traditional review-
reopening standard discussed above and mandates “a determination of any reduction in 
the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability.” 
Thus, the legislature created a presumption by statute that under such circumstances,  
Thus, the plain text of the 2017 amendments creates a mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process when the injured employee returns to work with the employer at the 
time of the work injury, earning the same or more as at the time of injury, and the 
employer terminates the employee before the hearing. The 2017 amendments leave the 
review-reopening process untouched. This means that the under Iowa Code section 
86.14(1), the agency must consider all matters relevant to a dispute at the time the case 
goes to hearing. And section 86.14(2) allows the parties to petition for review-reopening 
if there is a change in condition compared to the snapshot at the time of hearing on all 
relevant matters. This includes, but is not limited to, changes in employment such as a 
transfer to a lower paying job, Blacksmith, 290 N.W.2d at 354, or a voluntary quit, 
Collentine, 525 N.W.2d at 829–30. It is axiomatic that if such events can trigger review-
reopening under section 86.14(2), they are relevant to the parties dispute in the original 
proceeding under section 86.14(1). Since there is no language in the 2017 amendments 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 56 
 
that makes a change impacting this dynamic such matters must be considered in the 
original proceeding since they fall outside the circumstances triggering the mandatory 
bifurcated litigation process under section 85.34(2)(v). 
e .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  2 1 6 ,  4 2  U S C  §  1 2 11 2 ( d )  &  P o s t - O f f e r  
M e d i c a l  E x a m i n a t i o ns  
The Iowa Civil Rights Act (ICRA) prohibits employment discrimination against a 
qualified person with a disability because of the disability. Iowa Code § 216.6(1). The 
Iowa Supreme Court is not bound by the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) or 
Rehabilitation Act of 1975 (Rehab Act), their implementing regulations, or caselaw 
construing them. Goodpaster v. Schwan’s Home Serv. Inc., 849 N.W.2d 1, 6–13 (Iowa 
2014). But Iowa courts may rely on federal law as useful guidance when interpreting the 
ICRA because it shares a common purpose with the ADA and Rehab Act. See 
Bearshield v. John Morrell & Co., 570 N.W.2d 915, 918 (Iowa 1997); see also Rumsey 
v. Woodgrain Millwork, Inc., 962 N.W.2d 9, 22–28 (Iowa 2021); Goodpaster, 849 
N.W.2d at 15–16; Casey’s Gen. Stores, Inc. v. Blackford, 661 N.W.2d 515, 519–25 
(Iowa 2003); Boelman v. Manson State Bank, 522 N.W.2d 73, 79–80 (Iowa 1994); Miller 
v. Sioux Gateway Fire Dep’t, 497 N.W.2d 838, 841–42 (Iowa 1993). The undersigned 
has not found binding precedent holding that the ICRA imposes a framework similar to 
that under the ADA for post-offer medical examinations and inquiries, so this analysis 
will assume arguendo that the ICRA does not prohibit pre-offer medical examinations 
and inquiries into the health of job applicants.  
The ICRA applies to employers with four or more employees. Iowa Code 
§ 216.6(6)(a). The federal Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) covers entities such as 
employers with “15 or more employees for each working day in each of 20 or more 
calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year.” 42 USC §§ 12111 (2), (4). 
Thus, even assuming employers with between four and 14 employees are excluded 
from the pre-employment medical examination and inquiry framework set forth in the 
ADA, the federal statute’s reach nonetheless covers a significant share of Iowa 
employers.  
The ADA’s prohibition against employment discrimination “shall include medical 
examinations and inquiries.” 42 USC § 12112(d)(1). An employer is prohibited from 
“conduct[ing] a medical examination or mak[ing] inquiries of a job applicant as to 
whether such applicant is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or severity of 
such disability. Id., at § 12112(d)(2)(A). But an employer “may make preemployment 
inquiries into the ability of an applicant to perform job-related functions.” Id., at 
§ 12112(d)(2)(B). 
The ADA prohibits an employer from requiring a pre-offer medical examination. 
See id., at § 12112(d)(3). An employer may require a pre-employment physical “after an 
offer of employment has been made to a job applicant and prior to the commencement 
of the employment duties of such applicant.” Id., at § 12112(d)(3). Section 
12112(d)(3)(B) expressly authorizes an employer to “condition an offer of employment 
on the results of such examination” only if “information obtained regarding the medical 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 57 
 
condition or history of the applicant is collected and maintained on separate forms and 
in separate medical files and is treated as a confidential medical record” except for 
sharing it with supervisors and managers as necessary to evaluate work restrictions and 
accommodations, first aid and safety personnel if the disability might require emergency 
treatment, and government officials investigating ADA compliance. Id., at 
12112(d)(3)(B) (i)–(iii).  
The framework under the ADA for pre-employment physical examinations must 
be considered when determining the meaning of the text the legislature codified in Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v), which provides in pertinent part, “If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is offered work for 
which the employee receives or would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or 
earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the 
injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity.” (emphasis added). Under 
the plain language of the statute, the mere offer of work limits an injured worker’s 
permanency benefits to the extent of functional impairment as opposed to lost earning 
capacity using the traditional industrial disability analysis.  
Consider an Iowa worker who sustains a work injury that caused permanent work 
restrictions and then applies for a job with a third-party employer under the ADA’s 
preemployment examination and inquiry framework. The ADA allows an employer to 
make a job offer to an applicant and rescind the offer based on the results of a post-
offer medical examination and inquiries, which reveal the permanent functional 
limitations caused by the work injury. Such an adverse employment action is lawful 
under the ADA. It would also be relevant and probative under the IWCA on the extent of 
permanent disability caused by the work injury. 
Now view Trinity’s proposed interpretation of section 85.34(2)(v) against the 
backdrop of the ADA framework for post-offer medical examinations and inquiries. If 
section 85.34(2)(v) is read to include third-party employers who make job offers after 
the end of the employment relationship between an injured Iowa worker and the 
employer at the time of the work injury, that worker would be limited to permanency 
benefits based only on functional impairment by the offer from the third-party employer 
even if the functional limitations caused by the work injury—discovered in the post-offer 
medical examination and inquiry by the third-party employer authorized by the ADA—
ultimately result in the rescission of that job offer. Such an interpretation would 
effectively prevent the injured worker from receiving permanency benefits for the lost 
earning capacity created by the work injury and its resultant work restrictions even 
though they plainly have negatively impacted the injured Iowa worker’s capacity to earn 
in the labor market.  
The IWCA, ICRA, and ADA all create rights and responsibilities for employees 
with disabilities and employers. Because of the crossover in their purview, the interplay 
of the acts must be considered when interpreting the text of the IWCA. With respect to 
whether an employee with a disability is entitled to permanency benefits based on the 
extent of permanent impairment or industrial disability, it would run contrary to the 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 58 
 
purpose underpinning all three statutes, and in particular that of the IWCA, to read the 
IWCA so that a post-offer medical examination authorized under the ADA can prevent 
an employee from receiving permanency benefits based on industrial disability when the 
ADA-compliant medical examination results in the rescission of the offer that preceded 
it. 
f .  
C o n c l u s i on  
Based on the above analysis of the text the legislature codified in Iowa Code 
sections 85.34(2) (v) and (x) and their interplay with other statutory provisions, the 
undersigned concludes the limitation to permanency benefits based on impairment is 
limited to instances when the injured employee returns to work with or is offered work by 
the employer at the time of the work injury and the employment relationship endures  
through the hearing date in the contested case proceeding before the Commissioner. 
The end of the Trinity-Laird employment relationship before the hearing date is relevant 
to the question of the extent of the disability the work injury caused Laird to sustain that 
is outside the narrow exception to determining industrial disability for whole body 
injuries codified in section 85.34(2)(v) after the 2017 amendments. Laird is therefore 
entitled to permanency benefits based on a determination of her lost earning capacity 
using the traditional industrial disability analysis.  
2 .  
E n t i t l e m e n t  
The amount of compensation for an unscheduled injury resulting in permanent 
partial disability is based on the employee's earning capacity.” Neal v. Annett Holdings, 
Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012) (citing Broadlawns Med. Ctr. v. Sanders, 792 
N.W.2d 302, 306 (Iowa 2010)). The assessment of a claimant's earning capacity is 
based on multiple factors: functional disability, age, education, qualifications, work 
experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings before and after the 
injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics of the claimant, the claimant's 
inability, because of the injury to engage in employment for which the claimant is fitted, 
and the employer's inability to accommodate the claimant's functional limitations. Id.; 
IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632-33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 
N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). 
In the current case, Laird graduated from high school and attended college to 
obtain her postsecondary degree in nursing. She then worked her entire professional 
life as an RN until she quit her job at Trinity because of the effects of the stipulated work 
injury and Trinity’s decision to end her accommodation of not treating COVID-19 
patients.  
Laird is motivated to work. She worked hard to rehabilitate following her bout with 
COVID-19 and the long course of treatment it required. Laird successfully returned to 
work and performed all of the duties she was physically able. Trinity granted her the 
accommodation of not treating patients contagious with COVID-19, allowed her to self-
accommodate by taking notes, and her coworkers at Trinity informally accommodated 
the physical limitations COVID-19 has caused her by voluntarily performing more 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 59 
 
demanding duties. When she learned of Trinity’s decision to no longer accommodate 
her work restriction of not treating COVID-19 patients, Laird sought and found new 
employment better tailored for her skills and abilities after the stipulated work injury. 
Because of Laird’s skills, work ethic, and desire to work, she was able to get the 
job she held at the time of hearing with Cedar Valley Hospice. Laird has received 
positive job reviews in this position because of her skill and work ethic. In this position, 
her earnings have been lower than she would have earned had she stayed with Trinity 
in the RN position. Cedar Valley Hospice had not required Laird to treat contagious 
COVID-19 patients as of the hearing date. The position is also less physically and 
mentally demanding than the RN job at Trinity. Laird intends to continue working in this 
position and there is no reason to believe her employment with Cedar Valley Hospice 
will end any time soon. Both parties are happy with their employment relationship. 
Laird’s degree is in nursing. She did well in school. Her current position allows 
her to draw on her education and experience in the nursing field. However, due to the 
cognitive issues caused by the stipulated work injury, she is not a good candidate for 
retraining in another field. Moreover, Laird is unable to return to the type of RN position 
she held for most of her nursing career because of the work restrictions necessitated by 
the effects of the stipulated work injury. 
Laird has met her burden of proof on the question of lost earning capacity. The 
weight of the evidence shows the stipulated work injury caused Laird to sustain 
industrial disability of 55 percent. This is a whole person injury compensated out of 500 
weeks. Laird’s 55 percent industrial disability multiplied by 500 equals 275 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits. 
C . 
C o m m e n c e m en t  D a t e  
In 2017, the legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.34(2) to change when 
the IWCA requires payment of permanency benefits to commence. 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 
23, § 6. The legislature struck language requiring commencement of permanency 
benefits “at the termination of the healing period” provided in section 85.34(1) and 
replaced it with “when it is medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from 
the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanency 
impairment can be determined by use of the [Guides].” Id. (now codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(1)). Thus, under the plain language of the statute, as amended, the 
commencement date for permanency benefits is when the injured worker has reached 
MMI from the work injury and a physician can evaluate permanent impairment using the 
Guides. 
As discussed above, in 2017, the legislature amended the IWCA to codify the 
requirement to utilize solely the Guides when determining permanent impairment. See 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x). The Guides utilize “The Organ System and Whole Body 
Approach to Impairment.” Guides, § 1.3, p. 9. This approach is explained in the Guides 
thusly: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 60 
 
The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the 
organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations. Most 
organ/body systems chapters in the Guides provide impairment ratings 
that represent the extent of whole person impairment. In addition to listing 
whole person impairments, the musculoskeletal chapters provide regional 
impairment ratings (eg, upper extremity, lower extremity); regional ratings 
are then converted into whole person impairment ratings. Within some 
musculoskeletal regions, a consensus group developed weights to reflect 
the relative importance of certain regions. For example, different fingers or 
different areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their 
unique and relative importance to the region’s overall functioning. These 
weights, which have gained acceptance in clinical practice, have been 
retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a regional body to 
whole person impairment when needed. 
Id. (bold text omitted). 
The Guides created the Combined Values Chart to allow for the combination of 
multiple impairments to body parts of different organ systems or regions. Id., § 1.4, p. 9.  
The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) was designed to enable the 
physician to account for the effects of multiple impairments with a 
summary value. A standard formula was used to ensure that regardless of 
the number of impairments, the summary value would not exceed 100% of 
the whole person. According to the formula listed in the combined values 
chart, multiple impairments are combined so that the whole person 
impairment value is equal to or less than the sum of all the individual 
impairment values. 
Id. Each discrete impairment to each body part or system must first be determined 
before they are combined into one whole body impairment using the Combined Values 
Chart. See id., at pp. 10, 604. 
 
Considering the mandate in section 85.34(2)(1) to commence payment of 
permanency benefits ““when it is medically indicated that maximum medical 
improvement from the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment can be determined by use of the [Guides],” section 
85.34(2)(v)’s requirement to determine such impairment solely by utilizing the Guides, 
and “The Organ System and Whole Body Approach to Impairment” under Section 1.3 of 
the Guides, and the “Philosophy and Use of the Combined Values Chart” under Section 
1.4 of the Guides, it is axiomatic that the commencement date for permanency benefits 
is the date on which the injured employee reaches MMI for each individual body part or 
system because each discrete impairment can be combined under the Guides because, 
“A standard formula was used to ensure that regardless of the number of impairments, 
the summary value would not exceed 100% of the whole person.” Guides, 1.4, p. 9. 
This makes the commencement date for a whole person impairment the first date on 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 61 
 
which an injured employee reaches MMI for a body part or system that can be 
evaluated for permanent impairment using the Guides. 
In the current case, different physicians have found Laird to have reached MMI 
for different conditions at different times. Dr. Kuhnlein opined Laird reached MMI for her 
cognitive issues and metabolic conditions on February 12, 2021. The undersigned finds 
this opinion to be conclusory in nature and therefore unpersuasive. 
Dr. Malicka-Rozek found Laird reached MMI on May 12, 2021, and released her 
to return to work without restrictions, and Dr. Broghammer agreed. The undersigned 
finds this to be the more persuasive MMI date. The undersigned further finds Dr. Mehta 
and Dr. Kuhnlein’s April 5, 2022 MMI date for Laird’s pulmonary conditions persuasive. 
The undersigned also finds Laird did not meet her burden of proof on the question of 
whether she had reached MMI for her mental health conditions on the date of hearing. 
D . 
R a t e  
The parties stipulated that on the date of injury, Laird was married and entitled to 
three exemptions. However, they dispute the amount of Laird’s gross earnings at the 
time. Laird contends they were $1,444.86 and Trinity asserts $1,420.67. The difference 
is based on whether the short-staffing bonus Laird received from Trinity on two 
occasions during the 13 weeks before the stipulated injury date constitutes an “irregular 
bonus” for purposes of calculating her gross earnings under Iowa Code sections 85.36 
and 85.61(4). The word “irregular” means “without symmetry, even shape, formal 
arrangement, etc.: an irregular pattern” or “not characterized by any fixed principle, 
method, continuity, or rate: irregular intervals.” The Random House Dictionary of the 
English Language, 1009 (Unabridged 2d ed. 1983).  
Here, Trinity implemented the short-staffing bonus during the COVID-19 
pandemic when staffing levels were low. The bonus was offered to nurses such as 
Laird, but the nurses did not have to accept it. Trinity paid the bonus only if the nurse 
agreed to work the requisite hours. The record shows Trinity irregularly paid the bonus 
to Laird during the months leading up to the work injury and during only one two-week 
pay period in the 13 weeks immediately predating it. The facts in this case establish that 
Trinity irregularly paid the short-staffing bonus to Laird. Therefore, Trinity’s gross 
earnings of $1,420.67 and rate calculation of $910.39 are adopted.  
E . 
I n t e r e s t  &  C r e d i t  
Laird seeks interest on those payments of benefits Trinity made after they were 
due. Under Iowa Code sections 85.30 and 535.3, interest due to an injured employee 
“shall accrue from the date each compensation payment is due at an annual rate equal 
to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.” Laird is entitled to 
interest for all payments paid after they were due as determined from the 
commencement dates identified above in Section V(C). 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 62 
 
The interest to which Laird is entitled includes that on the payment of benefits 
Trinity made on December 23, 2022. That amount totals $254.99. Laird requests that 
the amount of unpaid interest be deducted from the credit to which Trinity is owed for 
overpayment of benefits. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(5) provides that an employer that pays an injured 
employee weekly benefits in excess of that required by the IWCA is entitled to a credit 
for the excess paid. The parties do not dispute that Trinity overpaid Laird benefits due to 
a weekly rate that was higher than that to which she is entitled. Trinity paid Laird 
temporary total disability or healing period benefits and permanency benefits at a rate 
higher than the $910.39 to which is Laird is entitled. The resulting overpayment totals 
$7,221.64. After subtracting the unpaid interest, Trinity is entitled to a credit of 
$6,966.65 for overpayment of benefits. 
F .  
P e n a l t y  
Iowa Code chapter 86 long governed certain aspects of our workers’ 
compensation system. In 2023, the Iowa General Assembly enacted legislation that 
took effect July 1, 2023, and transfers chapter 86 to sections 10A.303 through 10A.333 
in the Iowa Code. See 2023 Iowa Acts ch. 19, § 1477. Because the stipulated work 
injury occurred in 2020, before enactment of the legislation transferring chapter 86 to 
chapter 10A, this decision uses Iowa Code chapter 86 (2020). 
“Because penalty benefits are a creature of statute, our discussion begins with 
an examination of the statutory parameters for such benefits.” Keystone Nursing Care 
Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 307 (Iowa 2005). Under Iowa Code section 
86.13(4)(a) 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
This provision “codifies, in the workers’ compensation insurance context, the common 
law rule that insurers with good faith disputes over the legal or factual validity of claims 
can challenge them, if their arguments for doing so present fairly debatable issues.” 
Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993) (citing Dirks v. Farm Bureau Mut. 
Ins. Co., 465 N.W.2d 857, 861 (Iowa 1991) and Dolan v. Aid Ins. Co., 431 N.W.2d 790, 
794 (Iowa 1988)). “The purpose or goal of the statute is both punishment and 
deterrence.” Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 237 (Iowa 1996). 
The legislature established in Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b) a burden-shifting 
framework for determining whether penalty benefits must be awarded in a workers’ 
compensation case. See 2009 Iowa Acts ch. 179, § 110 (codified at Iowa Code 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 63 
 
§ 86.13(4)(b)); see also Pettengill v. Am. Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 740, 
746–47 (Iowa Ct. App. 2015) as amended (Feb. 16, 2016) (discussing the burden-
shifting required by the two-factor statutory test). The employee bears the burden to 
establish a prima facie case for penalty benefits. See Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b). To do 
so, the employee must demonstrate a denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
workers’ compensation benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b)(1). If the employee fails to 
prove a denial, delay, or termination, there can be no award of penalty benefits and the 
analysis stops. See id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
However, if the employee makes the requisite showing, the burden of proof shifts to the 
employer. See id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
To avoid an award of penalty benefits, the employer must “prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits.” 
Iowa Code§ 86.13(4)(b)(2). An excuse must meet all of the following criteria to be “a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse” under the statute: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
Id. § 86.13(4)(c).  
This paragraph creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in 
showing it had a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for the 
termination of benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(c)(1)-(3). First, the 
employer's excuse for the termination must have been preceded by an 
investigation. Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the investigation 
were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” relied on by the employer 
in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.” Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3) 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747 (emphasis in original). “An employer cannot unilaterally 
decide to terminate an employee's benefits without adhering to Iowa Code section 
86.13; to allow otherwise would contradict the language of that section.” Id. 
“A ‘reasonable basis’ for denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly 
debatable.’” Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307 (quoting Christensen v. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 64 
 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996)). A claim may be fairly 
debatable because of a good faith legal or factual dispute. See Covia, 507 N.W.2d at 
416 (finding a jurisdictional issue fairly debatable because there were “viable arguments 
in favor of either party”).  “[T]he reasonableness of the employer’s denial or termination 
of benefits does not turn on whether the employer was right. The issue is whether there 
was a reasonable basis for the employer’s position that no benefits were owing.” 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307–08.  
If the employer establishes a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse,” no 
penalty benefits are awarded. However, if the employer fails to meet its burden of proof, 
penalty benefits must be awarded. The following factors are used in determining the 
amount of penalty benefits: 
 The length of the delay; 
 The number of the delays; 
 The information available to the employer regarding the employee's injuries 
and wages; and  
 The prior penalties imposed against the employer under section 86.13. 
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
“The application of the penalty provision does not turn on the length of the delay in 
making the correct compensation payment. Any delay without reasonable excuse 
entitles the employee to benefits in some amount.” Id., at 236. 
Trinity learned Laird reached MMI on May 12, 2021. Trinity did not pay any 
permanency benefits until December 23, 2022. On that date, Trinity paid her $86,225.40 
for the time period from May 12, 2021, through January 31, 2023, at the weekly rate of 
$958.06. The check thus included payment for 84 weeks of past-due permanency 
benefits for the time period from May 12, 2021, through December 23, 2022. The proper 
rate as determined above was $910.36. Multiplying that by 84 weeks equals $76,470.24 
in past-due workers’ compensation. 
Trinity provided evidence of the action taken by its agents to determine what, if 
any, permanent impairment Laird sustained due to the stipulated injury. (Ex. F) The 
issue is that there is no indication Trinity communicated to Laird in writing the reason for 
the delay. (Ex. F) Therefore, even assuming arguendo, the timing of Laird’s entitlement 
to permanency benefits under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(1) was fairly debatable and 
the steps Trinity took were reasonable, the failure to contemporaneously convey the 
reason for the delay in payment violates Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c)(3). 
The longest delayed payment was about 83 weeks and they go down by week 
from there. Each of the 84 individual payments constitutes an individual delay. Trinity 
had ready access to the MMI determinations by Laird’s treating physicians and her 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 65 
 
earnings information. There is no indication in the record the Commissioner has 
imposed other penalties against Trinity, which is a mitigating factor. The weight of the 
evidence establishes that a 30 percent penalty on the $76,470.24 paid late is 
appropriate. 
G .  
M e d i c a l  E x p e n se s  
For all compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer 
must “furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1). Here, Trinity provided care to Laird until they denied 
liability and refused care. After Trinity did so, she sought care on his own. 
Trinity’s denial of liability means they lost the right to choose the care received by 
Laird for the work injury. Winnebago Indus., Inc. v. Haverly, 727 N.W.2d 567, 575 (Iowa 
2006) (citing Trade Prof'ls, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 124 (Iowa 2003)). Laird 
could therefore obtain reasonable care from any provider for the injury, at her expense, 
and seek reimbursement for such care through this contested case proceeding. See 
Trade Prof'ls, 661 N.W.2d at 121-25 (affirming on judicial review an agency decision 
ordering the payment of medical expenses for unauthorized care because the 
defendants denied liability for the alleged injury and therefore lost the right to control 
care). 
Trinity and Laird disputed whether the medical expenses were causally 
connected to the stipulated work injury. Hr’g Rpt. § 8(d). They also stipulated that, 
“Although causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot be stipulated, the 
listed expenses are at least causally connected to the medical condition(s) upon which 
the claim of injury is based.” Id. at § 8(e). Because Laird has prevailed on the question 
of causation with respect to the disputed medical conditions, Trinity must hold her 
harmless for the medical expenses in Exhibits 7 and 8. 
H . 
I M E  
Iowa Code section 85.39 governs examinations of injured employees to 
determine the extent of permanent impairment or disability caused by a work injury. Mid 
American Const. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 847-48 (Iowa 2024). Under subsection 
1, the employee must attend an examination by a physician of the employer's choice or 
be disqualified from benefits for the period of refusal. An opinion on causation or the 
extent of permanent impairment or disability by a doctor retained by the employer 
triggers the injured employee's right to an IME under subsection 2. 
“In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the employer 
and the employee.” Id. 2 N.W.3d at 848. “The statutory process balances the competing 
interests of the employer and employee and permits the employee to obtain an 
independent medical examination at the employer's expense.” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). Subsection 2 entitles the 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 66 
 
employee to receive an examination if the employee believes the evaluation made by 
the employer's physician was too low. Iowa Code § 85.39(2); Young, 867 N.W.2d at 
844. The employee's own examination “is known as an IME because the examination is 
independent of the examination done by the physician selected by the employer.” 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 843-44. 
Subsection 2 further provides, “A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination ... shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to 
perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” 
Under the Iowa Supreme Court's holding in Sandlin, “The reasonableness of the fees 
will be analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically charge to perform the 
impairment rating examination—which may include ‘the costs of reviewing medical 
records, conducting a physical examination, opining on causation, assessing permanent 
impairment, assigning restrictions, and addressing further treatment recommendations.”’ 
2 N.W.3d at 851-52 (quoting Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers' Comp. 
Comm'r No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022)). 
This analysis under the statute “effectively necessitates fact-finding by the 
commissioner on the fees typically charged in the local area where the examination is 
performed. Parties may offer evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to 
support or challenge the fee charged in a particular case.” Id. at 849. The court 
concluded “‘many IMEs come before the agency, which allows the [commissioner] to 
use agency experience and expertise to conclude that [the physician's] charges are in 
line with those of an occupational medicine doctor with a practice in the ... [local] area 
performing an evaluation of permanent impairment in accordance with the [AMA] 
Guides.” Id. (quoting Nguyen v. Hy-Vee, Inc., Iowa Workers' Comp. Comm'r No. 
21003118.03, 2023 WL 7128682, at *32 (Arb. Oct. 20, 2023)). 
The introductory chapter of the Guides states the following with respect to the 
process it details for evaluating permanent impairment or disability: 
Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides 
as comprehensive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing 
the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed 
in Chapter 2. A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable 
information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a 
discussion about the person's abilities and limitations, including the ability 
to perform common activities listed in Table 1-2. Combining the medical 
and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about 
essential work activities, if requested, is a basis for improved 
understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the 
individual's work ability. 
Guides, § 1.12, p. 15. 
Chapter 2, “Practical Application of the Guides,” provides the following with 
respect to the examiners' roles and responsibilities: 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 67 
 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. Moreover, the Guides state, “A clear, accurate, and complete report is 
essential to support a rating of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
To that end, the Guides lay out a list of elements that “should be included in all 
impairment evaluation reports. Id. (emphasis in original). The first is a narrative history 
of medical condition(s) consisting of 
the onset and course of the condition, symptoms, findings on previous 
examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse 
effects. Include information that may be relevant to onset, such as an 
occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any 
relevant investigations. Include detailed list of prior evaluations in the 
clinical data section. 
Id., § 2.6a.1, p. 21. 
In addition, the Guides direct a physician to “[a]ssess current clinical status, 
including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of 
contemplated treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.” Id., § 2.6a.3, 
p. 21. They also direct inclusion of discussion of diagnostic study results and 
outstanding pertinent diagnostic studies, whether the injured employee is at MMI, and 
diagnoses and impairments. Id., §§ 2.6a.2-2.6a.7, pp. 21-22. Moreover, the Guides 
state a report should discuss impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and 
limitations; calculation of the impairment rating; and discussion of how the impairment 
rating was calculated. Id., §§ 2.6a.8, 2.6b, 2.6c. p. 22. 
The Guides also state that other elements may be included in an impairment 
evaluation that include “a work history with detailed, chronological description of work 
activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, 
any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity and 
duration of exposure and activities, and any protective measures” as well as “discussion 
of causation and apportionment.” Id., §§ 2.6a.4, 2.6a.6, pp. 21-22. As discussed above, 
an Iowa Court of Appeals panel has opined that causation is effectively a zero percent 
impairment rating and therefore opinions on causation are reimbursable and the agency 
has followed this holding. 
The Guides provide a “Sample Report for Permanent Medical Impairment” for 
physicians to follow to help ensure they adhere to the process in the Guides. Id., pp. 23-
24. The sample includes a section entitled “Identifiers” with information about the injured 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 68 
 
employee and examination. Id., p. 23. The next section is entitled, “Introduction,” and 
consists of, “Purpose (impairment or IME evaluation, personal injury, workers' 
compensation) and procedures (who performed the exam, patient consent, location of 
examination).” Id. Following that is the “Narrative history,” which includes, “Chief 
complaints, history of injury or illness, occupational history, past medical history, family 
history, social history, [and] review of symptoms.” Id. After that is the section entitled, 
“Medical record review,” which is described as, “Chronology of medical evaluation, 
diagnostic studies, and treatment for the injury or illness.” Id. 
Next is a section detailing the physician's physical examination. Id. After that, a 
section discussing diagnostic studies. Id., p. 24. Then the section, ““Diagnoses and 
Impairments,” with the note, “If requested, discuss work relatedness, causation, 
apportionment, restrictions, accommodations, assistive devices.” Id. 
The report then has a section entitled, “Impairment Rating Criteria,” which 
includes, “MMI residual function, limitations of activities of daily living, [and] prognosis.” 
Id. This is followed by the “Impairment Rating and Rationale,” which includes the body 
part or system being rated, the chapter number of the Guides used, the table number of 
the Guides used, the percentage impairment of the whole person, and “[d]iscussion of 
rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination.” Id. 
The report template concludes with a section entitled, “Recommendations,” 
which is for, “Further diagnostic or therapeutic follow-up care.” Id. Then there is a 
section labeled, “Work ability, work restrictions.” Id. This final section includes the 
explanatory note, “If requested, review abilities and limitations in reference to essential 
job activities.” Id. 
Unsurprisingly, every section of the “Sample Report for Permanent 
Medical Impairment” in the Guides is relevant to the determination of 
permanent disability or impairment in workers' compensation cases before 
the agency. As discussed above, the rationale for directing a physician to 
write a report contained in the Guides is accurate: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. “A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating 
of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
The Guides reflect what agency experience and expertise reinforces: The IME 
report is important in the determination of an employee's entitlement to workers' 
compensation benefits, especially in contested cases before the agency. The AMA has 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 69 
 
established criteria in the Guides so that doctors are providing the information injured 
workers, employers, insurance carriers, and tribunals such as the agency need to 
equitably determine an individual's entitlement to workers' compensation benefits based 
on the injury they sustained and the disability the injured has caused. Presumably, this 
is why the legislature mandated use of the Guides when determining permanent 
impairment. Consequently, this mandate cannot be ignored when determining what is 
reimbursable as a reasonable cost under section 85.39(2). The costs that stem from a 
physician following the Guides in accordance with the requirement in section 85.34(2)(x) 
when performing an IME under section 85.39(2) are therefore reasonable. 
A worker's right to an IME under section 85.39 for a compensable work injury is 
only triggered when a doctor chosen by the employer opines on causation or 
permanency. See Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 851 (citing Kern v. Fenchel, Doster, & Buck, No. 
20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603, at *4 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021) (for the proposition 
“there can be no disability determination arising out of a disability evaluation without a 
determination there was causation”). The worker is entitled to an IME if the worker 
believes the opinion is too low. For purposes of IME reimbursement, an opinion of “no 
causation,” such as those in the report issued by Dr. Broghammer, is the functional 
equivalent to an opinion of no permanent disability. See Kern, 2021 WL 3890603, at *4 
(Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021) (holding “the clear effect of [a] no-causation determination 
was a finding of no compensable permanent disability”). Claimant’s counsel arranged 
for the IME by Dr. Kuhnlein in response to the report on causation and permanency 
issued by Dr. Broghammer. Therefore, this statutory requirement is also met. 
Further, the evidence shows that Laird’s medical treatment was long in duration 
and featured multiple providers. This resulted in a copious amount of medical records. It 
also meant that Dr. Kuhnlein’s in-person history with Laird took the time necessary to 
cover it all. Dr. Kuhnlein substantially complied with the Guides in the performance of 
his evaluation and the contents of his IME report. The weight of the evidence 
establishes Laird is entitled to $8,825.00 for the reasonable costs associated with Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s IME. 
I .  
C o s t s  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting City of Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 
660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are 
strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)). Because Laird prevailed on the disputed issues of causation, entitlement to 
permanency benefits, and entitlement to medical benefits, $3,175.00 for the reasonable 
costs of obtaining Dr. Patra’s IME report is taxed against the defendant under Iowa 
Code section and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.33. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 70 
 
VI.  
OR D ER  
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Trinity shall pay to Laird two hundred seventy-five (275) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the rate of nine hundred ten and 39/100 dollars 
($910.39) per week from the commencement date of May 12, 2021. 
2) Trinity shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) Trinity shall pay interest as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30: 
a) On unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein; and 
b) On all benefits paid after they were due. 
4) Trinity is to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the stipulated 
amount of one hundred twenty-one thousand eight hundred thirty-seven and 
9/100 dollars ($121,837.09). 
5) Trinity shall pay to Laird a penalty in the amount of twenty-two thousand nine 
hundred forty-one and 7/100 dollars ($22,941.07). 
6) Trinity shall pay to Laird eight thousand eight hundred twenty-five and 00/100 
($8,825.00) for the reasonable costs of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME. 
7) Trinity shall pay the medical expenses itemized in Exhibits 7 and 8. 
8) Trinity shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
9) Trinity shall pay to Laird three thousand one hundred seventy-five and 00/100 
dollars ($3,175.00) for the reasonable costs of obtaining Dr. Patra’s report. 
Signed and filed this 25th day of June, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
 
 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 71 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Corey J. L. Walker, Attorney for Claimant 
Lee P. Hook, Attorney for Defendant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.27.  The notice of appeal must be filed via 
Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the agency has granted the filing party permission by the 
to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, written notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321-1270.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the 
date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appea l falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
 
