Case Number: 22002697.01
Case Title:  STROHMAN, JOHN V. SECOND INJURY FUND ONLY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Strohman John - 22002697.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOHN STROHMAN, 
  : 
           FILE NO.:  22002697.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
              A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
                    D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :                           
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:   1402.40; 3202;                              
 
Defendant. 
  :                   
 
3203 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant John Strohman filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (“the Fund”). The case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on February 7, 2024. Pursuant 
to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case proceeded to 
a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. 
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and Second Injury Fund’s Exhibits AA and BB.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on February 7, 2024. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on March 18, 2024, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained a first qualifying loss to the left shoulder/left 
biceps on March 9, 2019; 
2. 
If so, the functional loss from the prior qualifying injury; 
3. 
Whether claimant sustained a second compensable loss to the left knee on 
February 18, 2021; 
4. 
If so, the functional loss from the second qualifying injury; 
5. 
The commencement date for Second Injury Fund benefits, if awarded; 
6. 
The credit to which Second Injury Fund is entitled, if any; and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Aug-08  11:32:59     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
7. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 56-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
10) He did not graduate from high school, but later obtained a GED. He is married and 
has adult children.  
 
After claimant left high school in the late 1980s, he worked at Godberson Smith 
as a steel puncher. (Tr., p. 11) He left that job to work at Iowa Beef Processing (IBP), 
where his job was to debone hams. His next job was at Lorentzen’s, later purchased by 
Conagra, where he again deboned hams. (Tr., pp. 11-12) After a couple of years there 
he moved to Specialists of Iowa, where he again did knife work on kosher beef. (Tr., p. 
12) He worked there for a few years, and then went to work at Kerber Milling.  
 
At Kerber Milling, claimant loaded trucks, bagged feed, and helped customers. 
(Tr., p. 13) He testified he did “pretty much anything that needed to be done.” He left 
Kerber for a job at Skyjack Manufacturing, where he worked in the paint department. 
This was claimant’s first job in painting, and where he learned to paint. He described his 
job at Skyjack as loading lines with parts for Skyjack lifts, cleaning them, painting them, 
and then unloading them.  
 
Claimant was laid off from Skyjack, and went to work at Morton Building cutting 
rafters, which he described as 2-by-12 to 20 foot boards. (Tr., p. 14) He eventually left 
that job to work at Montag Manufacturing, where he continued to work at the time of 
hearing. (Tr., p. 15) He was hired at Montag for painting, but is also certified to work in 
assembly. At the time of hearing, he had worked at Montag for about eleven years. 
 
Claimant testified there have also been times where he did some part-time work 
for farmers, picking up rocks and bailing hay. (Tr., p. 16) He has also done part-time 
hog confinement work and body shop work in the past. Additionally, for the past 24-
years, he has worked at the First United Methodist Church in Emmetsburg, doing 
general maintenance and cleaning. (Tr., pp. 15-16) He continued to do the part-time 
work at the church at the time of hearing. (Tr., p. 16) 
 
On March 9, 2019, claimant was injured when he fell while trying to climb over a 
snowbank that had not been sufficiently plowed. (Tr., p. 22) He landed on his left 
shoulder and arm, and sought medical treatment. He first reported to the emergency 
room on March 10, 2019, where he saw William Bender, M.D. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) He 

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
reported that he thought his shoulder was dislocated, and also advised he had 
dislocated his left shoulder in the 1990s once before. Dr. Bender ordered an x-ray, and 
referred him to orthopedics for a suspected rotator cuff injury. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 3; 5) He 
was also taken off work for three days. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) 
 
Claimant saw Andrew Pick, D.O., on March 11, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 42) Dr. Pick 
noted bruising in claimant’s upper arm area, and claimant also reported pain and 
weakness in his shoulder. Upon review of the x-rays, Dr. Pick noted some early arthritic 
changes in the acromioclavicular joint, as well as some other changes that could be 
consistent with a rotator cuff tear. As claimant is right-handed, he kept claimant off work 
in order to obtain an MRI to rule out a rotator cuff tear.     
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Pick on March 19, 2019, after his MRI. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 43) 
He continued to complain of pain and weakness in the shoulder and arm, and still had 
bruising in the left biceps. After reviewing the MRI, Dr. Pick diagnosed left shoulder 
acute rotator cuff tear, biceps tendinopathy, and impingement. Dr. Pick recommended 
surgery. On April 8, 2019, Dr. Pick performed left shoulder arthroscopy with rotator cuff 
repair, biceps tenodesis, limited debridement, and subacromial decompression. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 44) His post-operative diagnosis was the same as prior, with the addition of SLAP 
2 tear, full thickness supra/infraspinatus tear, labral fraying, and bursitis.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Pick for follow up on April 22, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 46) He was 
sore, but doing well. He was started in physical therapy at that time. His next follow up 
was May 21, 2019, at which time he was still off work. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 47) He was 
progressing in physical therapy, and Dr. Pick felt it was reasonable for him to start 
returning to some activities as tolerated. At his next follow up on June 25, 2019, he was 
even more improved and hoping to return to work as he stated he was “ambidextrous 
with the spray gun” used for his industrial painting job. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 48) Dr. Pick 
released him to return to work with no specific restrictions, noting claimant would “self-
limit with certain activities as he needs to.” He noted claimant still had some diminished 
range of motion, but was otherwise progressing well. He was to finish physical therapy 
and return to Dr. Pick on an as-needed basis.  
 
Claimant returned to his job at Montag as a painter, and continued to work in that 
position until his left knee injury on February 18, 2021. (Tr., p. 34) However, claimant 
testified that he had and continues to have some difficulties with his job duties due to his 
shoulder and arm injuries. (Tr., pp. 23-26) Claimant described that while doing his job 
duties, he has to hold on to hoses called “paint lines,” and sometimes he has to lift them 
overhead. (Tr., pp. 23-24) Prior to the arm injury, he was able to easily hold the paint 
lines at the correct angle for the part he was painting. (Tr., p. 24) However, since the 
injury, he continues to have difficulty with handling the paint lines, as well as problems 
with pushing and pulling. (Tr., pp. 23; 25) 
 
Claimant sustained a second injury while working at Montag on February 18, 
2021. (Tr., p. 16) On that date, claimant’s supervisor approached him and told him to 
report to the front office with him. Claimant testified he was startled, and when he took a 

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
step back, he inadvertently stepped on a piece of wood on the floor. This caused him to 
do “a little spin” on it, and he “kind of crashed my knee in to one of the A frames. . .” 
(Tr., pp. 16-17) His knee was in pain, and he requested medical treatment. (Tr., p. 17)  
 
He was seen at Palo Alto County Health System (PACHS) in the family practice 
clinic on February 19, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) He described a sharp, constant pain in his 
left knee following the work incident. X-rays were taken, and he was provided with a 
knee brace and instructions for cold and heat therapy. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 12-14) Claimant 
continued working, but his knee pain did not resolve, so he returned to Dr. Pick on 
March 12, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 50) He reported using a brace and ice since the incident 
with no relief. Dr. Pick ordered an MRI, and allowed claimant to continue working in the 
meantime with modifications as needed.  
 
Claimant had an MRI of the left knee on March 18, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 15-16) 
He returned to Dr. Pick on March 23, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 51) Dr. Pick reviewed the MRI, 
and noted a complex tear of the medial meniscus with mild extrusion of the body. He 
also noted a complex tear of the lateral meniscus, and early tricompartmental 
chondrosis. Claimant wanted to start with conservative care, and Dr. Pick provided an 
injection with plans to see claimant in three to four weeks. Claimant returned on April 
20, 2021, and reported the injection had been helpful. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 52) He said he still 
felt a “tingle” at times, but it was nothing compared to what he felt prior to the injection. 
Claimant wished to continue with conservative care, and Dr. Pick released him to return 
to work with no restrictions and a zero percent impairment rating. He placed claimant at 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) and told him to return as needed.  
 
On August 26, 2021, claimant reported to the emergency room with left knee 
pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 17) He reported his prior meniscus tear, and stated that he 
accidentally twisted his left knee that day and pain worsened to a level 8 out of 10. Ice 
and elevation were recommended, and he was to follow up with Dr. Pick. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
19) 
 
Dr. Pick saw claimant on August 31, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 53) He reported that he 
caught his toe while coming out of the paint area at work and felt his knee pull again. He 
had to leave work due to the pain, but since then it had gotten somewhat better, and he 
rated it at a level 3 of 10. He asked if another injection might be helpful. Dr. Pick agreed 
and provided the injection, and advised that claimant might need to consider 
arthroscopy with partial meniscectomy if he continued to have issues. Claimant returned 
to Dr. Pick on September 28, 2021, and reported his knee was much improved since 
the last injection. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 54) He had no new issues or concerns at that time. Dr. 
Pick allowed him to return to work with no restrictions, and told him to follow up if he had 
any reaggravation of the knee.  
 
Claimant next returned to Dr. Pick on January 28, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 55) He 
reported that his last injection had worn off, and his knee was really bothering him. He 
was ready to discuss surgery. X-rays taken that day showed significant advancement of 
the arthritic changes, to the point it was nearly bone-on-bone. Due to the significant 

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
progression of his arthritis, Dr. Pick no longer thought an arthroscopy would be of 
benefit. As such, he recommended a unicompartmental partial knee replacement. He 
also stated that the need for the surgery was a progression of claimant’s prior work 
injury. 
 
Claimant had a left total knee arthroplasty on February 28, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 
76-78) His first post-operative visit took place on March 11, 2022, at which time he had 
started physical therapy and was doing well. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 56) At his next follow up on 
April 8, 2022, he was still having some pain and was struggling with range of motion. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 57) Dr. Pick noted significant stiffness on examination. He recommended 
more frequent physical therapy to work on range of motion. He also allowed claimant to 
return to work with restrictions at that time. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 59)  
 
At his next follow up on May 20, 2022, claimant had made significant 
improvements with his range of motion and stiffness. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 60) His work 
restrictions were progressed, and Dr. Pick anticipated full release to work and MMI in 
three months. He was to continue therapy to gain additional motion. His final follow up 
was August 22, 2022, at which time he had continued to improve. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 64) He 
still had “quite a bit” of pain, and was still having swelling in his knee the more he was 
on it. Additionally, he had some limitations remaining with range of motion, and did not 
feel confident kneeling, squatting, climbing an excessive number of stairs, or climbing 
ladders. Dr. Pick provided permanent restrictions of limited kneeling, squatting, and 
climbing, and no ladders. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 64-65) Dr. Pick noted that claimant’s pain was 
moderate and occasional, and he was able to do most of his other activities. Claimant 
was not interested in any other intervention at that time. As such, Dr. Pick placed 
claimant at MMI, and noted he would be happy to perform an impairment rating at the 
request of the insurance company.  
 
On August 30, 2022, Dr. Pick provided an impairment rating. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 66) Dr. 
Pick noted claimant had moderate occasional pain, range of motion of 110 degrees, 
normal stability, small flexion contracture, no extensor lag, and was in good alignment, 
leading to fair results from his knee replacement. Using the AMA Guidelines to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Pick used Table 17-33 to provide 
a 50 percent impairment of the lower extremity, which is equal to 20 percent of the 
whole person.  
 
Initially, when claimant returned to work from the knee replacement, he was 
placed in assembly. (Tr., pp. 17-18) This was upsetting to claimant, as he has a passion 
for painting and enjoys his job. (Tr., pp. 19-20) However, the person who had replaced 
claimant in painting walked off the job one day, which allowed claimant to get his 
painting job back. (Tr., pp. 20-21) Claimant testified that his employer has been good 
with helping him return to work and provides him with assistance when needed. (Tr., pp. 
18-21) 
 
Claimant testified that due to the combined effects of his arm and knee, he would 
not be physically able to perform any of the jobs he has done in the past. (Tr., pp. 29-

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
31) He also stated that if his current employer was not so accommodating, he would 
unlikely be able to continue painting there. (Tr., p. 30) He testified that his knee is 
always sore, and does not completely “work right.” He said it aches a lot and sometimes 
feels like it is “not even there.” (Tr., pp. 30-31) With respect to his left arm, he testified 
that the weakness and motion in his arm changed his life. (Tr., p. 31) He testified that he 
does not know what he would do if he was not a painter, and he would need to be 
accommodated by any potential employer. (Tr., p. 31) He continues to work full-time at 
Montag as a painter, and has received pay increases since the knee injury in 2021. (Tr., 
pp. 36-37) He has no plans to leave his job at Montag and plans to retire from there. 
(Tr., pp. 37-38) He also continues to perform his part-time work at First United 
Methodist Church. (Tr., p. 38) 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with John Kuhnlein, D.O., 
on August 8, 2023. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME was limited to the left 
shoulder/arm injury. Dr. Kuhnlein reviewed the relevant medical records and performed 
a physical examination. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-3) On physical examination, he noted some 
deficits in shoulder range of motion. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) With respect to the arm, he noted 
some motor deficits and elbow supination, which he related to the tenodesis. (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 3) He provided a 3 percent left upper extremity impairment rating for the left shoulder, 
and a 2 percent impairment rating for the motor deficits and elbow supination. He then 
used the Combined Values Chart to provide a total rating of 5 percent of the upper 
extremity. He recommended restrictions of lifting up to 40 pounds occasionally from 
floor to waist and waist to shoulder, and 10 pounds occasionally over the shoulder. He 
specified that the restrictions pertain to the shoulder only. 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein used Table 16-35 on page 510 of the AMA Guides in providing his 
impairment rating for the motor deficits and elbow supination. That table is titled 
“Impairment of the Upper Extremity Due to Strength Deficit From Musculoskeletal 
Disorders Based on Manual Muscle Testing of Individual Units of Motion of the Shoulder 
and Elbow.” (Second Injury Fund Exhibit AA, p. 2) The AMA Guides allow for an 
examining physician to add to an individual’s impairment level for loss of strength, “[i]n 
rare cases, if the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an 
impairing factor that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the 
Guides.” (AMA Guides, § 16.8a, p. 508) The Guides also state, “[d]ecreased strength 
cannot be rated in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or 
absence of parts (e.g., thumb amputation) that prevent effective application of maximal 
force in the region being evaluated.” Id. (emphasis in original). Section 16.8c of the 
Guides states that with respect to manual muscle testing, “[r]esults of strength testing 
should be reproducible on different occasions or by two or more trained observers.” 
(AMA Guides, p. 509; Fund Ex. AA, p. 1)  
 
The Fund argues that because Dr. Kuhnlein only saw claimant once, and there 
are not other strength measurements in evidence, Dr. Kuhnlein’s rating does not comply 
with the Guides. The Guides make it clear that adding impairment based on loss of 
strength should be rare, and manual muscle testing is not the most reliable indicator 
due to it being “subject to the individual’s conscious or unconscious control.” (AMA 

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
Guides, § 16.8c, p. 509; Fund Ex. AA, p. 1) Therefore, I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s 2 percent 
upper extremity rating for motor deficits and elbow supination to be unreliable as it was 
made in contradiction to the criteria and processes set forth in the AMA Guides.  
Claimant was able to return to work in his regular job following his left 
shoulder/biceps injury. He does not have any physician-imposed restrictions related to 
his left arm, and no reliable impairment rating. Based on all of the evidence in the file, I 
find that while claimant likely does have some permanent disability related to his left 
shoulder, he did not sustain any permanent disability to his left arm that is separate and 
distinct from the left shoulder injury. As such, he has not proven a first qualifying injury, 
and is not entitled to benefits from the Fund. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Claimant is seeking benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. Iowa Code 
section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability. Before any liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met. These requirements are: 1) The employee 
must have lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye; 2) The employee must 
sustain a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ through a 
compensable injury; and 3) Permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury 
and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual, 
as if the individual had no preexisting disability. See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 
262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). While the Second Injury Fund may be entitled to a 
credit for the compensable value of the previously disabled scheduled member, the 
Second Injury Fund is not entitled to credit for any prior unscheduled injuries. See 
e.g.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Kratzer, 778 N.W.2d 42 (Iowa 2010).   
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Iowa Code 
85.64. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second 
Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970). The second injury may be a bilateral injury. Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa v. George, 737 N.W.2d 141 (Iowa 2007). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable, 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011). The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.” Id. The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part. Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156. When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
 
The claimant has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that 
he sustained some permanent disability resulting from both the initial injury and the 
second injury. Second Injury Fund v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 547-48 (Iowa 1995). 
For industrial disability to result from two scheduled injuries, the claimant must prove the 
first and second injuries combine to contribute to the industrial loss. Second Injury Fund 
v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994) 
The first question is whether the claimant lost the use of one of the enumerated 
members, specifically, in this case, the left arm. The claimant bears the burden of 
proving that permanent impairment resulted from the first injury, whether by a 
permanency rating, and/or by other credible evidence of permanency or work 
restrictions. Haynes v. Second Injury Fund, 547 N.W.2d 11, 14 (Iowa App. 1996) The 
Fund argues that claimant did not prove a qualifying first injury, because Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
impairment rating does not comply with the AMA Guides. Additionally, Dr. Kuhnlein did 
not recommend any restrictions related to the arm, as he specifically stated his 
restrictions only pertain to the shoulder. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions 
of section 85.34(2)(v). An injury to the arm is considered a scheduled member injury 
under Iowa law. The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
“limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312 (Iowa 1998). 
In 2017, the legislature modified Iowa Code section 85.34 regarding permanent 
disabilities. Iowa Code section 85.34(x) permanent disabilities states: 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x) (emphasis added). 
This agency has adopted The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for 
determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial 
disabilities. See 876 IAC 2.4.   
This agency is bound by statute to only consider the functional disability ratings 
issued by the various medical providers. The Commissioner has addressed the 2017 
legislative changes to Iowa Code section 85.34(x). He stated,  
 
Though the legislature indicated only impairment ratings with a basis in 
the Guides are to be utilized for determining the extent of scheduled 
member impairment, the legislature did not set forth what can and cannot 
be considered by the agency when addressing the credibility, 
persuasiveness, and accuracy of two or more competing ratings. In other 
words, deputy commissioners still have to weigh evidence to determine 
which rating is most convincing. See Ramirez v. Arconic, Inc., File No. 
5066573 (Arb., Dec., Jan. 30, 2020) (“However, the new statute does not 
appear to prohibit using lay testimony in aiding to ascertain which of the 
two ratings in this case is more convincing or credible.”) 
 
Bryan Heeren v. Derby Trucking LLC, File No. 5067250, (App., Dec. 30, 2020). 
This agency has cautioned against impairment ratings that do not comply with 
the Guides.  See Hill v. Vermeer Corp., File No. 5066032 (App. January 30, 2020). In 
this case, Dr. Kuhnlein is the only medical provider who has issued an impairment rating 
for the arm injury. However, I did not find the portion of his rating related to the motor 
deficits and elbow supination to be reliable, as it does not meet the criteria set forth in 
the AMA Guides. Additionally, claimant was able to return to work in his regular job 
following his left shoulder/biceps injury, and he does not have any physician-imposed 
restrictions related to his left arm. I did not find any permanent disability to his left arm 
that is separate and distinct from the left shoulder injury. As such, he has not proven a 
first qualifying loss, and has not demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that 
he is entitled to benefits from the Fund. As a result, all remaining issues are rendered 
moot. 
 

STROHMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
Signed and filed this ___8th __ day of August, 2024. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
David Lawyer  
 
(via WCES) 
Jennifer L. Beckman  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
 
