Case Number: 5039363
Case Title:  HEALY, MEGGAN V. GUTTENBERG CARE CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Healy, Meggan-5039363.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
                          IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
____________________________________________________________ 
 
GUTTENBERG CARE CENTER AND 
) 
Case No. CVCV060109 
MIDWEST EMPLOYERS CASUALTY 
) 
COMPANY,          
 
 
 
)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
  
Petitioners,  
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
vs. 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
MEGGAN STANTON n/k/a/ 
 
) 
ORDER ON JUDICIAL REVIEW 
MEGGAN HEALY,  
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
Respondent.  
 
 
) 
____________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Petitioners Guttenberg Care Center and Midwest Employers Casualty Company 
filed their Petition for Judicial Review on April 23, 2020.   Telephonic oral argument was 
held on August 21, 2020.  Appearing for Petitioners was attorney Chris Sheldrup.  
Appearing for Respondent Meggan Healy (Healy) was attorney Mark Sullivan.  Oral 
argument was not reported. 
 
Upon review of the court file and the administrative record in light of the relevant 
law, and after careful consideration of the respective arguments of counsel, the court finds 
the following facts, reaches the following conclusions and enters the following Order. 
BACKGROUND FACTS AND PROCEEDING 
This case arises out of an April 8, 2010, employment related low back injury to 
Healy.  She filed an arbitration petition, which proceeded to hearing before a deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner (Deputy I) on January 6, 2014.   Deputy I entered 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
an arbitration decision on August 5, 2015, awarded Healy 30% industrial disability.1   
(Arb. Dec. at pp. 15 – 16; 22). 
Healy filed a review-reopening petition on September 5, 2017, which proceeded to 
hearing in front of Deputy II on October 19, 2018.  Deputy II entered an order on February 
21, 2019, awarding Healy a modest increase of an additional ten percent of industrial 
disability.   Deputy II correctly noted that he was bound by the findings of fact in the 
August 5, 2014, arbitration decision as to Healy’s medical and physical status at the time 
of the January 6, 2014, arbitration hearing.   (Arb. Dec. at pp. 12, 15; R-R Dec. at p. 2).   
In that regard, Deputy II noted Healy’s permanent impairment was somewhere in 
the range of 10% to 13% of the whole person on January 6, 2014.  He also noted Healy 
was only capable of lifting 30 pounds on an occasional basis and was taking only Tylenol 
and Ibuprofen for management of her symptoms.   (Arb. Dec. at p. 16; R-R Dec. at p. 3).  
Deputy II further noted that at the time of the arbitration hearing, Healy’s symptoms were 
located in her low back and down her right leg.   (Arb. Dec. at p. 16; R-R Dec. at p. 3).    
 
Petitioners sought intra-agency review. The Commissioner affirmed the  
Deputy’s review-reopening decision on April 9, 2020, based upon several specific changes 
in Healy’s condition.  These included: 
1. 
Different pain now present in the left leg all the way down into 
the left foot, and worsening pain in the right leg.  (R – R Dec. at p. 2; R – R 
Tr. at pp. 75-77; Resp. Ex. 25 at p. 10; Depo. at p. 33). 
 
2. 
Worsening pain that now requires the use of Oxycodone and 
other medications to manage. (R – R Dec. at p. 2; R – R Tr. at pp. 73-75). 
 
                                            
1 The arbitration decision is contained in the certified record in Claimant’s black binder 
titled “Meggan Stanton v. Guttenberg Care Center, File No. 5039363, Hearing Date: 
February 22, 2016,” as Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
3. 
Worsening pain that, for the first time, compelled her treating 
physicians to recommend and surgically implant a spinal cord stimulator to 
manage Healy’s chronic pain.  (Tr. at p. 20; R – R Dec. at p. 5). 
 
4. 
Tightened work restrictions by Dr. Sassman at Medix, which 
included a 10-pound limit on lifting, pushing, pulling, and carrying.  (Resp. 
Ex. 22 at p. 10; R – R Dec. at p. 7). 
 
5. 
Substantially decreased range of motion.  Deputy II noted that 
Dr. Sassman based much of Healy’s increased permanent impairment, from 
13% to 26% whole person, on these findings of decreased range of motion.   
Dr. Sassman’s first evaluation was done prior to the arbitration hearing and 
her second evaluation on August 29, 2016 – after the arbitration hearing –
revealed substantially more restricted range of motion.   (Resp. Ex. 22 at p. 
8; R – R Dec. at p. 4).  
 
6. 
The substantial increase in ratable permanent impairment 
from 10 to 13% at the time of the arbitration hearing, to 26% whole person 
at the time of the review-reopening hearing. (R – R Dec. at pp. 3-4). 
 
7. 
Increasing low back pain.  (Resp. Ex. 25 at p. 12; Depo. at pp. 
43 – 45). 
 
8. 
New low back pain on the left side.  (Resp. Ex. 25 at p. 17; 
Depo. at pp. 59 – 61).  
 
Deputy II summed up his findings as to changes in Healy’s condition that 
warranted the review reopening award by saying: 
Considering claimant’s current condition, symptoms, impairment, medical 
restrictions, ongoing motivation to continue working, her educational 
background, employment history, and the factors pertaining to her 
increased symptoms and use of narcotics, I find that Ms. Healy has proven 
a substantial change in condition since the arbitration hearing.  While 
acknowledging the competing factors and facts presented by defendants, I 
specifically find that Ms. Healy has developed leg symptoms that now 
radiate to her left foot.  She has required implantation of a spinal cord 
stimulator since the arbitration hearing, and she now requires the use of 
narcotics to control her symptoms.  She has demonstrated a worsening of 
her condition that warrants reconsideration of her industrial disability.   
 
(R – R Dec. at p. 5). 
 
 
 
 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Iowa Code chapter 17A governs judicial review of administrative agency actions.   
The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the part of the 
agency.  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).   The court “may grant 
relief if the agency action has prejudiced the substantial rights of the petitioner, and the 
agency action meets one of the enumerated criteria in section 17A.19(10)(a) through (n).”   
Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom Sys., 
Inc. v. Iowa Utils. Bd., 805 N.W.2d 758, 762 (Iowa 2011)).   Where an agency has been 
“clearly vested” with a fact-finding function, the appropriate “standard of review [on 
appeal] depends on the aspect of the agency’s decision that forms the basis of the petition 
for judicial review”—that is, whether it involves an issue of (1) findings of fact, (2) 
interpretation of law, or (3) application of law to fact.  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256. 
 
“If the claim of error lies with the agency’s findings of fact, the proper question on 
review is whether substantial evidence supports those findings of fact.” Meyer, 710 N.W. 
2d at 219. “[A] reviewing court can only disturb those factual findings if they are ‘not 
supported by substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is 
reviewed as a whole.’”  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)).  
A district court’s review “is limited to the findings that were actually made by the agency 
and not other findings that the agency could have made.” Id.   However, “[i]n reviewing 
an agency’s finding of fact for substantial evidence, courts must engage in a “fairly 
intensive review of the record to ensure that the fact finding is itself reasonable.’” Neal v. 
Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Wal Mart Stores, Inc. 
v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 499 (Iowa 2003)). 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
 
“Substantial evidence means the quantity and quality of evidence that would be 
deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at 
issue when the consequences resulting from the establishment of the fact are understood 
to be serious and of great importance.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(1).  The Commissioner’s 
findings are binding on appeal unless a contrary result is contemplated as a matter of law.  
Long v. Robertson Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995).  The court is not free to 
interfere with the Commissioner’s findings where there is conflict in the evidence or when 
reasonable minds might disagree about the inferences to be drawn from the evidence, 
whether disputed or not.  Catalfo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 213 N.W.2d 506, 509 
(Iowa 1973).    
Judicial review of the Commissioner’s decision is not de novo and the 
Commissioner’s findings have the force of a jury verdict.   Holmes v. Bruce Motor Freight 
Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 298 (Iowa 1974).  The burden of demonstrating the required 
prejudice and the invalidity of agency action is on the party asserting invalidity.  Iowa 
Code § 17A.19(8)(a)(2005). 
 
When assessing whether an agency decision is supported by substantial evidence, 
a reviewing court must “accord deference to the agency’s decision on witness credibility.” 
Clark v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue & Fin., 644 N.W.2d 310, 315 (Iowa 2002).   The adequacy 
of the evidence in the record to support a particular finding of fact must be judged in light 
of all the relevant evidence in the record, including any determinations of veracity by the 
presiding officer who personally observed the demeanor of the witnesses and the agency’s 
explanation of why the relevant evidence in the record supports its material findings of 
fact.  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(3).  
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
 
In the instant matter, Deputy I found Healy to be a credible witness at the 
arbitration hearing based upon her findings of fact and her award of industrial disability.   
(Arb. Dec. at pp. 3 – 22).  There is no question that in the review-reopening hearing, 
Deputy II made a specific creditability finding when he said “Ms. Healy presented credible 
testimony at the review-reopening hearing.” (R – R Dec. at p. 3).  No other witnesses 
testified live at the review-reopening hearing.  (R – R Dec. at p. 1). 
It is the Commissioner’s duty to weigh the evidence as a whole.  This requires 
taking into account the credibility of the witnesses and determining causation.  Because 
appellate review is not de novo, the court must not reassess the weight to be accorded 
various items of evidence.  Burns v. Bd. of Nursing, 495 N.W.2d 698, 699 (Iowa 1993). 
 If “the claim of error lies with the agency’s interpretation of the law, the question 
on review is whether the agency’s interpretation was erroneous, and [the court] may 
substitute [its] interpretation for the agency’s.”  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. 
The court must also grant appropriate relief from agency action if such action was 
“[b]ased upon an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation has 
not clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency.”  Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10)(c).   With respect to such provisions of law, the court is not required to defer 
to the agency’s interpretation.  Iowa Code § 17A.19(11)(b).  Additionally, the court must 
grant relief from agency action that is “[b]ased upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable interpretation of a provision of law,” based upon misapplication of law to the 
facts, or is “[o]therwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.”   
Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(l-n); Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256. 
 
If “the claim of error lies with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge 
is to the agency’s application of the law to the facts, and the question on review is whether 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
the agency abused its discretion by, for example, employing wholly irrational reasoning 
or ignoring important and relevant evidence.” Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.  In other words, 
the court will only reverse the Commissioner’s application of law to the facts if “it is 
‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’” Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518 (quoting Lakeside 
Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007)). 
                                                              ANALYSIS 
Petitioners assert numerous issues regarding the Commissioner’s adoption of 
Deputy II’s factual determinations in the review-reopening decision.   Upon reviewing the 
record, the court finds the fact finding by Deputy II in the review-reopening decision, 
affirmed by the Commissioner, is reasonable.   These findings are clearly supported by 
substantial evidence in the record for the following reasons.    
 
Petitioners argue that Healy’s condition actually improved in several respects.   
They urge that her symptoms and functionality were 75% improved at the time of the 
review-reopening hearing.   This is assertion is not reasonably borne out by the facts in 
this record when it is considered as a whole.   
 
According to Dr. Benedetti’s office note from February 4, 2015, Healy initially 
experienced 70 to 75% relief of her pain with the implantation of the trial spinal cord 
stimulator.   However, the note makes clear that pain relief improved primarily the leg 
and foot, while the back pain persisted.  (Jt. Ex. 17 at pp. 33 – 34).    
Further, Petitioner’s counsel misstated the record when he cross examined Healy 
in her deposition about the specifics of that 75% improvement.   He indicated that it was 
in regard to a treatment note after the permanent stimulator was placed.  In fact, the 
February 4, 2015, office visit was the same day the temporary stimulator was removed.  
(Jt. Ex. 17 at p. 36).  Further, Petitioner’s counsel asked Healy a leading and compound 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
question about improvement of both pain and functionality without defining or 
explaining what he meant by “functionality.”  (Def. Ex. A at p. 12; Depo. Tr. at  
pp. 45 – 46).   Later at the review-reopening hearing, Healy explained that her low back 
pain never improved with the spinal cord stimulator and in fact her back pain got worse 
when she became more active, with improvement of her leg symptoms from the 
stimulator. (Resp. Ex. 25 at p. 12; Depo. Tr. at pp. 41 – 42).  In addition, she developed 
left sided low back pain in March 2016, which was a new area of pain.  (Jt. Ex. 17 at p. 61; 
R – R Tr. at p. 54; Jt. Ex. 17 at p. 52; Resp. Ex. 25; Depo. Tr. at pp. 59 – 60). 
Regarding Respondent’s alleged 75% change in symptoms, Deputy II also said: 
[I]t really represents the masking of symptoms provided by the spinal cord 
stimulator, rather than some type of physical improvement. The 
improvement identified by defendants also does not account for the 
development of new symptoms in claimant’s left leg and left foot or the 
development of the need to use narcotics to control her symptoms.   
 
(R – R Dec. at p. 5). 
 
 
Petitioners also contend that the decision to proceed with the spinal cord 
stimulator was made prior to the review-reopening hearing.   This argument is inaccurate 
under this record.  No authorized treating providers for Healy specifically prescribed 
implantation of a spinal cord stimulator prior to the arbitration hearing.   Implanting a 
stimulator had been discussed as a treatment option by Dr. Mouw after he declined to 
perform a spinal fusion that Dr. Abernathy had recommended.   
But Dr. Mouw did not order the spinal cord stimulator.  He simply referred Healy 
to the University of Iowa for an evaluation regarding a possible spinal cord stimulator 
versus a spinal fusion.  Petitioner’s counsel at the time directed a letter to Dr. Abernathy 
on January 18, 2017.  In summarizing the treatment history in that letter to Dr. 
Abernathy, Petitioner’s counsel said the following: 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
On May 16, 2013, Claimant presented to Dr. Mouw for a neurosurgical 
opinion regarding the possible fusions.  Dr. Mouw indicated that the more 
recent MRI showed only a small disc protrusion, largely unchanged from 
her original MRI, and that it showed no evidence of neural compression.   
He indicated that he would not recommend a lumbar fusion because the 
likelihood of it helping Claimant was extremely low. Dr. Mouw instead 
recommended some additional neurological evaluations and if not other 
etiologies for her pain, he indicated she could also consider a dorsal column 
stimulator.   
 
Dr. Patrick Hitchon at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
evaluated Claimant on August 12, 2013.  Dr. Hitchon indicated that he also 
reviewed the August 5, 2013, MRI and recommended a lumbar x-ray to rule 
out any instability, but otherwise didn’t recommend any surgical 
intervention either . . . . In his note, Dr. Hitchon also indicated that they did 
not recommend a spinal cord stimulator at that time.  
 
(Jt. Ex. 21 at p. 2). 
 
 
That appointment with Dr. Hitchon was the last treatment Healy had prior to the 
January 6, 2014, arbitration hearing.   Healy correctly asserts that prior to the arbitration 
hearing, no physician ordered that she should proceed with a spinal cord stimulator.   It 
was merely discussed as a treatment option, but it was not until after the arbitration 
hearing—once her symptoms had substantially worsened—that Dr. Miller finally 
determined Healy was a good candidate for a stimulator.  (Jt. Ex. 19 at p. 2; R – R Tr. at 
p. 46).    
Dr. Miller referred Healy to the University of Iowa Pain Clinic.   There Dr. Elahi 
initially recommended additional conservative treatment rather than the spinal cord 
stimulator.  (Jt. Ex. 17 at p. 7).   Healy was given more epidural steroid injections (Jt. Ex. 
17 at p. 14) and was prescribed Oxycodone and Percocet (Jt. Ex. 1 at pp. 6 – 7).  Not until 
yet another unsuccessful epidural steroid injection on October 3, 2014, was Healy 
scheduled for a psychological evaluation to determine whether she was a good candidate 
for a trial spinal cord stimulator.   (Jt. Ex. 17 at p. 15; Jt. Ex. 20 at pp. 1 – 3).   That trial 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
spinal cord stimulator was not actually implanted until January 28, 2015—more than a 
year after the arbitration hearing. (Jt. Ex. 17 at pp. 19 – 21).  Finally, on March 11, 2015—
more than fifteen months after the arbitration hearing—the permanent spinal cord 
stimulator was implanted.  (Jt. Ex. 17 at pp. 46 – 49). 
 
Petitioners argue that at some point prior to the arbitration hearing, Healy used 
opioids for her pain.  They argue that she only stopped using those because of a pregnancy.   
After stopping the Nucenta for her pain on or about December 2, 2011, due to pregnancy, 
Healy did not resume the use of opioids until after the arbitration hearing.   For more than 
two years leading up to the January 6, 2014, arbitration hearing, Healy controlled her 
chronic pain with just over the counter medications.  (Arb. Tr. at pp. 50 – 51, Def. Ex. E 
at p. 14). 
 
Healy’s symptoms worsened after the arbitration hearing.  On January 22, 2014, 
Dr. Smith prescribed Oxycodone, one tablet two times per day as needed.   (Jt. Ex. 18 at 
p. 3).   Healy had never taken Oxycodone before. (R – R Tr. at p. 45).  Healy eventually 
would extensively use Oxycodone, Zanaflex, Gabapentin, Amitriptyline, Xanax, 
Tramadol, and prescription Ibuprofen, together with her spinal cord stimulator, to cope 
with her increased pain after the arbitration hearing.   (Jt. Ex. 17 at pp. 7, 10, 14; Jt. Ex. 
18 at pp. 5, 12, 22 – 23, 37; R – R Tr. at pp. 64 – 65, 81). At the time of the  
review-reopening hearing, and after her stimulator had stopped functioning, Healy was 
taking more than eight Oxycodone per day, plus Tylenol, Ibuprofen, Clonidine and 
Alprazolam, plus a muscle relaxer and a pill for the nerve pain. (R - R Tr. at pp. 48, 56 – 
57, 65 – 67, 72; Ex. A at p. 16; Depo. at p. 63). 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
 
In the review-reopening decision, Deputy II found Healy only had required Tylenol 
and Ibuprofen for management of her symptoms at the time of the arbitration hearing.   
In contrast, he found that at the time of the review-reopening hearing, 
[s]he now requires the use of oxycodone to manage her pain symptoms.   As 
the prior deputy commissioner found, Ms. Healy required only over-the- 
counter medications to manage her symptoms at the time of the arbitration 
hearing.  Again, this is convincing evidence that Ms. Healy’s condition has 
substantially worsened since the arbitration hearing.  
 
(R – R Dec. at p. 3). 
 
Petitioners say that Healy’s increase in earnings after her certification as a medical 
assistant should defeat any review-reopening claim in this matter.   As Deputy II correctly 
noted: 
The fact that Ms. Healy now earns more than she did at the time of the 
arbitration hearing is not, standing alone, sufficient to defeat her review 
reopening claim.  Rather, the prior deputy commissioner anticipated that 
claimant may seek additional education and training and accounted for that 
in her industrial disability factors and award. Claimant’s ability to 
accomplish this was contemplated and she has earned her way back to a 
wage she had prior to the work injury.  However, this is not evidence that 
she is improved or has greater earning capacity than was estimated or 
foreseen at the time of the arbitration hearing.   Rather, it is a manifestation 
of the claimant’s motivation and cognitive abilities, as recognized by the 
deputy at the arbitration hearing.  
 
(R – R Dec. at p. 4). 
 
Petitioner did not appeal from the original arbitration decision. In the  
review-reopening decision, Deputy II also said: 
Claimant’s increase in earnings arguably demonstrates that she has 
increased earning capacity since the arbitration hearing.  However, this 
increase in wages is really the result of claimant’s motivation and her 
continued education and training.  Since the arbitration hearing, Ms. Healy 
has obtained additional education and become nationally certified as a 
medical assistant.  The prior deputy commissioner contemplated claimant’s 
ability to retrain, her age, and her motivation in the arbitration decision.  
 
(R – R Dec. at p. 4).  
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
 
Increased earnings since the arbitration hearing as a result of additional education 
does not necessarily mean no reduction in earning capacity.   Earning capacity requires 
an analysis of all the factors required in assessing industrial disability.  Quaker Oats v. 
Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 157 (Iowa 1996).  Loss of earning capacity is determined by 
considering the employee’s functional impairment, age, education, work experience, 
qualifications, ability to engage in similar employment, and adaptability to retraining to 
the extent any of these factors affect the employee’s prospects for relocation in the job 
market.  Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 1998). 
 
In the arbitration decision, Deputy I relied upon Healy’s relative youth at age 34 
and noted that younger workers have less difficulty than older workers when seeking 
employment. (Arb. Dec. at p. 16).  Deputy I also noted Healy’s prior educational 
accomplishments, including her CNA certificate and her two-year degree in radiology 
technology. She found that retraining was possible for Healy and that Healy was 
motivated to find work.   (Arb. Dec. at pp. 3 – 4, 16). 
Petitioners also allege that Deputy II erred by applying the wrong legal standard to 
the review-reopening decision or by misapplying the law to the facts. The gist of 
Petitioners’ argument that Deputy II applied the wrong legal standard appears to be that 
he did not put enough stock in Healy’s increased earnings which resulted from her 
obtaining her medical assistant certification after the arbitration hearing. Deputy II 
concluded the relatively modest award of just 30% industrial disability in the original 
arbitration decision reflected that Deputy I relied on Healy’s youth, motivation, and prior 
pursuit of post-secondary education and certification in making that award.    
(R – R Dec. at pp. 2, 4 – 8). 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

13 
 
 In reviewing the conclusions of law in the review-reopening decision, the court 
finds that Deputy II was aware of the appropriate legal standard requiring him to evaluate 
all factors impacting Healy’s industrial disability arising from a change of condition after 
the arbitration hearing.    
Deputy II noted that the required change of condition could be economic or 
physical.  He concluded by saying: 
In this case, the parties presented competing evidence that demonstrated a 
potential increase in claimant’s industrial disability, a potential decrease in 
her industrial disability, or evidence that there is no significant change in 
the industrial disability.  Having considered and weighed that competing 
evidence, I found that Ms. Healy proved a substantial change in her 
condition that resulted in a marginal worsening of her industrial disability.   
 
(R – R Dec. at p. 7). 
 
In an unscheduled whole body injury case, the claimant’s loss of earning capacity 
is determined by the Commissioner at the time of the arbitration hearing based upon the 
factors bearing on industrial disability then prevailing – not based upon what the 
claimant’s physical condition and economic realities might be at some future time.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(3); Quaker Oats, 552 N.W.2d at 157.  Factors that should be considered 
include the employee’s functional disability, age, education, qualifications, experience, 
and the ability of the employee to engage in employment for which the employee is fitted.   
Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 554 N.W.2d 258, 266 (Iowa 1995). The workers’ 
compensation statutory scheme contemplates that future developments (post-award and 
post-settlement developments), including the worsening of a physical condition or a 
reduction in earning capacity, should be addressed in review-reopening proceedings.  
Iowa Code § 86.14(2); Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 392 (Iowa 2009).  
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

14 
 
 
Deputy II’s reasonable finding that there were changes in Healy’s physical 
condition warranting a review-reopening and an increase in the industrial disability 
award is supported by substantial evidence in the record.   
 
Deputy II properly applied the correct legal standard to the facts in this case when 
he awarded Healy an additional ten percent industrial disability.  As the Commissioner 
said in the agency appeal decision: 
I affirm the deputy commissioner’s finding that claimant carried her burden 
of proof to establish a physical change in condition after the arbitration 
decision filed on August 5, 2014. In doing so, I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s acknowledgment of the competing factors, and the factors 
presented by defendants.  However, I affirm the deputy commissioner’s 
finding that after the arbitration decision, claimant developed left leg 
symptoms, required implantation of a spinal cord stimulator, and requires 
the use of narcotic medications to control her symptoms.  As a result, I 
affirm the deputy commissioner’s finding that claimant proved an increase 
of ten percent in her industrial disability after the arbitration decision.    
 
(App. Dec. at p. 2). 
 
Deputy II, in the review-reopening decision affirmed by the Commissioner, 
applied the correct legal standard in reviewing all of the appropriate factors impacting 
any determination of industrial disability loss in a workers’ compensation case.  Deputy 
II compared all of those factors as they existed at the time of the arbitration hearing to 
those same factors as they existed at the time of the review-reopening hearing.   Deputy 
II reasonably found that some of the factors did not change, some changed for the better, 
and some changed for the worse.  (R – R Dec. at p. 7).  As noted above, Deputy II 
ultimately found that Healy proved a substantial change in her condition that resulted in 
a marginal worsening of her industrial disability.  (Id.). 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

15 
 
On balance, Deputy II reasonably found the substantial deterioration of Healy’s 
physical condition since the arbitration hearing warranted the modest ten percent 
increase in industrial disability that Deputy II ordered. 
CONCLUSION 
The Commissioner adopted Deputy II’s review-reopening decision in all relevant 
respects.  When this record is considered as a whole, the Commissioner’s determination 
that Healy proved a deterioration in her physical condition from the time of the January 
6, 2014, arbitration hearing until the time of the October 19, 2018, review-reopening 
hearing is supported by substantial evidence.  The Commissioner’s interpretation of the 
relevant law was not erroneous.  The Commissioner’s application of the law to the facts 
was not irrational, illogical, wholly unjustifiable or an abuse of discretion. The 
Commissioner did not ignore important and relevant evidence.  The Commissioner’s 
decision was not otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion.    
The Commissioner’s final agency decision should be affirmed in its entirety and 
the Petition should be denied and dismissed.  
                                                ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the final 
agency decision is affirmed in its entirety and the Petition is denied and dismissed.   
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that costs are 
assessed to Petitioners. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER DECREE
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV060109
GUTTENBERG CARE CENTER ET AL VS MEGGAN STANTON
NKA HEALY
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-10-20 21:09:42     page 16 of 16
E-FILED  2020 OCT 20 9:09 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
