Case Number: 5063687.01
Case Title:  BAKER, WILLIAM V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Baker William-5063687.01R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
WILLIAM BAKER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 5063687.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC.,   : 
  REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos: 1800; 1801; 4100;  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
      2500; 3400 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, William Baker, filed a petition for review-reopening arbitration 
seeking workers’ compensation benefits from employer MSC Industrial Direct Co. 
(“MSC”), and their insurer, ACE American Insurance Company.  Randy Schueller 
appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Jean Dickson appeared on behalf of the 
defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on October 30, 2023, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-F.  The exhibits were received and admitted into the record with 
no objections.  Judicial notice was also taken of a previous arbitration decision, an 
appeal decision from the Commissioner, and of a district court decision relating to 
judicial review of the Commissioner’s appeal decision.   
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Christine Hylton was appointed the 
official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record 
closed at the close of the hearing, and the matter was considered fully submitted 
following briefing by the parties on December 4, 2023.  
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Feb-15  16:18:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 2 
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
 
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, and in the course of 
employment on April 14, 2017.   
 
3. That the alleged injury was a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That, although entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits cannot be stipulated, the claimant has been off of work since April 
14, 2017. 
 
5. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the disability 
is an industrial disability.   
 
6. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any 
are awarded, is December 23, 2022.   
 
7. That, at the time of the alleged injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were six 
hundred seventy-three and 20/100 dollars ($673.20) per week, and that he 
was single and entitled to four exemptions.  As a result, the parties believe 
the weekly rate to be four hundred forty-six and 06/100 dollars ($446.06).   
 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.  Medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute.    
 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
  
2. Whether the claimant is entitled for temporary disability benefits from April 14, 
2017, to the present.   
  
3. The extent of permanent disability benefits, if any are awarded. 
  
4. Whether the permanent disability is a scheduled member disability to the 
shoulder. 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to payment for certain medical expenses.   
 
6. Whether the claimant was paid 343.143 weeks of compensation at the 
stipulated rate of four hundred forty-six and 06/100 dollars ($446.06) prior to 
the hearing.   
 
a. With regard to the disputed credit, whether the claimant was paid 
298.143 weeks of temporary disability benefits from April 15, 2017, to 
December 22, 2022.   
b. With regard to the disputed credit, whether the claimant was paid 45 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits from December 23, 
2022, to November 2, 2023.   
  
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to supervision payments to his partner. 
   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Before discussing the claimant’s background and his medical history, it should be 
noted that prior to this review-reopening proceeding, the claimant filed an original notice 
and petition seeking workers’ compensation benefits from MSC.  An arbitration hearing 
was held on March 9, 2020, and an arbitration decision was issued on July 31, 2020.  
Judicial notice was taken of this decision, and reference will be made to some of the 
records of medical care received by Mr. Baker that are outlined in that decision, but not 
included in the record of this case.   
William Baker, the claimant, was 45 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He resides in Bondurant, Iowa.  (Testimony).   
On April 14, 2017, Mr. Baker was struck in the head at work.  (Testimony).  He 
was setting up a new job site and stocking cabinets.  (Arbitration Decision 3).  A cabinet 
weighing up to 1000 pounds fell on Mr. Baker, striking him in the head and left arm.  
(Arb. Dec. 3).   
Subsequent to his work injury in April of 2017, Mr. Baker has had extensive 
medical care, including 40 to 50 visits with his primary treating physician.  (Testimony; 
Arb. Dec.).  His diagnoses were TBI with left hemiparesis with loss of sensation in the 
left upper extremity and left lower extremity with apraxia, wordfinding problems with 
stuttering, peripheral vision loss, post-concussive headaches, myofascial pain involving 
the neck, cognitive deficits with memory loss, memory issues, concentration issues, and 
seizure activity.  (Arb. Dec. 9).  His care included treatment with a number of doctors.  
(Arb. Dec.).   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 4 
 
His primary physician continues to opine that Mr. Baker cannot work, and that he 
requires constant supervision at home.  (Testimony).  No doctor has allowed him to 
return to work or live without supervision.  (Testimony).   
Farid Manshadi, M.D., examined the claimant on July 19, 2017.  (Joint Exhibit 
1:1).  Dr. Manshadi noted the claimant’s history of traumatic brain injury with peripheral 
vision loss, left-sided weakness, episodic symptoms, and chronic headaches.  (JE 1:1).  
His partner recounted an incident wherein she found him on the kitchen floor and had to 
shake him to wake him up.  (JE 1:1).  He presented to her with a blank face and a 
memory lapse.  (JE 1:1).  It took him several hours to “come back and remember things 
again.”  (JE 1:1).  Dr. Manshadi recommended that the claimant have continued follow-
up care including speech therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, and 
neuropsychological care.  (JE 1:1).  He experienced tenderness over his upper 
trapezius muscles.  (JE 1:1).  Dr. Manshadi offered the claimant advice as to coping 
mechanisms while watching TV or driving.  (JE 1:1).  Dr. Manshadi told the claimant that 
he should not be driving for six months after the episode reported by his wife, which Dr. 
Manshadi opined was a “partial complex seizure.”  (JE 1:1).   
On August 16, 2017, Dr. Manshadi saw Mr. Baker again.  (JE 1:2).  Mr. Baker’s 
partner also attended the visit with him.  (JE 1:2).  He continued to have “fairly intense” 
daily headaches.  (JE 1:2).  He had 12 sessions of light therapy which helped him to 
sleep; however, once those ceased, his sleep worsened.  (JE 1:2).  He experienced 
another episode while descending stairs wherein he fell onto his chest.  (JE 1:2).  Dr. 
Manshadi continued to advise Mr. Baker against driving and recommended that his 
partner stay home in order to supervise Mr. Baker and take him to appointments.  (JE 
1:2).  Dr. Manshadi noted that Mr. Baker could not return to work.  (JE 1:2).  Dr. 
Manshadi observed that Mr. Baker continued to have issues with finding words and with 
mild stuttering during the visit.  (JE 1:2).   
Dr. Manshadi also drafted a letter indicating that Kristin Hestness needed to be 
with Mr. Baker in order to drive him to medical appointments.  (JE 1:3).  Dr. Manshadi 
also noted that Mr. Baker should not be left alone to care for his children.  (JE 1:3).  This 
arrangement was to remain in place until Mr. Baker was able to resume driving.  (JE 
1:3).   
On February 28, 2018, Mr. Baker applied for accommodations from MSC with 
assistance from Dr. Manshadi.  (JE 1:4-7).  Dr. Manshadi noted the diagnoses as 
follows:  
Traumatic [b]rain [i]njury, [l]oss of sensation in left upper extremity and left 
lower extremity, [a]praxia of left hand, [p]ost-concussive headaches, 
peripheral vision loss with improvement, word-find problems with stuttering, 
myofascial pain in the neck [and] upper back, cognitive deficits with memory 
loss [and] concentration issues, seizure activities. 
(JE 1:4).  Dr. Manshadi opined that the aforementioned conditions prevented Mr. Baker 
from returning to work at MSC.  (JE 1:5).  He also opined that Mr. Baker could not 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 5 
 
complete any tasks included in a job description supplied to him.  (JE 1:5).  Dr. 
Manshadi noted that there was a significant possibility that Mr. Baker would be 
incapacitated due to a sudden worsening of headaches or seizure activities.  (JE 1:5).  
Dr. Manshadi opined further that Mr. Baker would not likely need indefinite leave, but 
would likely not recover sufficiently to perform certain tasks and duties.  (JE 1:6).  Dr. 
Manshadi also did not believe that Mr. Baker could work with restrictions or 
accommodations at the time of completing the form.  (JE 1:6).   
 
On March 12, 2018, MSC terminated Mr. Baker.  (Arb. Dec. 3).   
 
Mr. Baker returned to Dr. Manshadi’s office on June 12, 2018, for his history of 
traumatic brain injury, post-concussive headaches, chronic neck pain, and upper back 
pain.  (JE 1:8-9).  Mr. Baker continued to have cognitive deficits.  (JE 1:8).  He also 
continued to have incidents where he stares blankly.  (JE 1:8).  Dr. Manshadi opined 
again that Ms. Hestness needed to remain Mr. Baker’s caregiver and urged that she be 
compensated as such.  (JE 1:8).  Dr. Manshadi continued to keep the claimant off work.  
(JE 1:8).   
 
On July 30, 2018, Dr. Manshadi wrote a letter to claimant’s counsel.  (JE 1:10).  
He again recommended that Ms. Hestness continue to provide Mr. Baker with 24/7 
supervision services.  (JE 1:10).   
 
James Gallagher, M.D., F.A.P.A., wrote a letter to defendants’ counsel outlining 
his opinions as to Mr. Baker’s condition.  (JE 2:1-10).  Dr. Gallagher is board certified in 
psychiatry and neurology, as well as a subspecialty certification in forensic psychiatry.  
(JE 2:1).  Dr. Gallagher visited with Mr. Baker on August 9, 2018, following a referral 
from Dr. Manshadi.  (JE 2:1).  Dr. Gallagher outlined the claimant’s complaints following 
the work accident, including a mention of seizure-type incidents.  (JE 2:1).  Dr. 
Gallagher told Mr. Baker that he was treating him for depression and anxiety following 
his work incident.  (JE 2:2).  Dr. Gallagher reviewed the claimant’s treatment to date and 
opined that Mr. Baker sustained a head injury that presented with emotional and 
cognitive symptoms.  (JE 2:4-5).  Dr. Gallagher also outlined other physical symptoms 
experienced by Mr. Baker.  (JE 2:5).  Mr. Baker had 24-hour care from Ms. Hestness, 
and Dr. Gallagher opined that both the claimant and Ms. Hestness resisted efforts to 
bring in an independent home care worker to help care for Mr. Baker.  (JE 2:5).  Dr. 
Gallagher opined that Ms. Hestness was “running interference” for Mr. Baker in resisting 
bringing in outside help.  (JE 2:5).  Dr. Gallagher opined that Mr. Baker could not return 
to work at the time.  (JE 2:5).   
 
Dr. Gallagher performed various tests on Mr. Baker during their meeting.  (JE 
2:6).  Mr. Baker displayed difficulty with remembering three objects presented to him.  
(JE 2:6).  He also displayed difficulty performing serial seven subtractions.  (JE 2:6).  
Mr. Baker also noted several instances of forgetfulness around the house, including  
burning fish in the oven.  (JE 2:7).   
 
Dr. Gallagher recommended that Mr. Baker return after adjusting some of his 
medications.  (JE 2:9).  He also recommended continued treatment with Dr. Manshadi 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 6 
 
and various other providers.  (JE 2:8-9).  He further recommended that outside help, 
such as a home health aide, be brought into the home to provide Ms. Hestness a “break 
from her duties.”  (JE 2:9).   
 
On October 11, 2018, Dr. Gallagher met with Mr. Baker and Ms. Hestness again.  
(JE 2:11-12).  Dr. Gallagher emphasized the need for future-orientation in treatment, 
including setting goals.  (JE 2:12).  Mr. Baker was easily frustrated and very ashamed 
by his current condition.  (JE 2:12).  Dr. Gallagher felt Mr. Baker was “stuck in the 
present.”  (JE 2:12).  Mr. Baker found that the increased medication helped provide 
some improvement.  (JE 2:11).   
 
Mr. Baker returned to Dr. Manshadi’s office again on June 25, 2019, for 
continued care.  (JE 1:11).  He continued to have issues with seizures.  (JE 1:11).  
Several incidents at his home were described wherein he was found on the ground with 
no memory of the previous several minutes, and where he “zoned out” while at the 
dinner table.  (JE 1:11).  He continued to experience balance, vestibular issues, and 
depth perception issues.  (JE 1:11).  He also had difficulty with cognition.  (JE 1:11).  
Ms. Hestness recounted an incident where Mr. Baker forgot to feed their young child 
and prepare lunch for their other children.  (JE 1:11).  Dr. Manshadi opined that Mr. 
Baker would not be able to return to gainful employment for quite a while.  (JE 1:11).  
He also recommended that Mr. Baker continue having around the clock observation or 
care.  (JE 1:11).   
 
Following the appointment, Dr. Manshadi wrote a letter confirming his opinions 
that Mr. Baker was not available for competitive employment, nor would he be for the 
foreseeable future.  (JE 1:12).   
 
On September 4, 2019, Mr. Baker continued his treatment with Dr. Manshadi.  
(JE 1:13).  He continued having issues with seizure activities.  (JE 1:13).  He attempted 
to complete certain tasks at home, including those outlined by his partner, but he still 
forgot to perform a number of functions.  (JE 1:13).  Dr. Manshadi felt that Mr. Baker 
achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) for his head injury and associated 
symptoms such as headaches, migraines, myofascial neck pain, seizures, peripheral 
vision issues, left-sided weakness, and word-finding issues.  (JE 1:13).  Despite him 
achieving MMI, Dr. Manshadi felt that he should continue to see Dr. Hines, Dr. 
Gallagher, and Dr. Fitzgerald.  (JE 1:13).  Dr. Manshadi opined in the medical record 
that Mr. Baker would not be able to be gainfully employed at that time, due to the 
traumatic brain injury and associated issues.  (JE 1:13).   
 
DeAnn Fitzgerald, O.D., responded to a check-box letter on September 11, 2019.  
(JE 3:1-3).  Dr. Fitzgerald opined that Mr. Baker had a traumatic brain injury caused by 
a work incident on April 14, 2017.  (JE 3:1).  Dr. Fitzgerald treated Mr. Baker for vision 
issues, vestibular issues, balance issues, gait issues, cognition issues, sleep 
disturbance, and anxiety.  (JE 3:1).  She agreed that all of her treatment was 
reasonable and necessary.  (JE 3:1).  Dr. Fitzgerald concluded that Mr. Baker had a 
permanent head injury, as he continued to have short-term memory loss with cognition 
issues.  (JE 3:2).  She also opined that Mr. Baker could not be left alone or be allowed 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 7 
 
to care for someone else.  (JE 3:2).  Finally, Dr. Fitzgerald opined that Mr. Baker 
required ongoing therapy with her.  (JE 3:2).   
 
Dr. Gallagher wrote a letter to claimant’s counsel on September 16, 2019, and 
completed a check-box letter.  (JE 2:13-15).  Dr. Gallagher agreed that the claimant 
suffered from a traumatic brain injury, anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress 
disorder.  (JE 2:14).  Dr. Gallagher agreed that the aforementioned diagnoses were 
caused and/or aggravated by the April 14, 2017, work incident.  (JE 2:14).  Dr. 
Gallagher also agreed that the medical treatment to date was reasonable.  (JE 2:14).  
Dr. Gallagher continued by agreeing that Mr. Baker needed monthly psychotherapy and 
medications.  (JE 2:15).  Finally, Dr. Gallager agreed with the following statement: 
William Baker has cognitive limitations as a result of the incident occurring 
on or about April 14, 2017.  From a psychiatric standpoint, William Baker 
cannot drive.  From a psychiatric standpoint, William Baker will require 24-
hour supervision.  I agree with Dr. Manshadi that William Baker is unable to 
be gainfully employed as a result of the incident occurring on or about April 
14, 2017.  In addition, from a psychiatric standpoint, William Baker lacks the 
cognitive function such as focus and concentration to perform vocational 
tasks requiring sustained cognitive function. 
(JE 2:15).  There is a handwritten note from Dr. Gallagher following this statement, but it 
is largely illegible.  (JE 2:15).   
 
Dr. Manshadi responded to a check-box form on September 20, 2019.  (JE 1:15-
17).  Dr. Manshadi agreed that the April 14, 2017, work incident caused a permanent 
head injury and the following diagnoses: post-concussive headaches, chronic migraine 
headaches, myofascial pain involving the neck and upper back, partial complex 
seizures, seizure disorder, traumatic brain injury with left hemiparesis and loss of 
sensation, continued word finding issues and memory problems, anxiety, depression, 
and post-traumatic stress disorder (“PTSD”).  (JE 1:15).  Dr. Manshadi agreed that the 
medical treatment to date was reasonable.  (JE 1:15-16).  Dr. Manshadi also agreed 
that Mr. Baker could not drive due to the April 14, 2017, injury, and required 
transportation to medical and other appointments.  (JE 1:16).  Dr. Manshadi also opined 
that Mr. Baker required indefinite 24-hour supervision.  (JE 1:16).  Dr. Manshadi 
recommended future medical care related to the April 14, 2017, work injury.  (JE 1:16).  
He deferred to several specialists, such as Drs. Gallagher, Fitzgerald, and Hines, as 
their opinions related to Mr. Baker’s continued care; however, he recommended 
continued bimonthly evaluation by a neurologist, neurological medications, continued 
use of a cryohelmet, seven to eight yearly follow-up visits with Dr. Manshadi, Botox 
injections, prescription medications, and a mini exercise bike or peddler.  (JE 1:16).  
Finally, Dr. Manshadi agreed with the statement, “William Baker is unable to be gainfully 
employed as a result of the incident occurring on or about April 14, 2017.”  (JE 1:17).   
 
As cited in the arbitration decision, Phil Davis, M.S., C.B.I.S., a vocational 
specialist, issued opinions as to the vocational implications of the work incident on Mr. 
Baker.  (Arb. Dec. 25-26).  Mr. Baker told Mr. Davis that he had good or excellent 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 8 
 
computer skills including writing and developing computer programs, and that he had 
several computers in his home.  (Arb. Dec. 25-26).  Mr. Baker expressed some 
hesitation as to his continued ability to perform computer programming work due to the 
need to sit in front of a screen and his ongoing cognitive issues.  (Arb. Dec. 26).  Mr. 
Baker and Ms. Hestness emphasized to Mr. Davis that Mr. Baker was not to drive.  
(Arb. Dec. 26).  At the time of the interview, Mr. Baker could not perform home repairs, 
remember to wake up on time, remember to take medications, or go to his 
appointments without assistance.  (Arb. Dec. 26).  At the time of this report, Ms. 
Hestness assumed all responsibilities with regard to paying bills, budgeting, and 
finances.  (Arb. Dec. 26).   
 
Mr. Davis cited the opinions of Dr. Manshadi as to three things: 1. Mr. Baker 
cannot drive; 2. Mr. Baker requires 24-hour supervision due to his work incident; and, 3. 
Mr. Baker is unable to be gainfully employed as a result of the work incident.  (Arb. Dec. 
26).  Mr. Davis also cited to the opinions of Dr. Gallagher and Dr. Fitzgerald.  (Arb. Dec. 
26).  The arbitration decision quotes Mr. Davis as follows: 
When taking into consideration the physical and cognitive restrictions set 
forth by Dr. Manshadi, Dr. Gallagher, and Dr. Fitzgerald (all of which agreed 
that Mr. Baker is unable to be gainfully employed as a result of his injury of 
4/14/17).  I would opine that Mr. Baker is currently incapable (100%) of 
returning to his past employment activities when taking into consideration 
the physical demands of any of his past employment, as well as the 
concerns for his safe ability to perform any job based upon his cognitive and 
psychological diagnosis.  Based on the same opinions of his treating and 
evaluating physicians, Mr. Baker is 100% precluded from performing any 
gainful employment activity.   
(Arb. Dec. 26).   
 
On October 1, 2019, Shelly Kinney, M.S.N., R.N., C.N.L.C.P., C.C.M., of Kinney 
Consulting, Inc., issued a “Life Care Plan Report” on behalf of Mr. Baker.  (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1:1-26).  Ms. Kinney is a registered nurse, a certified case manager, and a 
certified nurse life care planner.  (CE 3:1).  She received her Bachelor of Science in 
nursing in 1988, and obtained a Master of Science degree in nursing and nursing case 
management from the University of Alabama College of Nursing in 2004.  (CE 3:3).  
Since 2007, she has offered life care planning and case management services for 
persons following a significant illness or injury.  (CE 3:1).   
 
Ms. Kinney’s report was designed “to address the current and future medical and 
functional needs” of Mr. Baker following his traumatic brain injury.  (CE 1:2).  Life care 
plans compile subjective and objective measurements in order to project current and 
future medical costs.  (CE 1:2).  In preparing her report, Ms. Kinney reviewed a plethora 
of medical records, spoke with multiple providers, and met with Mr. Baker and Ms. 
Hestness for an in-person assessment at their home.  (CE 1:3).  Ms. Kinney noted the 
claimant’s history and medical care dating back to his work incident in April of 2017.  
(CE 1:3-5).  At the time of the report, Ms. Kinney listed the following medical and 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 9 
 
functional issues experienced by Mr. Baker: TBI with left hemiparesis and loss of 
sensation, seizure disorder, anxiety, cervical myofascial pain syndrome, depression, 
post-concussive headaches, chronic migraine headaches, post-traumatic stress, 
apraxia of the left hand, sleep apnea, vision disturbance, word finding issues, memory 
problems, fatigue, hearing loss, and dizziness.  (CE 1:5).  Ms. Kinney also listed the 
medications which the claimant was taking at the time.  (CE 1:6).  At the time of the 
report, Ms. Kinney noted the current medical treatment plan as follows: 
- 
Medications as listed 
- 
Combined vision and vestibular therapy at Vision in Motion 
- 
Use of Brain Tap biofeedback/relaxation system 
- 
Supervised exercise program, both independent and with a therapist, 
with visual/vestibular elements 
- 
Monthly follow up visits with psychiatry 
- 
Follow up visits with Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation for 
management of residual TBI symptoms and chronic pain 
- 
Follow up visits with Neurology 
- 
24-hour supervision 
- 
Multi-modality management of chronic headache 
- 
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) at night 
 
(CE 1:6).  Ms. Kinney outlined Mr. Baker’s home life, including a recent move to the Des 
Moines, Iowa, area, in order to be closer to family support and to have more access to 
activities.  (CE 1:6-7).   
 
Mr. Baker performed his activities of daily living with no need for assistance; 
however, he had an occasional loss of balance and seizures.  (CE 1:8).  He walked with 
a steady gait.  (CE 1:8).  He noted to Ms. Kinney that he had difficulty recognizing the 
passage of time, along with short-term memory issues.  (CE 1:8).  Ms. Kinney made 
note that she called Mr. Baker two days following the visit, and he reported no memory 
of the visit.  (CE 1:8).  Mr. Baker also noted difficulty with motivation.  (CE 1:8).  Ms. 
Kinney noted Dr. Manshadi’s recommendation of 24-hour supervision.  (CE 1:8).  Ms. 
Kinney then detailed Mr. Baker’s history of partial complex seizures, wherein he stares 
off into the distance and is not “there.”  (CE 1:8).  Mr. Baker told Ms. Kinney that he 
becomes easily frustrated in attempting to complete tasks.  (CE 1:9).   
 
Ms. Kinney opined that Mr. Baker had the following nursing problems or hazards: 
chronic pain, at risk for falls, at risk for Ms. Hestness experiencing caregiver role strain, 
depression, and diversional activity deficit.  (CE 1:9).  The remainder of the report is 
estimated costs for future medical care to be provided to Mr. Baker.  (CE 1:11-25).  The 
costs themselves are not really pertinent to this proceeding.   
 
Following the review of additional medical records and reports, Dr. Manshadi 
drafted a letter addressed to claimant’s counsel, dated January 24, 2020.  (JE 1:18-19).  
Based upon his review of these reports, Dr. Manshadi continued to opine that Mr. Baker 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 10 
 
continue to not work, continue to not drive, and continue to require 24-hour supervision.  
(JE 1:18).   
 
Dr. Gallagher reaffirmed his opinions provided in September of 2019, in a 
February 10, 2020, communication to claimant’s counsel.  (JE 2:16).   
 
Mr. Baker saw Dr. Gallagher again on February 19, 2020, for continued care.  
(JE 2:17-18).  Mr. Baker displayed a “fairly good” mood, but decreased energy.  (JE 
2:17).  Dr. Gallagher outlined an issue over the weekend where Mr. Baker did not 
receive certain medications on time.  (JE 2:17).  This caused Mr. Baker to suffer from 
discontinuation syndrome from his Cymbalta.  (JE 2:17).  During this visit, Dr. Gallagher 
worked with Mr. Baker on keeping him on task and providing him with critical pathway 
thinking.  (JE 2:17).  Dr. Gallagher then reviewed reports, including that of Dr. Chen.  
(JE 2:17).  Dr. Gallagher disagreed with Dr. Chen’s opinions.  (JE 2:17).  He also 
disagreed with any other “newer reports,” and noted that Mr. Baker was fearful he would 
not receive further treatment due to the recent reports.  (JE 2:17-18).   
 
On March 3, 2020, Mr. Baker visited Dr. Manshadi for a repeat evaluation.  (JE 
1:20).  Mr. Baker brought a recording of him attempting to play his guitar.  (JE 1:20).  
Despite a professed proficiency in playing the guitar, the video showed an inability on 
the part of Mr. Baker to play music.  (JE 1:20).  Mr. Baker told the doctor that he could 
read the music, but could not get his hands to play the music.  (JE 1:20).  Mr. Baker 
also reported continued symptoms including flickering of his eyes and his eyes rolling 
backwards at times.  (JE 1:20).  Dr. Manshadi recommended that Mr. Baker return in 
three to four months for another evaluation.  (JE 1:20).   
 
Dr. Gallagher wrote another letter to claimant’s counsel dated March 9, 2020.  
(JE 2:19-20).  Apparently, there was a decision made by the defendants to deny 
elements of Mr. Baker’s claim and cease authorizing medical care.  (JE 2:19).  Dr. 
Gallagher noted that this appeared to be based upon the opinions of Dr. Chen and other 
providers that Mr. Baker did not have a traumatic brain injury.  (JE 2:19).  Dr. Gallagher 
opined that these opinions were “[r]emarkable.”  (JE 2:19).  Dr. Gallagher recounted the 
facts of the incident, the claimant’s concussion, and then noted it was now “…magically 
and with certainty…decided that all of Mr. Baker’s current difficulties are related to some 
unknown occurrence or unexplainable etiology and not the work injury.”  (JE 2:20).  Dr. 
Gallagher opined that it appeared that Mr. Baker was being kicked to the curb, as his 
care was abandoned with no possibility of discussion.  (JE 2:20).   
 
On March 18, 2020, Mr. Baker had another visit with Dr. Gallagher.  (JE 2:21).  
Dr. Gallagher opined that Mr. Baker displayed optimism and noted that he wanted to 
continue treating with him.  (JE 2:21).   
 
Dr. Gallagher saw Mr. Baker again on April 15, 2020.  (JE 2:22).  Mr. Baker 
displayed increasing depression and irritability.  (JE 2:22).  Dr. Gallagher continued to 
discuss resiliency and structure with Mr. Baker.  (JE 2:22).  Dr. Gallagher changed Mr. 
Baker’s medications in an attempt to provide additional relief.  (JE 2:22).   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
Mr. Baker saw Dr. Manshadi via telehealth on May 8, 2020.  (JE 1:21).  Mr. 
Baker could not recall having any seizures, but noted that Ms. Hestness usually kept 
track of those things.  (JE 1:21).  She was not present at the visit.  (JE 1:21).  Mr. Baker 
noted that he still could not work due to his chronic headaches and cognition issues.  
(JE 1:21).  He continued to take a number of prescription medications and follow up with 
various other doctors.  (JE 1:21).  Dr. Manshadi requested that Mr. Baker return for 
another follow up and have an EMG of his left arm.  (JE 1:21).   
 
Dr. Gallagher visited with Mr. Baker again on May 14, 2020.  (JE 2:23).  Mr. 
Baker continued to be quite forgetful.  (JE 2:23).  Ms. Hestness recounted an incident 
wherein Mr. Baker repaired and sold a couch with no recollection of doing so.  (JE 
2:23).  Dr. Gallagher discussed resiliency with Mr. Baker.  (JE 2:23).   
 
On May 20, 2020, Dr. Manshadi performed a Botox injection on the claimant for 
treatment of his migraine headaches.  (JE 1:22).  The Botox injections helped provide a 
moderate improvement in the frequency of his headaches.  (JE 1:23).   
 
Dr. Gallagher continued his care for Mr. Baker on June 10, 2020.  (JE 2:24).  Mr. 
Baker experienced difficulties with sleep.  (JE 2:24).  Dr. Gallagher surmised that Mr. 
Baker seemed to “churn” about his lawsuits and negative thoughts, which caused the 
“demons to come out to play.”  (JE 2:24).  Mr. Baker expressed guilt about his need to 
depend on others and feeling like a burden.  (JE 2:24).  This thought became ingrained 
and included disgust towards his own family, as they would not assist him.  (JE 2:24).   
 
On July 6, 2020, Mr. Baker returned to Dr. Gallagher’s office.  (JE 2:25).  Mr. 
Baker was “not making fantastic progress,” however, he told Dr. Gallagher that he 
played more music than he used to which provided him with a sense of fulfillment.  (JE 
2:25).  Mr. Baker expressed an interest in medicinal marijuana.  (JE 2:25).   
 
On July 31, 2020, I issued an arbitration decision.  As noted in the previous 
arbitration decision, Drs. Manshadi, Gallagher, and Fitzgerald, opined that Mr. Baker 
could not return to employment, could not drive, and required around-the-clock 
supervision and care.  (Arb. Dec. 36).  In my decision, I found the opinions of several 
medical practitioners to be more persuasive than the evidence presented by the 
claimant’s treating providers.  I found that the claimant failed to meet his burden of proof 
to support a holding of permanent and total disability pursuant to the odd-lot doctrine or 
the statute.  (Arb. Dec. 37).  I also found that the claimant was not entitled to alternate 
medical care by way of 24/7 supervision by Ms. Hestness, or ongoing medical care.  
(Arb. Dec. 39).  This decision was appealed to the Commissioner. 
 
Dr. Gallagher saw Mr. Baker again on August 19, 2020.  (JE 2:26).  Mr. Baker 
recently developed suicidal thoughts and abnormal behavior.  (JE 2:26).  Mr. Baker 
made certain inappropriate posts on social media.  (JE 2:26).  Dr. Gallagher also 
outlined a “dry spell” of intimacy between Mr. Baker and Ms. Hestness.  (JE 2:26).  Dr. 
Gallagher noted that, “[m]uch of this was borne of the dissatisfaction of the decision that 
was handed down and the resulting despair and anger about it.”  (JE 2:26).   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
Mr. Baker had another Botox injection for his headaches on August 21, 2020.  
(JE 1:25-27).  He noted continued moderate improvement following the injections.  (JE 
1:26).  Dr. Manshadi requested that the claimant return in three months for another 
injection.  (JE 1:27).  Mr. Baker asked about medical marijuana for treatment, to which 
Dr. Manshadi agreed with a caveat that he should consult with the doctor that 
prescribed Mr. Baker’s anti-seizure medications.  (JE 1:27).   
 
Mr. Baker reported to the emergency department at Broadlawns Medical Center 
on August 29, 2020, complaining of depression.  (JE 4:1-4).  Mr. Baker indicated that he 
had an argument with his wife that evening that resulted in the police being called.  (JE 
4:1).  Following the altercation, he texted her song lyrics implying depression and/or 
suicidal thoughts.  (JE 4:1).  She notified the police, who picked him up and brought him 
to the emergency room.  (JE 4:1).  He admitted to feeling depressed due to an inability 
to help around the house following his traumatic brain injury; however, he denied being 
suicidal.  (JE 4:1).  He requested to be discharged.  (JE 4:3).   
 
On December 18, 2020, Dr. Manshadi completed a “Report on Incapacity” form 
from the Iowa Department of Human Services.  (JE 1:28-29).  Dr. Manshadi again listed 
the claimant’s diagnoses, and wrote that Mr. Baker would require indefinite care.  (JE 
1:28).  He also recommended continuous in-home care by a caregiver.  (JE 1:28).  Dr. 
Manshadi opined that the claimant had no ability to care for children in his home, nor 
could he perform work of any kind.  (JE 1:29).  He also opined that Mr. Baker could not 
participate in classroom training.  (JE 1:29).  He recommended that Mr. Baker apply for 
long-term disability benefits.  (JE 1:29).   
 
Mr. Baker visited Dr. Fitzgerald on March 4, 2021, complaining of regression in 
his left eye.  (JE 3:4-9).   
 
Dr. Manshadi provided the claimant with another Botox injection on March 12, 
2021.  (JE 1:30-32).   
 
The Commissioner issued an appeal decision on March 17, 2021.1  (Appeal 
Decision).  The Commissioner afforded no significant weight to certain opinions, and 
weight to others, and ultimately found that Mr. Baker carried his burden of proof to 
establish that he sustained a permanent injury to his head, and that his current condition 
at the time of the first arbitration hearing was causally related to the April 14, 2017, work 
injury.  (App. Dec. 6-7).  The Commissioner also found that the April 14, 2017, work 
injury caused or materially aggravated, accelerated, or lit up the claimant’s pre-existing 
anxiety and depression.  (App. Dec. 7).  The Commissioner held that Mr. Baker was 
entitled to 24-hour supervision.  (App. Dec. 8).  The Commissioner ordered MSC to 
compensate Ms. Hestness for her supervision of the claimant.2  (App. Dec. 8).  In 
arriving at the amount of compensation owed to Ms. Hestness, the Commissioner 
                                                 
1 The defendants appealed the Commissioner’s Appeal Decision to the Iowa District Court for Polk County.  
The District Court upheld the Commissioner’s Appeal Decision.  The defendants then filed an appeal to the 
Supreme Court of Iowa, which was later dismissed. 
2 It should be noted that in a Rehearing Decision, the Commissioner later clarified that Ms. Hestness would 
only be compensated as the claimant’s supervisor for 112 hours per week. 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 13 
 
accepted calculations provided and noted below by Ms. Kinney.  (App. Dec. 9).  Finally, 
the Commissioner held that the claimant was at MMI for his head injury, but had not yet 
achieved MMI for his anxiety and depression based upon the opinions of Dr. Manshadi 
and Dr. Gallagher, respectively.  (App. Dec. 11).  Based upon this, the Commissioner 
awarded the claimant a running award of healing period benefits “until such time as he 
reaches maximum medical improvement.”  (App. Dec. 12).   
 
On March 17, 2021, Mr. Baker reported to MercyOne Covenant Clinic for an 
examination by Marc Hines, M.D.  (JE 5:1-7).  Mr. Baker noted having a seizure every 
month to two months.  (JE 5:2).  He also complained of a constant headache.  (JE 5:2).  
Neuropsychological testing was done, which showed improvement over his previous 
testing.  (JE 5:3).  Dr. Hines recommended some changes to the claimant’s 
medications.  (JE 5:6).   
 
Mr. Baker went to CIA Johnston on March 30, 2021, where Alexandra 
Vandermeide, M.D., examined him.  (JE 6:1-3).  Mr. Baker had longstanding 
hypertension which was uncontrolled at the time of the examination.  (JE 6:1).  Dr. 
Vandermeide scheduled an appointment with a cardiologist, and also recommended 
that the claimant stop smoking.  (JE 6:3).   
 
The claimant returned to Dr. Gallagher’s office on April 13, 2021.  (JE 2:27).  Mr. 
Baker ran out of benefits, so he could not see Dr. Gallagher.  (JE 2:27).  Dr. Gallagher 
opined that Mr. Baker was “doing better than when I last saw him.”  (JE 2:27).  He 
seemed upbeat and stable; however, he still slept poorly and displayed evidence of a 
seizure disorder.  (JE 2:27).   
 
Amy Tiefenthaler, L.M.H.C., met with Mr. Baker on May 15, 2021.  (JE 7:1-2).  
Mr. Baker noted depressive symptoms since his injury and being away from work.  (JE 
7:1).  He told Ms. Tiefenthaler that he experienced depressive episodes due to the 
stress of not living the same life as he did before his accident.  (JE 7:2).  Ms. 
Tiefenthaler diagnosed Mr. Baker with major depressive disorder, and planned to 
continue seeing him.  (JE 7:2).   
 
On June 15, 2021, Mr. Baker had another Botox injection.  (JE 1:33-35).  Dr. 
Manshadi asked the claimant to return in three months.  (JE 1:35).  He also noted that 
continued follow-up with Drs. Hines, Gallagher, and Fitzgerald was “very appropriate.”  
(JE 1:35).   
 
Dr. Vandermeide saw the claimant for a follow-up visit on June 29, 2021.  (JE 
6:4-6).  Mr. Baker wanted to change blood pressure medication, as the currently 
prescribed medication made him tired.  (JE 6:4).  The doctor changed his medications 
and made other referrals for esophageal thickening and kidney issues.  (JE 6:6).   
 
On July 1, 2021, Mr. Baker saw Dr. Vandermeide again at the request of Dr. 
Zafar for a preoperative physical.  (JE 6:7-10).  Mr. Baker was to have a procedure to 
treat his kidney stones.  (JE 6:7-10).   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
Mr. Baker saw Dr. Manshadi again on September 17, 2021, for another Botox 
injection.  (JE 1:36-38).  Mr. Baker reported significant improvement in the frequency 
and severity of his headaches.  (JE 1:37).  He opined it was 90 percent improvement 
since starting Botox injections.  (JE 1:37).  Dr. Manshadi recommended a follow up in 
three months.  (JE 1:38).   
 
On February 16, 2022, Mr. Baker saw Dr. Manshadi for continued follow-up care.  
(JE 1:39-41).  Mr. Baker reported continued significant improvements since starting 
Botox injections.  (JE 1:40).  Mr. Baker told Dr. Manshadi that he attempted to play his 
guitar, but noticed weakness in his left hand.  (JE 1:41).  He also showed symptoms of 
left ulnar neuropathy at his elbow.  (JE 1:41).  Dr. Manshadi recommended an EMG.  
(JE 1:41).   
 
Ms. Tiefenthaler met with Mr. Baker again on March 30, 2022.  (JE 7:3-4).  Mr. 
Baker discussed his goals for treatment including reducing anxiety and getting a better 
sleep routine.  (JE 7:3).   
 
Dr. Manshadi examined Mr. Baker again on May 3, 2022.  (JE 1:42).  Mr. Baker 
noted numbness in his left elbow and fingers.  (JE 1:42).  Based upon his physical 
examination of Mr. Baker, Dr. Manshadi recommended nerve conduction and EMG 
studies.  (JE 1:42).  An EMG was performed on the same date, which Dr. Manshadi 
opined showed evidence of left ulnar neuropathy “consistent with Cubital Tunnel 
syndrome.”  (JE 1:43).  He noted, “[p]atient may benefit from [u]lnar nerve 
decompression.”  (JE 1:43).   
 
In response to a letter from defendants’ counsel, Dr. Manshadi drafted a missive 
on May 4, 2022.  (JE 1:45).   Dr. Manshadi told defendants’ counsel that Mr. Baker 
experienced weakness in his left hand caused by ulnar neuropathy as confirmed by 
several EMGs.  (JE 1:45).  Dr. Manshadi confirmed that Mr. Baker recounted the rack 
that hit him in the head also striking his left elbow.  (JE 1:45).   
On May 9, 2022, Ms. Tiefenthaler responded to a letter from ESIS Nurse Impact, 
requesting her opinions as to several questions.  (JE 7:5-6).  Ms. Tiefenthaler reiterated 
her diagnosis of major depressive disorder for Mr. Baker.  (JE 7:5).  She found that he 
had not yet reached MMI for the psychiatric injury, but felt that he would achieve MMI in 
six months to one year.  (JE 7:5).  She recommended continued biweekly therapy while 
“working on depressive symptoms.”  (JE 7:6).   
Russell Buchanan, M.D., a neurosurgeon, examined Mr. Baker on June 20, 
2022.  (JE 8:1-5).  Mr. Baker had numbness of the left ulnar distribution.  (JE 8:1).  
Specifically, Mr. Baker had numbness to the left third, fourth, and fifth digits, along with 
a feeling of weakness in the left arm.  (JE 8:4).  Dr. Buchanan noted the results of the 
EMG, which showed left ulnar neuropathy that was consistent with cubital tunnel 
syndrome.  (JE 8:4).  Dr. Buchanan recommended proceeding with a left ulnar release 
in order to decompress the nerve.  (JE 8:4).   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
On July 11, 2022, Mr. Baker returned to Dr. Vandermeide’s office for another 
preoperative physical ahead of a left cubital tunnel release.  (JE 6:11-14).  Dr. 
Vandermeide recommended that Mr. Baker proceed with the surgery.  (JE 6:14).   
 
Dr. Buchanan performed a left ulnar nerve release of the left cubital tunnel, on 
July 29, 2022.  (JE 8:6-7).   
 
Mr. Baker saw Dr. Vandermeide again on August 5, 2022.  (JE 6:15-17).  Mr. 
Baker aspirated during surgery causing hypoxia.  (JE 6:15).  As a result of this, he was 
admitted to the hospital.  (JE 6:15).  This visit was a follow-up to his hospitalization.  (JE 
6:15).   
 
On August 8, 2022, Mr. Baker saw Ms. Tiefenthaler again for his depressive 
symptoms.  (JE 7:7-8).  Mr. Baker and the therapist discussed various goals 
surrounding his anxiety and depression.  (JE 7:7-8).   
 
A nurse practitioner met with Mr. Baker for postsurgical follow-up care on August 
24, 2022.  (JE 8:8-12).  Mr. Baker did not feel improvement in pain or numbness since 
his surgery.  (JE 8:10).  He also noticed weakness still in his left hand.  (JE 8:10).  The 
nurse practitioner reiterated to the claimant that the surgery was performed in order to 
prevent a worsening of symptoms, not to restore strength to the claimant’s left arm.  (JE 
8:11).   
 
On September 6, 2022, David Visokey, M.D., examined the claimant for his sleep 
issues.  (JE 9:1-3).  Since his previous visit, Mr. Baker had no changes to his 
symptoms.  (JE 9:1).  He used a CPAP.  (JE 9:1).  Dr. Visokey attributed the claimant’s 
sleep apnea to the traumatic brain injury sustained by Mr. Baker in April of 2017, as he 
had no issues with sleep apnea until after his injury.  (JE 9:3).   
 
Ms. Tiefenthaler and Mr. Baker met again on September 12, 2022, for continued 
counseling.  (JE 7:9-10).  Mr. Baker expressed continued concern about his seizures 
and how he behaves during the seizures.  (JE 7:9).   
 
Dr. Fitzgerald saw Mr. Baker again on October 8, 2022.  (JE 3:10-13).  Mr. Baker 
had difficulty with depth perception and short-term memory.  (JE 3:13).  Mr. Baker did 
not drive, continued to work on balance, and also complained of continued “break thru” 
seizures.  (JE 3:13).   
 
On October 10, 2022, Mr. Baker visited with Ms. Tiefenthaler again.  (JE 7:11-
12).  They discussed trauma triggers, sleep techniques, and familial relationships.  (JE 
7:11).   
 
Dr. Buchanan issued a letter addressed to defendants’ counsel on November 14, 
2022.  (JE 8:13).  Dr. Buchanan found that the claimant was not at MMI as of the writing 
of the letter, though he anticipated that MMI would be reached in “the next couple of 
months.”  (JE 8:13).  He also declined to provide a functional impairment rating.  (JE 
8:13).   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 16 
 
 
Mr. Baker returned to Ms. Tiefenthaler’s office for additional counseling on 
December 12, 2022.  (JE 7:14-15).  Mr. Baker experienced a recent illness.  (JE 7:14).  
Mr. Baker expressed worry as to his depressive symptoms worsening over the next few 
months “due to changing weather and day light decreasing.”  (JE 7:14).  Ms. 
Tiefenthaler provided techniques on how to be proactive to avoid increasing depression.  
(JE 7:14).   
 
In a letter dated December 23, 2022, Ms. Tiefenthaler responded to questions 
posed by defendants’ counsel.  (JE 7:16).  Ms. Tiefenthaler reiterated her diagnosis of 
major depressive disorder with symptoms of depression and anxiety.  (JE 7:16).  She 
placed him at MMI, but recommended that he continue therapy in order to manage his 
symptoms.  (JE 7:16).  Ms. Tiefenthaler noted being unfamiliar with the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, and therefore unable to provide 
an impairment rating.  (JE 7:16).   
 
On September 13, 2023, Dr. Manshadi wrote another letter to defendants’ 
counsel regarding some questions posed to him.  (JE 1:47-48).  Dr. Manshadi 
recounted his continued follow-up care for Mr. Baker, including Botox injections to treat 
post-concussive headaches.  (JE 1:47).  Dr. Manshadi also began providing assistance 
to Mr. Baker regarding his anti-epilepsy drugs, as Dr. Hines cancelled several 
appointments.  (JE 1:47).  Dr. Manshadi also recommended to Mr. Baker that he find a 
new neurologist.  (JE 1:47).  Dr. Manshadi counseled Mr. Baker not to drive for six 
months due to his seizure in July.  (JE 1:47).  Dr. Manshadi noted that Mr. Baker also 
outlined an episode in the morning that he came to the office for his last visit.  (JE 1:47).  
He was driven to the office by a friend for his appointment.  (JE 1:47).   
 
The claimant applied for, and was granted Social Security Disability benefits 
backdated to April 14, 2017.  (Testimony; CE 4:1).   
The claimant owns two cars, and has a valid driver’s license.  (Testimony).  He 
did not drive from April of 2017 to April of 2023.  (Testimony).  He started driving in a 
short mile radius in April of 2023 at the suggestion of Dr. Fitzgerald, as he was seizure 
free for six months.  (Testimony).  He recounted driving a few times alone, and that 
despite his restrictions on driving provided by doctors, he would not drive on days where 
he felt a seizure coming on.  (Testimony).  He also testified that he took his son to 
school via vehicle on several occasions.  (Testimony).  Following his last seizure in July 
of 2023, he stopped driving.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Baker noted being left at home alone at times.  (Testimony).  Ms. Hestness 
corroborated this in her deposition testimony.  (DE C).  He also noted that his older 
children stay with him at times, as they are aware of how to handle him if he has a 
seizure.  (Testimony).   
 
Pursuant to the prior decisions, Ms. Hestness has supervised the claimant.  
(Testimony).  She is currently paid fourteen and 61/100 dollars ($14.61) per hour for 16 
hours per day.  (Testimony).  Mr. Baker testified that he was satisfied with Ms. Hestness 
as his primary caregiver.  (DE D).  He wanted her to continue to be his caregiver.  (DE 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 17 
 
D).  The claimant is requesting that this amount be increased.  (Testimony).  Ms. Kinney 
wrote a letter to claimant’s counsel dated September 21, 2013.  (CE 2:1).  In this letter, 
she outlined the mean hourly wage of a nursing assistant or home care attendant in the 
Des Moines, Iowa, area, based upon wage data from the United States Department of 
Labor.  (CE 2:1).  The wages are as follows: 
 
2020 - $14.91 
 
2021 - $15.11  
 
2022 - $16.46 
 
2023 – The 2023 data is scheduled for release in April, 2024 
(CE 2:1).   
 
Ms. Hestness was deposed in this matter on August 22, 2023.  (DE C).  She 
opined that Mr. Baker’s vision has improved since the time of the first arbitration 
hearing.  (DE C).  Otherwise, the remainder of his conditions have stayed the same.  
(DE C).  She confirmed that Mr. Baker continued to have monthly seizures.  (DE C).  
She also confirmed that she helped Mr. Baker take his medications, including reminding 
him to take them.  (DE C).  As part of her care for Mr. Baker, Ms. Hestness placed 
cameras around their home so that she could monitor him from another room of the 
home.  (DE C).  She also noted that she leaves him alone at times if she is running to 
pick up their young son from school or to the gas station.  (DE C).  She transports him 
to doctor appointments.  (DE C).   
 
Occasionally, Mr. Baker performs yard work, grocery shops, and does 
housework.  (Testimony).  He also pays bills with assistance.  (Testimony).  Ms. 
Hestness confirmed in her deposition that Mr. Baker pays his own bills including for 
property taxes on their home.  (DE C).   
 
At the time of his deposition in August of 2023, Mr. Baker continued to have 
Botox injections.  (DE D).  He uses a rowing machine, a BOSU ball, resistance bands, 
free weights, and an exercise bike.  (DE D).   
 
Finally, Mr. Baker reached a settlement with MSC in a civil lawsuit.  (DE E).  The 
settlement was for one million and 00/100 dollars ($1,000,000.00).  (DE E).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).  
 
 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 18 
 
Temporary Disability 
 
In the previously issued appeal decision, the Commissioner, as affirmed by the 
District Court, determined that the claimant was entitled to a running award of healing 
period benefits.  The Commissioner based this largely on the fact that one of the 
“triggers” in our temporary disability statute(s) had not been met.  Namely, the claimant 
had yet to achieve MMI for his anxiety and depression issues, at the time of the first 
hearing.   
 
The claimant is requesting either a continuation of the running award, or in the 
alternative, if the claimant has achieved MMI, a determination that the claimant is 
permanently and totally disabled.  The defendants contend that the claimant achieved 
MMI and is not entitled to a continued running award of healing period benefits, and 
further, that the claimant is not permanently and totally disabled.   
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 
696 N.W.2d 596 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability benefits 
and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss of 
earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefits depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).   
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.   
Iowa Code 85.33(1) provides: 
...the employer shall pay to an employee for injury producing temporary total 
disability weekly compensation benefits, as provided in section 85.32, until 
the employee has returned to work or is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the first employment in which the 
employee was engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.   
Temporary total disability benefits cease when the employee returns to work, or is 
medically capable of returning to substantially similar employment. 
 
Iowa Code 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an 
injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until: (1) the worker has 
returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or, (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The first of 
the three items to occur ends a healing period.  See Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 
N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); Evenson v. Winnebago Indus. Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 
2016); Crabtree v. Tri-City Elec. Co., File No. 5059572 (App., Mar. 20, 2020).  The 
healing period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable 
expectation of improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 19 
 
Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be 
interrupted or intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986).  
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Id.   
 
The claimant brought these claims against the defendants, but the defendants 
make the argument in their posthearing brief that the claimant was placed at maximum 
medical improvement, and therefore not entitled to a continued running award of healing 
period benefits.   
 
In the appeal decision, the Commissioner noted that the claim for permanent 
disability benefits was not ripe until MMI was achieved.  As of September 4, 2019, Dr. 
Manshadi opined that the claimant reached MMI for his head injury, including his issues 
with headaches, chronic migraines, myofascial pain in the neck and back, seizures, 
peripheral vision, left-sided weakness, and loss of sensation; however, he deferred as 
to the claimant’s mental health issues.  Dr. Gallagher, who was treating Mr. Baker for 
his ongoing anxiety and depression, had not placed Mr. Baker at MMI at that time.  
While the Commissioner noted that Mr. Baker showed slow, but steady improvement, 
as borne out by the medical records, he had yet to achieve MMI.  Based upon this, the 
Commissioner noted that, “[t]he current record does not support a finding that claimant 
has reached MMI with respect to his severe anxiety and depression.”   
 
Subsequent to the last hearing, Mr. Baker continued to treat with Dr. Manshadi.  
He also continued to see Dr. Gallagher for counseling services.  His visits became more 
spotty and he followed up one last time in April of 2021.  Mr. Baker then began seeing 
Ms. Tiefenthaler for his counseling.  Ms. Tiefenthaler visited with Mr. Baker on a number 
of occasions.  She was asked in May of 2022 by ESIS Nurse Impact whether the 
claimant had achieved MMI for his psychiatric injury, including his diagnosis of major 
depressive disorder.  At that time, Ms. Tiefenthaler opined that the claimant had not 
reached MMI, though he would likely achieve it in six months to one year.  By 
December 23, 2022, Ms. Tiefenthaler opined that Mr. Baker achieved MMI.  She 
declined to issue any opinions as to permanent impairment, as she noted being 
unfamiliar with the Guides.   
 
The argument presented by the claimant that the consistent opinions of Dr. 
Manshadi that the claimant cannot work dictates that the claimant is entitled to continue 
a running award of healing period benefits is not persuasive.  The Commissioner found 
that Mr. Baker was entitled to healing period benefits.  Because the claimant was 
awarded healing period benefits specifically, my analysis hinges on whether the 
claimant met one of the three factors used to measure when healing period benefits 
should cease.  In this case, the claimant has not returned to work, nor has any provider 
determined that he was medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment.  However, Dr. Manshadi and Ms. Tiefenthaler have both opined that Mr. 
Baker achieved MMI.   
 
Considering Dr. Manshadi’s September 4, 2019, opinion, the ruling in the 
Commissioner’s appeal decision, the subsequent affirmation by the District Court, and 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 20 
 
Ms. Tiefenthaler’s opinions, healing period benefits would cease on December 23, 
2022, as Mr. Baker achieved MMI as of that date.   
Causation 
There is a dispute in this case as to whether the claimant’s injury is a cause of 
permanent disability.  The claimant contends that he is permanently and totally disabled 
as a result of the April 14, 2017, work incident.  The defendants contend that there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that the claimant sustained a permanent disability.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).    
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.    
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).    
It is well established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and In the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 21 
 
[A] disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to finally 
disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is whether 
the diseased condition was the cause or whether the employment was a 
proximate contributing cause.   
Musselman v. Ce. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).   
 
It is well settled in Iowa that an employer is liable for all consequences that 
naturally and proximately flow from an accident to an employee in the usual course of 
their employment.  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-68, 266 N.W. 480, 
482 (1936).  Further disability is compensable when the further disability is the 
proximate result of the original injury.  Id.   
 
Unfortunately, the claimant did not provide much by way of a closing argument in 
their posthearing brief as to this issue.  I turn to the medical evidence in the record.  Dr. 
Manshadi has continually suggested that the claimant cannot work and will not be able 
to work for an indefinite period of time following his work injury.  He encouraged the 
claimant to apply for long-term disability benefits.  While the Social Security 
Administration’s determinations are not binding on this Agency, it is a persuasive piece 
of evidence in this case showing the claimant’s inability to work.  Additionally, Mr. Baker 
has continued to have seizures as recently as July of 2023.  While he has driven 
incidentally on a few occasions, this was on the advice of Dr. Fitzgerald.  Since having 
his last seizure, he stopped driving.  Dr. Manshadi opined that the claimant should not 
be driving, and by all accounts, he has stopped driving since that time.  
 
Ms. Tiefenthaler did not provide an opinion as to permanent impairment.  She 
noted being unfamiliar with the Guides and their evaluation procedures for permanent 
impairment.  The defendants provided no counterevidence during the instant 
proceeding to indicate that the claimant did not have any permanent impairment.  
Additionally, after reviewing the prior arbitration decision and the appeal decision, I now 
see that the experts upon which they relied had significant flaws in their opinions.   
 
While Dr. Manshadi did not use the explicit words “permanent impairment,” nor 
did he provide an impairment rating, it is clear based upon his opinions and the opinions 
discussed in the prior arbitration decision from Drs. Gallagher and Fitzgerald, that the 
claimant sustained permanent impairment from the April 14, 2017, work incident.  
Additionally, the evidence that the claimant continues to have seizures and mental 
health difficulties are an indication that he suffered permanent impairment as a result of 
the April 14, 2017, work incident.  The claimant has carried his burden to show, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that the April 14, 2017, work incident was a cause of 
permanent impairment.   
 
 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 22 
 
Permanent Disability and/or Permanent and Total Disability 
 
There is a dispute noted in the hearing report as to whether or not the claimant’s 
work injury should be evaluated as a scheduled member disability to the left shoulder.  
Without even discussing the extent of the law on this issue, it is apparent from the 
dearth of evidence in this case as to the issue, that an evaluation of the claimant’s 
permanent disability based solely upon a scheduled member impairment to the shoulder 
would be incorrect.   
 
The claimant alleges that his permanent disabilities have caused him to be 
permanently and totally disabled under either the statute and/or the odd-lot doctrine.   
In Iowa, a claimant may establish permanent total disability under the statute, or 
through the common law odd-lot doctrine.  Michael Eberhart Constr. v. Curtin, 674 
N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004) (discussing both theories of permanent total disability 
under Idaho law and concluding the deputy’s ruling was not based on both theories 
rather, it was only based on the odd-lot doctrine).  Under the statute, the claimant may 
establish that they are totally and permanently disabled if the claimant’s medical 
impairment, taken together with nonmedical factors totals 100-percent.  Id.  The odd-lot 
doctrine applies when the claimant has established the claimant has sustained 
something less than 100-percent disability, but is so injured that the claimant is “unable 
to perform services other than ‘those which are so limited in quality, dependability or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.’”  Id.  (quoting Boley v. 
Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 130 Idaho 278, 281, 939 P.2d 854, 857 (1997)).   
“Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.”  Walmart 
Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 501 (Iowa 2003) (quoting IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 2000)).  Total disability occurs when the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee’s experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform.”  IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 633. However, finding that the claimant could 
perform some work despite claimant’s physical and educational limitations does not 
foreclose a finding of permanent total disability.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File 
No. 661698 (App. October 1987); Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial 
Commissioner Report 134 (App. May 1982).   
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen, Co., the Iowa Supreme Court formally adopted the 
“odd-lot doctrine.”  373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985).  Under that doctrine, a worker 
becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining 
employment in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus 
totally disabled if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, 
dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., 
at 105.   
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to provide evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 23 
 
produce such evidence and the trier of fact finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, then the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d 
at 106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot 
employee include: the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady 
employment, vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not 
available for the worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, 
education, age, training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive 
on the issue.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  
Even under the odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and 
credibility of evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has 
been carried, and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as 
to compel a finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106.  
The claimant has not provided evidence sufficient to meet his burden that he is 
permanently and totally disabled based upon the statutory framework.  Therefore, I 
examine this as an odd-lot case.   
At the time of the hearing, the claimant was 46 years old.  He lived with Kristin 
Hestness, who provided him with 24-hour care.3  Mr. Baker is a high school graduate.  
He took classes at a community college.  He eventually was hired by MSC as a solution 
sales representative.  In that position, he set up new job sites.  Mr. Baker appeared to 
be of average intelligence prior to his work injury.  However, following his work injury, it 
is clear that he had ongoing memory issues due to his head injury.  This makes him a 
poor candidate for retraining.  There are no impairment ratings to consider.  One 
concerning aspect is that the claimant has not looked for work since the incident.  
However, this is not a definitive finding, as the claimant has been precluded from driving 
since 2017, despite some recent limited efforts to regain this skill.  This failed, as the 
claimant continued to have seizures, which precluded him from continuing to drive.    
The pertinent evidence in this case dates back several years.  In September of 
2019, Dr. Gallagher agreed that Mr. Baker had cognitive limitations, could not drive, and 
could not be gainfully employed as a result of his work incident.  After placing the 
claimant at MMI in September of 2019, Dr. Manshadi opined that Mr. Baker was unable 
to be gainfully employed as a result of the work incident.  He confirmed this in a letter of 
December 18, 2020, in which he recommended indefinite medical care and noted that 
the claimant was incapable of work of any kind.  Dr. Fitzgerald also opined that Mr. 
Baker required 24-hour care and had continued short-term memory issues.   
Mr. Davis took into consideration restrictions and opinions provided by Drs. 
Manshadi, Gallagher, and Fitzgerald in arriving at the conclusion that the claimant was 
currently incapable of returning to his past employment activities.  Mr. Davis stated, 
“[b]ased on the same opinions of his treating and evaluating physicians, Mr. Baker is 
100% precluded from performing any gainful employment activity.”  It would have been 
helpful had the claimant provided a more recent vocational report or opinion as to this 
issue; however, the claimant has made a prima facie case that he is permanently and 
                                                 
3 While there were times that Ms. Hestness left Mr. Baker alone or in the care of another person, there is 
not enough evidence to suggest that these were pervasive, or anything more than incidental.   

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 24 
 
totally disabled under the odd-lot doctrine based upon the preponderance of the 
evidence in the record.   
The defendants essentially argue that no provider has opined that the claimant is 
permanently and totally disabled or that the opinions are too distant from the time of the 
hearing.  However, there is no indication that any of the providers’ opinions have 
changed.  The defendants could have sought an opinion as to the claimant’s ongoing 
condition, as they did several times since the claimant’s injury, in order to counter the 
opinions provided by the claimant’s providers.  They did not do this.  Since the claimant 
made a prima facie showing of permanent and total disability, the burden shifted to the 
defendants to show that there was suitable employment available to Mr. Baker.  The 
employer failed to provide any evidence in the instant hearing as to this issue.   
Based upon the foregoing, and the evidence in the record, I find that the claimant 
is permanently and totally disabled based upon the odd-lot doctrine.  As stipulated, 
benefits would commence on December 23, 2022. 
Payment of Medical Expenses 
There is a dispute as to the compensation owed to Ms. Hestness as the 
caregiver to Mr. Baker.  The defendants contend that 24-hour supervision is no longer 
necessary for Mr. Baker.  The claimant contends that 24-hour supervision remains 
necessary, and that the compensation paid to Ms. Hestness for her services should be 
increased.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 1975).   
The employee has the burden of proof to show medical charges are reasonable 
and necessary, and must produce evidence to that effect.  Poindexter v. Grant’s Carpet 
Service, I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Decisions, No. 1, at 195 (1984); McClellon v. 
Iowa S. Util., 91-92, IAWC, 266-272 (App. 1992).    
The claimant continues to require 24-hour surveillance.  There is not sufficient 
evidence to rebut this issue.  The claimant continues to have periodic seizures.  He also 
continues to have mental health care.  Dr. Manshadi opined in December of 2020 that 
Mr. Baker required 24-hour surveillance or care, and that he could no longer work.  
Since that time there is no indication or medical record that indicates that his opinion 
changed, nor is there any provider since the initial arbitration and appeal decision that 
indicates it would be appropriate to cease the claimant’s 24-hour surveillance.  There is 
also no indication in the record that Ms. Hestness is no longer a sufficient caregiver.  
The defendants point to an incident wherein Mr. Baker reported to Broadlawns Medical 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 25 
 
Center seeking mental health care.  They allege that Ms. Hestness did not accompany 
Mr. Baker to this visit as an indication that she was not providing sufficient care as a 
caregiver.  What the defendants neglect to mention in their posthearing brief is that the 
medical record indicates that the police transported Mr. Baker to Broadlawns following 
an argument that he had with Ms. Hestness.  Based upon the foregoing reasons, and 
the record, I decline to stop the 24-hour surveillance provided to Mr. Baker by Ms. 
Hestness as a result of the April 14, 2017, work injury. 
Next, I turn to the proper wage to be paid to Ms. Hestness.  Determining the rate 
of compensation for home nursing services using the local value of the service 
provided, and not the amount of the wage paid to a certified nurse aide, is the valuation 
endorsed by the Iowa Supreme Court in Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 156 
(Iowa 1996) (determining that the claimant carried his burden of establishing a 
reasonable compensation rate for the home nursing services provided by his wife, who 
was not a nurse, by presenting evidence obtained from “home nursing services in the 
area as to what would be charged if the same services were performed by a nurse.”).   
Previously, Ms. Hestness was paid fourteen and 61/100 dollars ($14.61) per hour 
for 112 hours per week based upon the Commissioner’s appeal decision.  The claimant 
provided a letter from Ms. Kinney outlining the mean hourly wage of a nursing assistant 
or home care attendant in the Des Moines, Iowa, area, based upon wage data provided 
by the United States Department of Labor.  Ms. Kinney noted that the appropriate 
wages were fourteen and 91/100 dollars ($14.91) per hour in 2020, fifteen and 11/100 
dollars ($15.11) per hour in 2021, and sixteen and 46/100 dollars ($16.46) per hour in 
2022.  This evidence is unrebutted by the defendants.  Therefore, I find that Ms. 
Hestness should have been compensated at the foregoing rates for 2020, 2021, and 
2022.  Until the Department of Labor data is released for 2023, Ms. Hestness shall be 
compensated based upon the 2022 wages.  As previously provided by the 
Commissioner’s appeal decision, Ms. Hestness shall be compensated for 112 hours per 
week at the aforementioned rates.   
Credit 
 
Iowa Code section 85.22 outlines the liability of others when an employee 
receives an injury for which compensation is payable under Iowa Code chapter 85.  
Specifically, a workers’ compensation carrier holds a statutory lien on the proceeds of a 
third-party recovery.  See Iowa Code section 85.22.  Any credit is subject to the 
obligation of the insurer to pay its share of the attorney fees required for that recovery.  
See Ewing v. Allied Construction Services, 592 N.W.2d 689, 690 (Iowa 1999).   
 
In Ewing, the employee sustained severe and permanent injuries as part of his 
employment by a construction company.  Id.  Subsequent to receiving workers’ 
compensation benefits, the plaintiff filed a third-party action, and recovered $750,000.00 
in a settlement.  Id.  The court ruled that the employer was entitled to reimbursement for 
indemnity and medical expenses which they previously paid.  Id.  The employer 
continued to pay workers' compensation benefits after the third-party settlement.  Id.  
The court concluded that the employer should pay the claimant an amount equal to one-

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 26 
 
third of the amount it would have been required to pay that week, but for the third-party 
settlement.  Id.   
 
In this case, the claimant entered into a third-party settlement agreement with 
multiple defendants.  The settlement agreement amounted to one million and 00/100 
dollars ($1,000,000.00).  Prior to the hearing, the defendants claimed a credit for 
payments made totaling four hundred thirty-one thousand six hundred twenty-nine and 
33/100 dollars ($431,629.33).  The defendants then made weekly payments constituting 
one-third of the amount owed on a weekly basis as an attorney lien.  They provided 
evidence of the same.  The defendants claim that they hold a “future credit” of five 
hundred forty-six thousand fifty-one and 44/100 ($546,051.44).  The claimant provided 
no argument or evidence as to their dispute on this credit.  In fact, the claimant testified 
that weekly payments continued to be made. 
 
This case is similar to Ewing, in that the defendants are entitled to a continuing 
credit, and they are obligated to pay the one-third amount of each weekly benefit 
payment to the claimant’s attorney to represent satisfaction of the contingent fee.    
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on December 23, 
2022, and that the healing period benefits ceased as of that date.   
 
That the claimant is permanently and totally disabled pursuant to the odd-lot 
doctrine. 
 
That, pursuant to the parties’ stipulations, permanent total disability benefits shall 
commence on December 23, 2022, at the stipulated rate.   
 
That the defendants are entitled to a credit for the third-party settlement, less the 
contingent attorney’s fee owed to claimant’s attorney.   
 
That the defendants shall compensate Ms. Hestness for 24-hour surveillance or 
supervision services at the above noted rates for 112 hours per week.   
That the defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
 

BAKER V. MSC INDUSTRIAL DIRECT CO., INC. 
Page 27 
 
Signed and filed this ___15th __ day of February, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
Jean Zetta Dickson (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
