Case Number: 5066686
Case Title:  PARSONS, TERRY V. HY-VEE INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Parsons Terry-5066686d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TERRY PARSONS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5066686 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
HY-VEE ALGONA, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EMC INSURANCE COMPANIES, 
  : 
 
 
  :      Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1405.40, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
1803, 1803.1, 2601.10 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Terry Parsons filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from the defendants, employer Hy-Vee, Inc. (Hy-Vee) and insurance carrier 
EMC Insurance Companies (EMC), for an alleged injury to the right lower extremity and 
whole body. The undersigned presided over a hearing in this case on April 21, 2020, via 
online video stream. Janece Valentine represented Parsons and Dennis Riekenberg 
represented the defendants. 
ISSUES 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.149(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the agency for determination. 
The undersigned issued an order approving the hearing report and entering it into the 
record because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, resulting from 
the stipulated work injury? 
2) Is Parsons entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
3) Are costs taxed against the defendants under Iowa Code section 86.40? 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-04  15:02:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 2 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Parsons and Hy-Vee at 
the time in question. 
2) Parsons sustained an injury on October 21, 2015, which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment with Hy-Vee. 
3) The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded, is April 3, 2019. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a. Parsons’s gross earnings were $318.25 per week. 
b. Parsons was married. 
c. Parsons was entitled to two exemptions. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. This decision contains no discussion of any factual or legal 
issues relative to the parties’ stipulations. The parties are bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACTS 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 15; 
 Defendants’ Exhibit (Def. Ex.) A; and 
 Hearing testimony by Parsons and Noah Utterback, a night stock manager at 
the Hy-Vee store where Parsons worked.  
After careful consideration of the evidence, the undersigned makes the following 
findings of fact. 
Parsons, a life-long Iowan, resides in Burt. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) He did not complete 
high school because he dropped out in the eleventh grade after his father died. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 15) At the time of hearing, Parsons had not obtained his GED or any postsecondary 
degrees or certificates. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) 
Parsons worked at Pizza Hut and then washed dishes at Nick’s Pizza & 
Steakhouse. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) After Parsons turned 18, he worked on a farm performing 
field work and helping with livestock. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) He next worked at a hatchery 
transferring eggs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) 
While working at the hatchery in 1987, Parsons was diagnosed with cone 
dystrophy, which rendered him legally blind. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) He gave up his driver’s 
license because of the diagnosis. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) Parsons applied for Social Security 
Disability benefits and the federal Social Security Administration (SSA) found him 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 3 
eligible. (Hrg. Tr. p. 58) Because of Parsons’s disability, he is unable to effectively use a 
computer due to his limited ability to see the keyboard. (Hrg. Tr. p. 62) 
Parsons continued to work despite receiving Social Security benefits. He kept 
track of his earnings to make sure he did not earn more than is allowed for a recipient of 
Social Security benefits under federal law. (Hrg. Tr. p. 58) Parsons worked for about a 
year and a half taking engines apart at a junkyard. (Hrg. Tr. p. 55) But for the vast 
majority of the time between his Social Security benefits eligibility determination and 
beginning employment with Hy-Vee, Parsons worked as a part-time farmhand on a 
friend’s farm doing fieldwork and helping repair machinery. (Hrg. Tr. p. 55) During his 
time working at the farm, he picked up some mechanical skills in maintaining 
equipment. (Hrg. Tr. p. 56) 
Hy-Vee hired Parsons on March 8, 2015, to stock shelves at its Algona grocery 
store. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 15; Hrg. Tr. p. 20) His duties included bringing produce on pallets 
from the back of the store to the aisles for shelving. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20) Parsons used a 
pallet jack to help move products for shelving. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) Utterback testified 
Parsons “did a good job” and was an employee he “didn’t really have to worry about a 
whole lot.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 69) 
On October 21, 2015, Parsons was working at Hy-Vee. (Jt. Ex. 1; Hrg. Tr. pp. 
20–22) Parson was pulling a hand pallet jack with canned goods on it. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) 
He slipped and the two back wheels of pallet jack ran over his right foot. (Jt. Exs. 1, 4, p. 
16; Hrg. Tr. p. 22) Parsons fell backward, causing a hyperextension injury to the right 
foot and ankle as well as the crush injury. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) 
Parsons went to the emergency room at Kossuth Regional Health Center. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 25) Mark Davis, PA-C, provided care that night and during the early morning 
hours of October 22. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 16) Davis ordered X-rays of Parsons’s injured foot. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) 
Davis observed Parsons’s foot showed minimal swelling. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) 
Parsons complained of significant pain in his right foot and anterior ankle. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
16) The pain ran from the extensor surface of his great toe, directly up his forefoot, and 
to the anterior ankle. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) Parsons did not complain of numbness or tingling. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) X-rays did not show any acute fractures. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) 
Davis advised Parsons to stay off his foot as much as possible over the coming 
days. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) He did not instruct Parsons to stay home from work or give him 
any work restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) Parsons went back to work, without restrictions, 
on his next scheduled workday, on November 25, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16; Hrg. Tr. pp. 28, 
53) After the work injury, Parsons worked about the same number of hours for Hy-Vee 
as he did before the work injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 54)  
Parsons continued to experience symptoms following his return to work. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 27–28) Parsons felt like he “got put on hold for a while” by EMC after his trip to the 
ER because he could not get answers regarding care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) The defendants 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 4 
provided Parsons no care for his foot between his trip to the ER on the night of the 
injury and March 1, 2016. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28)  
On March 1, 2016, Parsons returned to see Davis. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17; Hrg. Tr. p. 
28) Parsons complained of sharp and severe pain in the webspace between the second 
and third toe of his right foot. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17) He informed Davis he experienced the 
pain daily, mostly when walking and on occasion when trying to sleep. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17) 
Davis noted the pain radiated to the forefoot, but Parsons was not tender in that area. 
(Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17) Parsons denied numbness or tingling. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17)  
Davis ordered more X-rays and compared them to those taken on the night of 
injury. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17) He again observed no evidence of fractures or dislocations in 
Parsons’s foot. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17) Davis suspected a Morton’s neuroma, which involves 
a thickening of the tissue around one of the nerves leading to the toes, and referred him 
to Edward Henrich, D.P.M., a podiatrist. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 17) 
On March 24, 2016, Parsons went to the Mason City Clinic and saw Dr. Henrich, 
who noted pain and Parsons complaining of feeling “pins and needles” in his toes. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 26) Dr. Henrich felt a neuroma in the second interspace of the right foot was 
causing the pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 27) He administered injections of Kenalog and Marcaine, 
and prescribed Gabapentin. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 27) Dr. Henrich instructed Parsons to ice his 
foot twice a day for a week. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 27)  
Dr. Henrich recommended physical therapy (PT). (Hrg. Tr. p. 30; Jt. Ex. 9, p. 59) 
Parsons attended 12 PT appointments between May 18, 2016, and June 21, 2016. (Jt. 
Ex. 9, p. 59) After completing PT, the intensity and duration of Parsons’s pain was 
reduced, leaving him able to complete most activities. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 59) However, pain 
still limited Parsons’s ability to squat, stand, or kneel for prolonged periods of time. (Jt. 
Ex. 9, p. 59) 
Parsons followed up with Dr. Henrich on June 30, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 28) Dr. 
Henrich noted Parsons continued to complain of pain and observed palpable 
tenderness in the second interspace of his right foot. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 28–29) He ordered 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of Parsons’s right foot. (Jt. Ex 5, p. 30) Dr. Henrich 
informed Parsons surgery to remove the neuroma was a possibility. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 30) He 
took Parsons off work for one week. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 30) 
Parsons saw Dr. Henrich on July 26, 2021, to discuss the MRI. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 33) 
He complained of ongoing pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 33) The diagnosis shifted from the second 
interspace of Parsons’s right foot to the third. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 34) Dr. Henrich shared with 
Parsons that the MRI was negative for any significant plantar plate issues. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
34) Dr. Henrich injected Parsons with Kenalog, Marcaine, and cortisone. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
34) Parsons experienced short-term relief from the injections. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30) 
On August 18, 2016, Parsons followed up with Dr. Henrich. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 35) He 
reported “doing very well, at least 55% better.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 35) Parsons informed Dr. 
Henrich his foot “does not hurt as much” and “he can get through an 8-hour shift, and 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 5 
just the last little bit, he notices it. It burns and stings at times.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 35) After 
examining Parsons, Dr. Henrich noted he had “no significant Mulder sign present in the 
actual 3rd interspace of the right foot” and “some mild swelling and tenderness upon 
deep palpation of the interspace.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 35) Dr. Henrich instructed Parsons to get 
better footwear, with a wider and deeper sole, and to follow up as needed. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
36) 
As part of Utterback’s supervisory duties, he walked the store every 30 or 40 
minutes to see how night stock employees were performing their job duties. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
69) Utterback noticed little difference in the way Parsons performed his duties 
immediately after the work injury but did not notice any issues as time went by. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 71) Parsons did not ask Utterback for or take extra breaks due to the work injury. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 72) Parsons did not tell Utterback about any issues sleeping due to his work 
injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 72) 
Parsons voluntarily quit his job with Hy-Vee effective August 25, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 15) At hearing, Parsons credibly testified on the question of why he quit: 
I asked to be switched to days because I was having trouble after working 
nights, after I had hurt my foot, sleeping, because my foot would throb, 
burn, and I would not be getting enough sleep. And I kept getting the 
runaround about I will look into it. And I finally said -- he kept giving me the 
runaround, and I said I’m done. I couldn’t keep going on anymore without 
hardly any sleep [. . .] because of my foot hurting so bad. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 39–40) Utterback learned Parsons quit from his supervisor. (Hrg. Tr. p. 72)  
Hy-Vee had no issues with Parsons’s job performance at the time he voluntarily 
quit. (Hrg. Tr. p. 69) Utterback testified he had no reason to discipline or discharge 
Parsons at the time he quit. (Hrg. Tr. p. 73) When asked, Utterback shared his opinion 
as a supervisor that Parsons could have continued working for Hy-Vee had he not quit. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 72) 
The weight of the evidence shows Parsons did not discuss with Utterback the 
functional issues his work injury caused him while performing full-duty work for Hy-Vee 
after the work injury. Utterback did not observe any behavior by Parsons that reflect the 
pain he was in and difficulties full-duty work as a night stocker at Hy-Vee caused him. 
Parsons shared his concerns with other Hy-Vee management and ultimately quit 
because management was unresponsive. 
After quitting at Hy-Vee, Parsons worked for Pizza Ranch, washing dishes. (Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 19, 41; Def. Ex. A, p.4) He earned $11,001.00 working there in 2017. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
59) The evidence in the record leaves it is unclear why Parsons’s employment at Pizza 
Ranch ended.  
Parsons also worked for Stateline Co-op in Fenton, dumping grain from semis for 
about six weeks in the autumns of 2016 and 2018, with a chair to sit on in between semi 
loads. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41–42; Def. Ex. A, p. 4) At the time of hearing, Parsons was working 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 6 
for $10.00 per hour part-time on his Duane Dittmer’s farm, doing an array of jobs, from 
field work to mowing the lawn to working in the shop. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 19, 41) In 2018, 
Parsons reported income of $5,755.00 from working at the farm. (Hrg. Tr. p. 60) There 
is no evidence in the record regarding his earnings in 2019 or 2020. At the time of 
hearing, Parsons had not applied for any other jobs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 61) He credibly testified 
he intended to look for other jobs after the COVID-19 pandemic was over. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
59) 
Parsons did not seek care for his injury until he returned to Dr. Henrich on April 6, 
2017. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 37) He told Dr. Henrich was “doing okay” and “the medication did not 
do a lot for him.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 37) Dr. Henrich noted his foot “does look okay and feels 
good with less pain and less discomfort. It is still just somewhat problematic. He seems 
to be just touchy in both the 2nd and 3rd interspaces on this right side with mild 
metatarsalgia. Mild arthritic pain.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 38) He further opined that “this is really 
kind of hard to discern. It does not sound like as much neuroma pain as it is arthritic 
pain. He may even be getting some small vessel disease that might be causing some 
issues.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 38) 
On September 14, 2017, Parsons followed up with Dr. Henrich, complaining of 
ongoing foot tenderness. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 40) Dr. Henrich identified Parsons’s problems as 
peripheral neuropathy and degenerative arthritis. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) He noted: 
The patient does have discomfort in his feet. He has a lot of problems 
from the crush injury 2 years ago. He does not have a lot of swelling, but 
burning, stinging, numbness, tingling, and shooting sensation in the ball of 
his right foot. Mild decreased range of motion to the joints because of the 
arthritic change. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) Parsons filled a prescription the next day, but did not do so again in 
2017 or 2018. (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 78; Jt. Ex. 14, p. 80) 
Eric Zisoffe of EMC sent medical records to Douglas Martin, M.D., accompanied 
by letters dated September 21, 2018, and October 2, 2018 (not in evidence), seeking 
his diagnosis of Parsons’s condition. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 43) Dr. Martin pointed out Zisoffe 
indicated Parsons underwent care with a neurologist at the Center for Neurosciences, 
Orthopedics and Spine, P.C., but there were no records from the provider included 
among those sent for review. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 43) There are no such records in evidence 
either. 
In Dr. Martin’s letter in response to EMC, dated November 1, 2018, he opined: 
One of the issues here is that I am not sure that I necessarily am 
comfortable with having a firmly established diagnosis. Some records 
suggest that there is a Morton’s neuroma in the second interspace. 
Other[s] suggest that it is in the third interspace. There is also a note that 
simply refers to the problem as “peripheral neuropathy.” 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 7 
Thus, it makes it very difficult to analyze this situation if a firm diagnosis 
has not yet been established. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 44) He then summarized the typical course of treatment for each diagnosis 
and opined, if Parsons received the non-surgical conservative care detailed, he should 
be at maximum medical improvement (MMI). (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 44)  
On January 3, 2019, Parsons saw Michael Jacoby, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 7) This is the 
first time he received care for his injury since seeing Dr. Henrich on September 14, 
2017. Dr. Jacoby noted: 
Multiple evaluations and treatments. Still has trouble. May awaken at night 
with burning, throbbing, and aching pain. Constant pain. Pain is in ball and 
toes, like a sock distribution over the end of the foot. Pain is worst in the 
cold. In shower, slight pressure against toes helps. [. . .] Has to be 
cautious going down steps as pain may become worse. Same is true upon 
standing. Sitting in recliner helps. At best, pain is 5 [on a scale with zero 
as no pain and ten as highest level of pain], worst 9-10, normally 5-6. 
Currently an 8. No change in color of foot but it feels colder. Prescribed 
medications have not helped. Cortisone injection not helpful. Foot not 
necessarily weak. Has noted increased pain with touch. TENs unit helps a 
little.  
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 46) 
Dr. Jacoby diagnosed neuropathic pain. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 47) He opined he saw “no 
objective features” for complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), which he deemed “a 
definite possibility after a ‘crush’ type of injury.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 47) He also addressed the 
possibility of degenerative arthritis: “Whereas this may cause symptoms, the touch 
allodynia he characterizes may be atypical for such.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 47) Dr. Jacoby 
prescribed a more aggressive titration and dosing of Gabapentin due to it being 
previously ineffective. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 47) 
Dr. Jacoby decided Parsons should undergo electrodiagnostic testing. He did so 
on January 25, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 48–49) According to Dr. Jacoby, “Evidence to 
support a peripheral neuropathy in the [lower extremities was] not found.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 
49) 
Parsons followed up with Dr. Jacoby on February 14, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 50) 
Parsons reported the Gabapentin “helped a little.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 50) Dr. Jacoby 
prescribed Lyrica and referred him for pain management. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 51) 
On April 3, 2019, Parsons went to Central States Medicine for an evaluation of 
pain in his right ankle, foot, and toes. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 54) He rated his pain level as 
“moderate.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 54) Parsons shared that his pain interfered with some daily 
activities. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 54)  

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 8 
Christian Ledet, M.D., examined Parsons and noted his right toes had normal 
range of motion and stability. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 56) His right ankle and foot demonstrated 
pain with palpation of soft tissue, but no swelling, effusion, masses, defects, crepitation, 
or calor. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 56) On CRPS, Dr. Ledet opined in pertinent part: 
With persistent foot pain after this crush injury concerns arise in regards to 
the diagnosis. Persistent pain can result in the diagnosis of [CRPS]. 
[CRPS] is a diagnosis that is associated with a range of injuries and 
trauma. The CRPS constellation of symptoms occurs predominately in the 
extremities and consists of burning pain accompanied by edema and color 
change. The syndrome is understood to be a neuropathic pain syndrome 
that includes sensitization of the peripheral and central nervous systems in 
addition to regional inflammation. Immobilization has been demonstrated 
to produce symptoms and signs of similar findings. Diagnostic criteria and 
tests for CRPS have been suggested and there continues to be debate 
about the criteria that establish the diagnosis. There is no “gold standard” 
diagnostic test to confirm or eliminate the diagnosis of CRPS. Efforts to 
externally validate diagnostic criteria for this CRPS have indicated that the 
current guidelines available to clinicians for the diagnosis of CRPS have 
low specificity and may lead to over diagnosis of this condition.  
Differentiation between a diagnosis of CRPS and “regional pain of 
undetermined origin” is difficult to validate with objective metrics. In 
accordance with guidance provided by the Iowa Worker’s Compensation 
Commissioner, I have utilized criteria described on page 496, of the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, fifth edition, table 16-
16, objective diagnostic criteria for CRPS. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 58)  
Despite this discussion of CRPS and reference to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides), Dr. Ledet did not engage in an analysis 
of the factors for diagnosing CRPS or make an express finding on the question of 
CRPS. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 58) However, under the “current problems,” the record from the visit 
identifies “pain in right foot” and “encounter for observation for other suspected diseases 
and conditions ruled out.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 54) Thus, it appears Dr. Ledet might have ruled 
out CRPS, though he does not expressly state so in the records or provide any rationale 
for doing so. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 54–58) 
Dr. Ledet felt it was unnecessary for Parsons to continue to travel to Des Moines 
for ongoing care. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 58; Hrg. Tr. pp. 37) Consequently, Dr. Ledet transferred 
care back to Davis at the Algona Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20; Hrg. Tr. p. 37) Parsons 
returned to see Davis on April 26, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20) Davis noted: 
Vital signs are reviewed. His right foot shows normal hair pattern, 
including both the dorsum of his foot and dorsum of his toes. He has 
easily palatable dorsalla pedis and posterior tibial pulses. Skin is intact 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 9 
with no rashes. He has good sensation to light touch. There is a sense of 
mild hyperesthesia on the lateral aspect of the dorsum of his forefoot. 
Ankle appears to normal range of motion. There is no swelling. He has 
tenderness to compression both the plantar aspect and dorsum of the 
distal metatarsal heads. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20) Davis reviewed Parsons’s prescribed medications with him. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 20) 
Parsons followed up with Davis on May 28, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) Davis noted 
Parsons “continues to have significant sensitivity [to] even the slightest bump on the 
dorsum of his foot.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) Parsons rated his pain as eight on the zero-to-ten 
scale and described it as typical. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) Davis found his conditionally largely 
unchanged from his previous appointment. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) 
The defendants propounded interrogatories on Parsons during the litigation of 
this case. (Def. Ex. A) Parsons provided answers, signed and notarized on July 11, 
2019. (Def. Ex. A) In them, Parsons described the symptoms he had experienced 
between the date of injury and date of the interrogatory answers as “pain in [his] toes 
and across the bottom of [his] foot right where the toes end” as well as “burning and 
aching all the time.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
Davis next examined Parsons on August 21, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, 23) Parsons rated 
his pain as five out of ten, which was typical at the time. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 23) Davis noted 
Parsons and his wife took a trip to California to see their grandchild, during which he 
found “cold water aggravates the pain in his foot dramatically” and he “had significant 
trouble walking on any uneven ground and particularly on rocky ground.” (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 
23–24) Davis noted the following after his physical examination of Parsons: 
 Full and normal range of motion of the ankle; 
 The dorsum of the right forefoot is exquisitely tender to even the lightest 
touch; 
 Any palpation or compression across the distal one-half of all metatarsals 
causes significant discomfort, withdrawal, and verbal response to pain; 
and 
 Exquisite tenderness with any compression applied to the metatarsal 
heads during plantar examination. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 24) 
Sunil Bansal, D.O., performed an independent medical examination (IME) of 
Parsons that included an in-person exam on March 18, 2020, and a review of medical 
records. (Jt. Ex. 10) Dr. Bansal’s examination of Parsons’s right foot and ankle showed: 
 The foot was cooler to the touch than the left foot; 
 The dorsum of the foot had a reddish hue; 
 Diffuse tenderness over the foot; 
 Swelling of the dorsal foot into the lateral malleolus noted; 
 Doralis pedis pulses +2; 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 10 
 Allodynia over the dorsum and plantar aspect of the foot; 
 3/5 strength with eversion and inversion; and  
 4/5 strength with dorsiflexion and plantar flexion. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 68) 
Dr. Bansal diagnosed Parsons with “neuropathic pain” in the right foot and ankle 
“with features of [CRPS].” (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 69) On causation, he opined, “The mechanism 
of a loaded pallet jack running over his right foot is consistent with his right foot crush 
injury, and the development of neuropathic pain syndrome/complex regional pain 
syndrome.” (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 69) Dr. Bansal did not use the criteria in the Fifth Edition of 
the AMA Guides to diagnose Parsons; rather, he used the “Budapest Criteria,” which he 
explains as follows: 
To address limitations secondary to the variance of CRPS criteria, an 
international consensus meeting was held in Budapest in 2003 to review 
issues related to the CRPS diagnosis with the goal of recommending 
improvement to the IASP criteria. The resulting proposal for modified 
diagnostic criteria for CRPS, or the “Budapest Criteria,” was based 
primarily on empirically derived criteria published previously. Derived from 
this was the most sensitive predictor criteria for CRPS. This is also the 
criteria used by the most recent edition of the AMA Guides[, the Sixth 
Edition]. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 69–70) 
Dr. Bansal applied the Budapest Criteria as follows: 
1. Continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting event. 
yes 
2. Must report at least one symptom in three of the four following 
categories: 
 Sensory: reports of hyperesthesia and/or allodynia. 
yes 
 Vasomotor: reports of temperature asymmetry and/or skin color 
changes and/or skin color asymmetry 
yes 
 Sudomotor/edema: reports of edema and/or sweating changes 
and/or sweating asymmetry. 
yes 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 11 
 Motor/trophic: reports of decreased range of motion and/or 
motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic 
changes (hair, nail, skin). 
yes 
3. Must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or more of 
the following categories: 
 Sensory: evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or allodynia 
(to light touch and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint 
movement). 
yes 
 Vasomotor: evidence of temperature asymmetry and/or skin 
color changes and/or asymmetry. 
yes 
 Psydomotor/edema: evidence of edema and/or sweating 
changes and/or sweating asymmetry. 
yes 
 Motor/trophic: evidence of decreased range of motion and/or 
motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic 
changes (hair, nail, skin) 
yes 
4. There is no other diagnosis that better explains the signs and 
symptoms. 
Correct. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 70 (citing Harden RN et al. Validation of proposed diagnostic criteria (the 
“Budapest Criteria”) for Complex Regional Pain Syndrome, Pain. 2010 Aug; 150(2):288-
74)). 
Dr. Bansal assigned Parsons the permanent work restrictions of no prolonged 
standing or walking greater than 15 minutes at a time and no walking on stairs, ladders, 
or uneven ground. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 71) He recommended long-term pain management for 
Parsons. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 71) On the question of permanent impairment, Dr. Bansal 
opined: 
Utilizing the AMA Guides of Evaluation for Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, we find that CRPS of the lower extremity is rated per Table 13-15. 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 12 
His functional limitations are best defined by the criteria set forth for Class 
2 impairments, as well as some from Class 3. He has difficulty walking on 
uneven surfaces. Therefore, he is assigned a 10% whole person 
impairment. This is a stand-alone impairment, and accounts for any other 
impairment to the foot. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 69)  
Parsons credibly testified about how the work injury and resulting physical 
limitations have impacted his life. He agrees with the work restrictions assigned by Dr. 
Bansal. (Hrg. Tr. p. 50) Based on his experience living with the injury and activities that 
aggravate it, Parsons credibly asserted he would be unable to work an eight-hour shift 
while standing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45)  
On a typical day, Parsons experiences tingling, coldness, and burning in his foot. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 45) He credibly testified he can stand for 15 minutes at the most before he 
must sit down due to the injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) Because his right foot gets colder than 
his left foot, he wears more than one pair of socks on his right foot in cold weather to try 
to keep it from getting too cold. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) 
Further, Parsons described the problems he has walking because of the work 
injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) His work injury prevents him from walking long distances. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 45) Walking on uneven ground is difficult because it aggravates his foot injury. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 45) He avoids climbing ladders because climbing them worsens his 
symptoms. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) Parsons uses stairs with his foot sideways to mitigate the 
burning caused by using them with his foot facing straight ahead. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) 
Parsons is the proud grandpa to eleven grandchildren, one of whom has sadly 
passed away. (Hrg. Tr. p. 44) Before the injury, Parsons enjoyed playing with them 
games like kickball, football, basketball, and soccer. (Hrg. Tr. p. 44) But after the injury, 
he can no longer do so without aggravating his injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 44) The same is true 
when he attempts to dance with his wife. (Hrg. Tr. p. 44) Parsons can dance for a little 
bit, but then his foot starts to tingle, burn, and his kneecap will go numb. (Hrg. Tr. p. 44) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injuries at issue in this case occurred before July 1, 2017, the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act in effect before the 2017 amendments applies. Smidt v. 
JKB Restaurants, LC, File No. 5067766 (App. December 11, 2020). 
1 .  
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
The parties agree Parsons sustained a permanent disability resulting from the 
work injury to his right foot. They dispute the nature and extent of that disability. 
Parsons contends the work injury caused CRPS. The defendants disagree, arguing the 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 13 
evidence shows Parsons did not sustain CRPS, only a functional impairment to the 
lower extremity, citing Holstein Electric v. Breyfogle in support of their position the injury 
is limited to the foot. 756 N.W.2d 812 (Iowa 2008). 
“In this state, the right to workers' compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A 
& H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Caylor v. Employers Mut. 
Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890, 893 (Iowa App. 1983)). “The primary purpose of the 
workers' compensation statute is to benefit the worker and his or her dependents, 
insofar as statutory requirements permit.” McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 
181, 188 (Iowa 1980) (citing Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298, 
299 (Iowa 1979); Wetzel v. Wilson, 276 N.W.2d 410, 411-12 (Iowa 1979); and Hoenig v. 
Mason & Hanger, Inc., 162 N.W.2d 188, 190 (Iowa 1968)). A statutory provision 
governing workers’ compensation in Iowa “is not to be expanded by reading something 
into it that is not there.” Downs, 481 N.W.2d at 520 (citing Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298).  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2) governs permanent partial disabilities. The statute 
lists certain body parts in a schedule, including the foot and leg, and a catch-all that 
governs injury to any body part not listed. See Iowa Code § 85.34(2). Disabilities to the 
scheduled members are compensated based only on the injured employee’s functional 
loss and without consideration of the impact on the injured employee’s earning capacity. 
Simbro v. Delong's Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886, 887 (Iowa 1983) (citing Graves v. 
Eagle Iron Works, 331 N.W.2d 116, 117–18 (Iowa 1983)). However, under Barton v. 
Nevada Poultry Co. and its progeny, an injury to a scheduled member that causes 
CRPS is considered an injury to the nervous system, which is not included in the 
statutory schedule, and is therefore an unscheduled injury, making any resulting 
disability industrial in nature. 110 N.W.2d 660 (Iowa 1961); see also Collins v. Dep’t of 
Human Serv., 529 N.W.2d 627, 628–30 (Iowa App. 1995) (discussing, but ultimately not 
addressing, reflex sympathetic dystrophy—or CRPS, a name by which the condition is 
also known—as an unscheduled injury triggering industrial disability analysis). Thus, the 
question of the nature and extent of permanent partial disability hinges on whether the 
crush injury caused CRPS. 
The claimant has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injuries arose out of and in the course of employment with the employer. 
Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 253 (Iowa 2010) (citing Quaker 
Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996)); see also Douglas v. Vermeer 
Mfg., File No. 5062611 (App., October 23, 2019) (citing Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150 and 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). “Employers may raise any number of arguments to 
contest an employee's assertion that an injury arose out of and in the course of 
employment.” Vegors, 786 N.W.2d at 254. Such contestations do not shift the burden of 
proof on causation, which the claimant retains. Id.  
“Medical causation ‘is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (quoting Dunlavey 
v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)).  

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 14 
With regard to expert testimony[,] [t]he commissioner must consider [such] 
testimony together with all other evidence introduced bearing on the 
causal connection between the injury and the disability. The 
commissioner, as the fact finder, determines the weight to be given to any 
expert testimony. Such weight depends on the accuracy of the facts relied 
upon by the expert and other surrounding circumstances. The 
commissioner may accept or reject the expert opinion in whole or in part.’ 
Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 752 (Iowa 2002)).  
The defendants contend that because Dr. Bansal used the Budapest Criteria for 
diagnosing CRPS instead of the factors listed in the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides, his 
opinion should be given less weight. This argument is unavailing to a pre-July 1, 2017 
injury. The version of rule 876 IAC 2.4 in effect before the 2017 amendments and 
applicable in this case states: 
The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
published by the American Medical Association are adopted as a 
guide for determining permanent partial disabilities under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2) “a” to “s.” The extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment may be determined by use of the Fifth Edition of 
the guides and payment of weekly compensation for permanent partial 
scheduled injuries made accordingly. Payment so made shall be 
recognized by the workers’ compensation commissioner as a prima facie 
showing of compliance by the employer or insurance carrier with the 
foregoing sections of the Iowa workers’ compensation Act. Nothing in 
this rule shall be construed to prevent the presentations of other 
medical opinions or other material evidence for the purpose of 
establishing that the degree of permanent disability to which the 
claimant would be entitled would be more or less than the 
entitlement indicated in the Fifth Edition of the AMA guides. 
(emphasis added).  
The Commissioner has made clear that under the rule, the AMA Guides are “a 
useful tool in evaluating disability,” but “only a guide,” the use of which “is not binding on 
the agency.” Ament v. Quaker Oats Company, File Nos. 5044298, 5044299 (App. 
March 17, 2016); see also Lauhoff Grain Co. v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834, 839–40 
(Iowa 1986) (holding the agency is not bound to follow the AMA Guides under the 
version of what is now rule 876 IAC 2.4 applicable in this case). Thus, even on the 
question of permanent disability, the AMA Guides are not binding on the agency for 
cases that stem from work injuries before July 1, 2017.  
It is axiomatic that if the AMA Guides are not binding on the question of 
permanent impairment, the only use expressly cited in the rule, their use is not 
mandatory on the question of diagnosis or causation, uses not found in the rule’s text. 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 15 
See Kucera v. Baldazo, 745 N.W.2d 481, 487 (Iowa 2008) (holding that, under the 
longstanding principle of statutory construction expressio unius est exclusion alterious, 
legislative intent is expressed by exclusion and inclusion alike with express mention of 
one thing implying exclusion of another)). This is not to say that a doctor or the agency 
is prohibited from using the AMA Guides when considering whether a claimant has 
CRPS. The rule and principles of interpretation make clear only that the rule does not 
create a requirement to use only the AMA Guides to diagnose CRPS. Consequently, 
there is no basis in the law governing this case for the agency to conclude that an 
expert’s failure to use the AMA Guides when diagnosing CRPS undermines the 
credibility of the opinion.  
Since under Iowa law Dr. Bansal’s diagnosis cannot be dismissed out of hand for 
not using the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides, analysis turns to the three doctors who 
address the question of a possible CRPS diagnosis. On January 3, 2019, Dr. Jacoby 
opined on whether Parsons had CRPS. Dr. Ledet referenced CRPS in a record from his 
examination of Parsons on or about April 3, 2019. Dr. Bansal examined Parsons during 
an in-person exam on March 18, 2020, and issued an IME report containing his CRPS 
diagnosis dated March 23, 2020. 
On January 3, 2019, Dr. Jacoby opined Parsons’s showed “no objective features” 
of CRPS even though he observed Parsons’s foot was cool to the touch and under both 
the AMA Guides and the Budapest Criteria, cool skin temperature is among the 
objective diagnosis criteria. The limited explanation of Dr. Jacoby’s conclusory 
statement and the fact that it apparently runs at least partially contrary to the two 
frameworks used for diagnosing CRPS by other experts, makes the record unclear what 
Dr. Jacoby believes the “objective features” of CRPS to be. The conclusory nature of his 
opinion, apparent failure to consider skin temperature as a factor, and overall lack of 
information with respect to what factors Dr. Jacoby considered make his opinion 
unpersuasive. 
Dr. Ledet included a paragraph on CRPS in the medical records from his 
examination of Parsons. However, Dr. Ledet did not expressly discuss why he believed 
or did not believe Parsons had CRPS. Under the AMA Guides, the presence of eight 
criteria triggers the CRPS diagnosis. Some of the factors are addressed in Dr. Ledet’s 
notes. For example, edema is a vasomotor change listed as a factor in the AMA Guides 
and Dr. Ledet noted no swelling or effusion in the area of Parsons’s right foot and ankle. 
However, it is unclear how many of the factors listed in the AMA Guides Dr. Ledet 
specifically considered and what his conclusion was after doing so. This is problematic 
because the substance of Dr. Ledet’s records does not include an opinion expressly 
stating whether he believes with a reasonable degree of medical certainty whether he 
believes Parsons had CRPS. 
The defendants attempt to downplay the lack of an express opinion in the 
records from Dr. Ledet’s examination by citing the codes in them for right-foot pain and 
ruling out a possible condition. According to the defendants, they suggest Dr. Ledet 
ruled out CRPS and offered an alternative diagnosis. One problem with this argument is 
that the diagnosis of right foot pain does not in and of itself rule out CRPS. Absent an 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 16 
express statement ruling out CRPS, the use of the code is inconclusive. For if the 
diagnosis was right foot pain of a type that allowed CRPS to be ruled out, why did Dr. 
Ledet not include an express finding that identified the condition in the records after the 
paragraph on CRPS?  
Further, the record does not identify who chose the codes, when the person did 
so, or why. It could have been Dr. Ledet, but it also could have been someone else, 
perhaps in an administrative role, with no formal medical education. These possibilities 
make a determination on who chose the codes, and what to infer from the choice, 
speculative. Thus, there is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Dr. 
Ledet entered the coding information with the intention to represent his opinion that 
Parsons did not have CRPS. The codes are not enough to support the conclusion Dr. 
Ledet believes with a reasonable degree of medical certainty Parsons did not have 
CRPS, given his choice to not expressly state such an opinion in the medical records 
after including a paragraph about CRPS and its diagnosis. Based on the evidence, it is 
at least as likely Dr. Ledet did not feel he could rule out CRPS at the time of the 
examination. 
“An inference is not legitimate if it is based upon suspicion, speculation, 
conjecture, surmise, or fallacious reasoning.” Godfrey v. State, 962 N.W.2d 84 (Iowa 
2021). For the reasons discussed above, it would be a bridge beyond the bounds of 
inference to find Dr. Ledet issued an opinion on CRPS, given the substance of the 
records regarding his examination. Concluding Dr. Ledet’s expert opinion was, in fact, 
that Parsons did not have CRPS requires the type of surmise inappropriate for an 
agency acting as a tribunal. The substance of the medical records from Dr. Ledet’s 
appointment is therefore unpersuasive on the question of whether Parsons had CRPS 
at the time of his appointment with Dr. Ledet. 
In Dr. Bansal’s report, he notes that the most recent edition of the AMA Guides 
uses the Budapest Criteria. The defendants’ attack on the Budapest Criteria for CRPS 
diagnosis focuses exclusively on the fact that the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides uses 
a different framework for diagnosing CRPS. The defendants do not address the fact, as 
discussed above, that agency rules identify the Fifth Edition for use in determining 
permanent disability and make no reference to diagnosis. Nor do the defendants refute 
the discussion in Dr. Bansal’s IME report of the Budapest Criteria as an up-to-date 
CRPS diagnosis model, which enjoys medical consensus. The defendants put forth no 
other argument or evidence for giving the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides more weight 
than the Budapest Criteria. The lack of evidence in the record undermining the 
Budapest Criteria as a valid diagnostic framework for CRPS lends credence to Dr. 
Bansal’s summary of the Budapest Criteria as a valid method for diagnosing CRPS. 
Consequently, under Iowa law and the record in this case, the Budapest Criteria 
constitute a viable framework for diagnosing CRPS. 
The defendants also question the veracity of Dr. Bansal’s observations regarding 
Parsons’s symptoms relevant to the Budapest Criteria. They contend Dr. Bansal’s 
observations are not credible because they differ from some of the recorded 
observations of the treating physicians and Davis, in the years before Dr. Bansal’s 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 17 
examination. They specifically identify Dr. Bansal’s findings of swelling, reddish hue in 
color, and reduced range of motion.  The defendants take no issue with the other 
findings relating to the Budapest Criteria that Dr. Bansal made during his examination. 
According to the defendants, Dr. Bansal’s recorded findings of swelling, red skin 
color, and reduced range of motion cast his opinion into question. However, by 
comparing Dr. Bansal’s observations to those of other providers, they are comparing 
apples to oranges. There is no medical evidence in the record that is contemporary to 
Dr. Bansal’s and casts doubt on the accuracy of his findings. Put otherwise, there is an 
insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Dr. Bansal misrepresented any 
of his observations based on comparisons between his observations and those of the 
defendants’ chosen doctors during Parsons’s years-long course of treatment. 
Further, Dr. Bansal had no reason to make misrepresentations regarding 
swelling, skin color, or reduced range of motion. Under the Budapest Criteria, diagnosis 
of CRPS is appropriate if an individual has at least on symptom in three of the four 
following categories: 
 Sensory: hyperesthesia and/or allodynia; 
 Vasomotor: temperature asymmetry, skin color changes, and/or skin color 
asymmetry; 
 Sudomotor/edema: edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating 
asymmetry; and/or 
 Motor/trophic: decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction 
(weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin). 
Dr. Bansal found allodynia, so the sensory category is met. He also found 
temperature asymmetry and skin color change/asymmetry, so the vasomotor category 
is satisfied twice over and there is consequently no need to embellish any observation 
regarding skin color. Dr. Bansal also noted the motor dysfunction of weakness in 
satisfaction of the motor/trophic category. Thus, three of the four categories of the class 
implicated by the defendants’ accusations are satisfied independent of lost range of 
motion or swelling. Under the Budapest Criteria, three of four is sufficient for a CRPS 
diagnosis. Therefore, Dr. Bansal could have diagnosed Parsons with CRPS 
independent of his observations regarding swelling, skin color, and reduced range of 
motion, by using those of his observations unchallenged by the defendants. This reality 
makes the defendants’ attack on Dr. Bansal’s credibility in this case all the more 
unavailing.  
For the reasons discussed above, Dr. Bansal’s recorded observations of 
Parsons’s physical condition are credible. His diagnosis with respect to CRPS is the 
most persuasive because of his detailed findings and clear reasoning. Parsons has met 
his burden of proof on the question of CRPS. The evidence establishes it is more likely 
than not the work injury at Hy-Vee caused CRPS. Further, Parsons’s credible testimony 
with respect to how the symptoms caused by his injury impact his daily functions, 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 18 
including those implicating his ability to work, supports the conclusion, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that the work restrictions Dr. Bansal identified in his 
IME report are appropriate. 
Because a preponderance of the evidence shows Parsons’s work injury at Hy-
Vee caused CRPS, an unscheduled injury. “The amount of compensation for an 
unscheduled injury resulting in permanent partial disability is based on the employee's 
earning capacity.” Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012) 
(citing Broadlawns Med. Ctr. v. Sanders, 792 N.W.2d 302, 306 (Iowa 2010)). The 
assessment of a claimant’s earning capacity is based on multiple factors: functional 
disability, age, education, qualifications, work experience, inability to engage in similar 
employment, earnings before and after the injury, motivation to work, personal 
characteristics of the claimant, the claimant’s inability, because of the injury to engage 
in employment for which the claimant is fitted, and the employer’s inability to 
accommodate the claimant’s functional limitations. Id.; IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 
N.W.2d 621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). 
Parsons was 58 years old at the time of hearing. He’s been found legally blind 
due to cone dystrophy, which caused him to surrender his driver’s license. 
Consequently, Parsons cannot drive. This limits his ability to drive as part of his job 
duties and commute to work. 
Parsons dropped out of high school in the 11th grade. At the time of hearing, he 
had not earned a high school equivalency diploma (HSED). Consequently, it is more 
likely than not he has not obtained any postsecondary degrees or certificates. 
Moreover, because of his disability, Parsons has a limited ability to use the keyboard on 
a computer. 
Dr. Bansal assigned Parsons a 10 percent functional impairment to the whole 
body due to his foot injury and CRPS. He also gave Parsons the following permanent 
work restrictions: 
 No prolonged standing or walking greater than 15 minutes at a time; and 
 
 No walking on stairs, ladders, or uneven ground. 
These medical opinions are credible and are adopted as part of this decision. 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, a claimant’s lack of motivation to 
find work may count against the extent of industrial disability. West Side Transport, Inc. 
v. Fishel, 746 N.W.2d 280, *4–*5 (Iowa App. 2008) (Table); Ehlinger, 237 N.W.2d at 
792; Malget v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 5048441 (Remand Decision, May 
23, 2018). The weight of the evidence in this case shows Parsons is motivated to work. 
Parsons dropped out of high school after his dad passed away because he had to work 
to help support his family. After turning 18, he worked for a farmer, performing field work 
and helping with livestock. Then he worked for a hatchery before his diagnosis of cone 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 19 
dystrophy and the determination it made him legally blind and eligible for Social Security 
disability benefits. 
After Parsons was diagnosed with cone dystrophy, he went to work part-time on 
a friend’s farm. He worked for about a year and a half at a junk yard, but worked at his 
friend’s farm for the remainder of the time between leaving the hatchery and starting at 
Hy-Vee. After quitting at Hy-Vee, he returned to restaurant work with Pizza Ranch, 
washing dishes. After his employment with Pizza Ranch ended, Parsons worked at the 
co-op performing seasonal work that was not physically demanding. He has since 
returned to working part-time at his friend’s farm, from which he reported earnings 
around half what he earned at Hy-Vee and Pizza Ranch. 
Moreover, Parsons returned to work at Hy-Vee a few days after having his foot 
crushed by a hand cart with about 2,000 pounds of canned goods on it despite the 
aggravation of symptoms doing so caused him. He worked full duty for about ten 
months, while waiting for the defendants to authorize additional care for his injury and 
the symptoms it caused him, including pain that negatively affected his sleep. 
Continuing to work while experiencing pain and lost sleep demonstrates a high 
motivation to work.  
The defendants argue the fact that he returned to work following the crushing of 
his foot and performed his regular duties while working his regular hours for ten months 
weigh against a finding of industrial disability. However, the weight of the evidence 
establishes Parsons experienced symptoms that impacted his sleep after returning to 
work and the defendants delayed authorizing additional care to address his complaints. 
It would be inappropriate to hold Parsons’s willingness and attempt to return to full-duty 
work against him, given the fact that doing so worsened his symptoms and the 
defendants delayed authorization of additional care during this time period despite his 
complaints, which combined to cause his resignation from Hy-Vee. 
After quitting Hy-Vee because of his symptoms, the resultant loss of sleep, and 
the company’s lack of response to his request to change shifts, Parsons obtained 
employment at Pizza Ranch, a co-op, and a friend’s farm, where he was working part-
time at the time of hearing. At hearing, Parsons credibly testified he intended to look for 
another job after the COVID-19 pandemic subsided, a reasonable position that does not 
implicate his motivation because he had a part-time job working at his friend’s farm at 
the time. The evidence establishes Parsons has been motivated to work from a young 
age to present. 
Despite Parsons’s motivation, the record establishes the work injury and resulting 
restrictions will negatively impact his earning capacity because of limitations on the 
types of jobs he can physically perform. Because of the restrictions on standing and 
walking he received after his employment with Pizza Ranch ended, Parsons is unlikely 
to return to restaurant work of the type he performed in high school and with Pizza 
Ranch. Those restrictions, combined with the limitations on ladders, stairs, and uneven 
ground, make a return to field and animal work on farms unlikely as well. Parsons’s 
work restrictions also make a return to stocking at Hy-Vee or elsewhere improbable. 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 20 
Parsons’s sight impairment makes types of sedentary work a bad fit. For 
example, he cannot see well enough to use a keyboard, which makes cashier work a 
poor fit. His limited educational background and sight limitations make office work on 
computers highly unlikely. 
Parsons could conceivably return to the hatchery. He is also able to perform at 
least some farmhand duties on his friend’s farm. The evidence is unclear on what work 
Parsons performed in 2018 on his friend’s farm, before Dr. Bansal’s restrictions, or if he 
could continue to perform that job within those restrictions. 
For the reasons discussed above, the evidence establishes it is more likely than 
not that Parsons’s has sustained a fifty (50) percent industrial disability from the work 
injury. 
2 .  
R e i m b u r s e m en t  f o r  I n d e p e n d en t  M e d i c a l  E x a m i n a t i o n  
( I M E ) .  
Before September 1, 2021, the Commissioner recognized a distinction between a 
medical opinion on causation and one on the nature and extent of permanent disability  
when determining whether the cost of an IME may be reimbursed to the claimant under 
Iowa Code section 85.39. Barnhart v. John Deere Dubuque Works of Deere & 
Company, File No. 5065851, p. 2 (App. March 27, 2020) (citing Reh v. Tyson Foods, 
Inc., File No. 5053428 (App. March 26, 2018)); see also Phillips v. Kimberley Farms, 
Inc., File No. 5057945, p. 15 (Arb. April 24, 2019) (“The Commissioner has made it 
abundantly clear that a medical opinion on some other issue such as causation or 
restrictions is not the equivalent of an impairment rating.”). Under the agency 
interpretation of the statute, an injured employee could only obtain reimbursement for 
an IME in response to an opinion on permanent impairment by an employer-chosen 
doctor. Id. No reimbursement was available if the employer-chosen doctor opined only 
on causation. Id. 
The Iowa Court of Appeals considered the agency’s interpretation of Iowa Code 
section 85.39 with respect to whether an employer must pay for an IME of an injured 
employee when the employer has not obtained an impairment rating in Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. September 1, 2021) 
(slip copy) (application for further review pending before the Iowa Supreme Court as of 
November 18, 2021). The court reversed the agency decision denying IME 
reimbursement because the employer-chosen doctor had opined only on causation and 
had not addressed what, if any, disability the claimant had sustained. Id. at *2–*5. The 
court determined the agency had erroneously interpreted Iowa Code section 85.39 and 
caselaw construing it. Id. at *5 (“We see no conflict applying our supreme court's 
interpretation of section 85.39 in Young to a finding that Dr. Paulson's opinion on lack of 
causation was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating and, in fact, we find such 
interpretation compelling.”). Thus, the court concluded that an employer-chosen doctor’s 
opinion finding that an alleged injury did not arise out of and in the course of 
employment constitutes an opinion of no disability and the cost of an IME sought due to 
disagreement with such an opinion is reimbursable under section 85.39.  

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 21 
This case differs somewhat from Kern. In Kern, the defendants obtained an 
opinion on causation that was silent on the question of impairment, “the clear effect” of 
which, the court held, “was a finding of no compensable permanent disability.” 2021 WL 
3890603 at *4. In the current case, the defendants did not obtain an impairment rating, 
but do not dispute that the stipulated work injury caused Parsons some permanent 
disability; they dispute only whether the permanent disability is limited to a functional 
impairment of Parsons’s foot or is an industrial disability due to CRPS. Moreover, the 
defendants ask the agency to use Dr. Bansal’s whole body impairment rating and a 
conversion table in the AMA Guides to calculate the scheduled member functional 
impairment rating they believe is appropriate. (Def. Brief at p. 11) Despite the 
differences, the Kern opinion controls.  
Here, as in Kern, the clear effect of the defendants’ choice not to obtain a 
permanent impairment rating regarding Parsons’s injury is a zero percent impairment 
rating. Had Parsons not obtained an IME in this case, there would be no expert opinion 
in the record on permanent disability. The fact that the defendants chose not to get an 
impairment rating and now argue the agency should use the impairment rating in Dr. 
Bansal’s IME report as the basis for a finding of permanent disability to the right foot, 
while also arguing Parsons is not entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME, shows 
the practical impact of the agency’s prior interpretation of section 85.39, which the Kern 
court found contrary to the legislative intent underpinning the statute and the caselaw 
construing it. See id. at *4; see also Lozano Campuzano, 940 N.W.2d at 435. 
Consequently, under Kern, the defendants must reimburse Parsons for the full and 
reasonable cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME under section 85.39. 
3 .  
Ta x a t i o n  o f  C o s t s .  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 660 (Iowa 
2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are strictly 
construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Under the administrative rules governing contested case proceedings before the 
agency, hearing costs shall include: 
 Attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical 
means at hearings and evidential depositions; 
 Transcription costs when appropriate;  
 Costs of service of the original notice and subpoenas; 
 
 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 22 
 
 Witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 
and 622.72; 
 Costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that 
said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 
622.69 and 622.72; 
 Reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports; 
 Filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees incurred by 
using the payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES); and 
 Costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. 
876 IAC 4.33.  
Parsons has prevailed on the disputed issues of permanent disability and 
reimbursement of IME expenses. Consequently, it is appropriate to tax costs against the 
defendants. The defendants must pay the one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) 
filing fee and thirteen and 40/100 dollars ($13.40) in service costs incurred by Parsons 
while litigating this case. (Jt. Ex. 15, p. 81) However, the rule does not expressly identify 
medical records as a taxable cost and it is unclear how, if at all, the costs relating to Dr. 
Jacoby’s records might fit into another category under the rule. Consequently, costs 
relating to Dr. Jacoby’s records are not taxed. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
1) The defendants shall pay to the claimant two hundred and fifty (250) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of two hundred twenty-nine 
and 75/100 ($229.75) per week from the commencement date of April 3, 
2019. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
5) The defendants shall pay to Parsons two thousand nine hundred sixty-four 
and 00/100 dollars ($2,964.00) for the cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME. 

PARSONS V. HY-VEE ALGONA 
Page 23 
6) The defendants shall pay to the claimant the following amounts for the 
following costs: 
a. One hundred dollars and 00/100 ($100.00) for the filing fee; and 
b. Thirteen and 40/100 dollars ($13.40) for the cost of service by certified 
mail. 
Signed and filed this _4th _ day of January, 2022. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Janece Valentine (via WCES) 
Dennis Riekenberg (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
