Case Number: 5068666
Case Title:  QUINTEROS, YESENIA V. JBS USA HOLDINGS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Quinteros Yesenia-5068666D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
YESENIA QUINTEROS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No.  5068666  
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     
 
 
  : 
 
    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
    
 
 
  :                 
JBS USA, L.L.C. 
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
and 
 
  : 
 
                   
 
 
  : 
 
 
         
AMERICAN ZURICH INSURANCE CO.,   : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:   1402.40, 1803, 2502, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
         2907, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Yesenia Quinteros, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against JBS USA, 
L.L.C., (hereinafter referred to as “JBS”) and its workers’ compensation insurance 
carrier, American Zurich Insurance Company.  This case came before the undersigned 
for an arbitration hearing on June 4, 2021.  Due to the ongoing pandemic in the state of 
Iowa and pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was tried using the CourtCall videoconference platform. 
The parties filed a hearing report before the scheduled hearing.  On the hearing 
reports, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 16, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through E.  Claimant testified on her own behalf.  
Defendants called Toni Deters, the Occupational Health and Workers’ Compensation 
Manager for the employer’s Ottumwa plant, to testify.  No other witnesses testified at 
trial.   
Counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  This 
request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on July 16, 2021.  The 
case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Dec-03  15:35:15     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 2 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits for the 
stipulated July 29, 2016 left shoulder injury. 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits for the 
stipulated left arm injury occurring on May 30, 2017. 
3. 
Whether defendants should be ordered to pay penalty benefits and, if so, 
in what amount for an alleged unreasonable underpayment of permanent 
disability benefits. 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
5. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Yesenia Quinteros, is a 28-year-old woman, who resides in Ottumwa, 
Iowa.  Ms. Quinteros was born in Fresno, California and moved to Iowa when she was 8 
years old.  She is bilingual and is able to read and speak both English and Spanish.  
However, claimant only completed the 11th grade and dropped out of school during her 
senior year.  She testified that she was not a great student and found both science and 
math to be difficult.  Nevertheless, she was able to obtain her GED in December 2020.  
She has no further schooling or formal training.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
Ms. Quinteros has some basic computer skills she developed during high school.  
However, she does not own a computer.  She is able to order items on-line and send e-
mails through her smartphone.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
After dropping out of high school, claimant sought employment.  She began 
working for Cargill, which is the predecessor to the current owner of the Ottumwa meat 
packing plant where claimant works, in May 2011.  Her starting pay in 2011 was $14.35 
per hour.  She submitted to and passed a pre-employment physical without any 
limitations before commencing employment with Cargill.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
Ms. Quinteros continued working at this plant through ownership changes and 
continues working for the current owner and employer, JBS, at the time of hearing.  
During the first five years of employment, claimant worked a “Loin Defatter” position.  In 
that position, she used a Whizard knife with her right hand on a continuous basis and 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 3 
 
 
worked with pork loins that weighed approximately 10 pounds each.  (Claimant’s 
testimony) 
Claimant testified that the Loin Defatter position was hard on her right arm and 
hand with constant gripping.  Therefore, in early 2016, she transferred to a “Pump 
Operator” position with JBS.  She worked this job for a few months before her initial 
work injury on July 29, 2016.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
Ms. Quinteros explained the Pump Operator position required her to use a small 
rake in her right hand (though she testified she had to use both hands when pulling the 
meat) to pull meat forward toward herself and then used a hook in her left hand to move 
the meat to a separate area to be injected with brine.  Claimant was performing the 
raking motion and task on July 29, 2016 when she felt and heard a pop in her left 
shoulder.  She reported the injury to her supervisor and was sent to the company nurse 
station to be seen on the same date.  (Claimant’s testimony)  Defendants admit that 
claimant sustained a left shoulder injury on this date and that the injury caused 
permanent disability.  (Hearing Report) 
Unfortunately, claimant’s left shoulder symptoms did not resolve.  The employer 
referred her to an orthopaedic surgeon, Christopher B. Vincent, M.D. for evaluation and 
treatment.  Dr. Vincent attempted conservative measures, including work restrictions 
and an injection into claimant’s left shoulder.  Claimant continued working and ultimately 
missed no time from work as a result of the left shoulder injury or treatment. 
Conservative treatment did not resolve claimant’s left shoulder symptoms.  
Ultimately, Dr. Vincent recommended surgical intervention.  Claimant submitted to 
surgery on her left shoulder on February 24, 2017.  Dr. Vincent performed a left 
shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, biceps tenodesis, distal clavicle excision and 
subacromial decompression, acromioplasty, and CA ligament release.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 
123) 
Ms. Quinteros returned to work the Monday after her surgery, missing no time 
from work.  She continued working for JBS until May 30, 2017 when she developed 
symptoms in her left hand and wrist.  (Claimant’s testimony)  She was referred for 
treatment of the left hand by an orthopaedic surgeon, Michael A. Gainer, M.D.  He 
diagnosed claimant with carpal tunnel syndrome and trigger finger of the left long finger.  
Dr. Gainer performed a carpal tunnel release and released claimant’s left trigger finger 
on September 29, 2017.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 136)  Once again, claimant returned to work 
without missing time.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
Unfortunately, claimant developed an infection in her left long finger after this 
surgical intervention.  She required a second surgery to clean and debride the infected 
area.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 137)  Defendants concede that claimant sustained permanent 
disability as a result of the left carpal tunnel syndrome and left trigger finger.  (Hearing 
Report) 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 4 
 
 
In the summer of 2018, claimant complained of ongoing left shoulder symptoms.  
She was returned for further evaluation by Dr. Vincent.  He ordered an MRI arthrogram 
and claimant complained of significantly worse symptoms after the arthrogram.  
(Claimant’s testimony; Joint Ex. 2, pp. 126-127)  Ultimately, claimant developed an 
infection in the left shoulder and required surgical intervention to irrigate and debride 
this infected area.  (Joint Ex. 2, pp. 128-130; Joint Ex. 6)  Once again, claimant returned 
to work without lost time, even though she was working with an antibiotic pump after this 
infection and surgical intervention.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant ultimately decided to bid to a new job and was awarded the “Rework 
job.”  She now inspects rejected product to ensure it is ready to be shipped and that it is 
safe for the customer.  This sometimes requires claimant to re-box and re-label meat 
products.  However, she testified that she is capable of performing this job.  She now 
earns $21.58 per hour in the Rework position.  Claimant continues working for the 
employer in the Rework position at the time of hearing.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
Ms. Quinteros testified that her left shoulder and left arm are not fully recovered.  
She testified that there are many things she cannot do now because of the injuries.  She 
testified that she has pain at a level of 2 out of 10 on a pain scale at all times and that it 
can increase to an 8 out of 10 with activity.  Ms. Quinteros uses ibuprofen on a daily 
basis for her symptoms and sometimes uses heat or ice before bed due to her 
symptoms. 
Claimant testified that she does not believe she could physically perform the loin 
cutting job now.  She testified it is a repetitive job and that she does not believe she 
could continuously flip the loin.  Ms. Quinteros also testified that she does not believe 
she could perform the pump operator job now.  She testified that she could not do the 
repetitive raking of meat that is required for that job, even though she continued 
performing that job after her left shoulder surgery occurred.  Ms. Quinteros also testified 
that she does not believe she could perform repetitive work of any kind within the JBS 
plant with her left hand after these injuries. 
The physicians have differing opinions about claimant’s physical capabilities.  
Claimant’s treating surgeon, Dr. Vincent, initially opined that claimant did not require 
any permanent work restrictions as a result of her left shoulder injury.  (Joint Ex. 1, pp. 
101, 103, 105, 107, 111)  However, after claimant submitted to a valid functional 
capacity evaluation (FCE) with John Kruzich, Dr. Vincent changed his opinion and 
accepted the recommendations of Therapist Kruzich.  (Defendants Ex. D; Defendants’ 
Ex. E, p. 31)  Specifically, Dr. Vincent opined, “I would recommend the patient be 
placed under permanent work restrictions to avoid lifting greater than 25 pounds from 
the level of the waist to the shoulder and avoid lifting greater than 15 pounds from the 
level of the waist to above shoulder.”  (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 31) He additionally 
recommended “a 50 pounds, pushing and pulling restriction on the affected left 
shoulder.  While the patient can perform above the level of the shoulder, she should 
avoid continuous work above the level of the shoulder.”  (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 31)   

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Vincent also opined that claimant sustained five percent permanent 
impairment of the left upper extremity as a result of her left shoulder injury.  He 
converted that to three percent of the whole person pursuant to the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 106) 
Claimant’s hand surgeon, Dr. Gainer, opined that claimant obtained maximum 
medical improvement on December 4, 2017 and required no work restrictions.  He also 
opined that claimant sustained a five percent permanent impairment of the left hand as 
a result of the left carpal tunnel syndrome and left long trigger finger.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 
107) 
Claimant obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by Sunil 
Bansal, M.D. on March 6, 2020.  (Joint Ex. 9)  Using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. 
Bansal opined that claimant sustained a five percent permanent impairment related to 
her left carpal tunnel and left trigger finger injuries.  He assigned a 15 percent 
permanent impairment of the left upper extremity relative to claimant’s left shoulder 
injury.  He converted the shoulder impairment to a 9 percent permanent impairment of 
the whole person.  (Joint Ex. 9, p. 174) 
Dr. Bansal also addressed the issue of permanent work restrictions.  He opined 
that claimant should perform “No lifting greater than 10 pounds with the left arm.  No 
over shoulder work with the left arm.  No frequent reaching with the left arm.”  (Joint Ex. 
9, p. 175)  Subsequently, claimant obtained a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) 
performed by Daryl Short, DPT, on January 29, 2021.  (Claimant’s Ex. 8)  Daryl Short 
opined that claimant was cooperative and gave consistent effort.  He concluded the 
FCE was valid. 
Pursuant to the Short FCE, it was determined that claimant has some limitations 
with elevated work, forward bent standing, and reaching.  Mr. Short recommended 
limiting lifting to no more than occasionally lifting 25 pounds from floor to waist.  The 
Short FCE also recommended no lifting greater than 5 pounds occasionally from waist 
to the crown and no front carrying above 25 pounds for no more than 50 feet.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 8, p. 21)  Dr. Bansal reviewed the Short FCE and issued a supplemental 
report dated March 3, 2021, in which he opines that the FCE results were consistent 
with his own assignment of restrictions and adopted the recommendations of the Short 
FCE.  (Claimant’s Ex. 6, p.18) 
Defendants offered unrebutted testimony of Toni Deters.  Ms. Deters explained 
that she is the occupational health and workers’ compensation manager at the Ottumwa 
plant.  She explained that claimant has not turned in any of the work restrictions given to 
her by either Dr. Vincent or Dr. Bansal.   
If an employee has permanent medical restrictions, those are documented by the 
plant on a “yellow card” and the claimant is not permitted to bid to any job that is not 
consistent with the restrictions documented.  Claimant has not submitted restrictions or 
requested a yellow card.  The employer was not aware of claimant’s restrictions from 
either Dr. Vincent or Dr. Bansal.  Nevertheless, Ms. Deters testified that the claimant’s 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 6 
 
 
current position with JBS is within and consistent with the restrictions offered by Dr. 
Vincent and the Kruzich FCE. 
Dr. Vincent reviewed the IME performed by Dr. Bansal and authored a 
supplemental report dated December 7, 2020.  In his supplemental report, Dr. Vincent 
opined that the impairment rating provided by Dr. Bansal was erroneous because Dr. 
Vincent believes the distal clavicle excision he performed actually improved claimant’s 
functional shoulder abilities.  He further opined that, even if applied literally, the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition would result in an impairment rating of 2.5 percent of the left upper 
extremity as a result of the distal clavicle excision.  (Joint Ex. 1, pp. 110-111) 
Considering the competing medical opinions, I find the five percent permanent 
impairment rating offered by Dr. Bansal relative to the left upper extremity resulting from 
the left carpal tunnel release and left trigger finger to be accurate.  Dr. Gainer also 
offered a five percent permanent impairment rating of the left hand.  Pursuant to the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, this converts to a five percent permanent impairment of the 
left upper extremity. (AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Table 16-2, page 439)  Accordingly, Dr. 
Gainer and Dr. Bansal concur that claimant has a five percent permanent impairment as 
a result of the May 30, 2017 injury resulting in the left carpal tunnel release and left 
trigger finger release.  I accept that impairment rating and find that claimant sustained a 
five percent permanent functional impairment and loss of the left arm as a result of the 
May 30, 2017 injury. 
With respect to the left shoulder injury occurring on July 29, 2016, there are 
essentially three impairment ratings offered.  Dr. Vincent offers an impairment rating of 
5 percent of the upper extremity, or 3 percent of the whole person, for claimant’s 
shoulder injury.  This impairment rating contains no permanent impairment for the distal 
clavicle resection Dr. Vincent performed.   
While I acknowledge Dr. Vincent’s expertise and opinions that the distal clavicle 
resection actually improved claimant’s functional abilities, I think his opinion that this 
should result in a zero percent impairment is contrary to the specific provisions of the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  Dr. Bansal references a specific portion of the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition (Table 16-27) to assign permanent impairment for the distal clavicle 
resection.  Indeed, this section of the AMA Guides indicates that the resection is 
equivalent to 10 percent of the upper extremity.  This would be convincing but for the 
further explanation offered by Dr. Vincent.   
Dr. Vincent explains that the 10 percent impairment from Table 16-27 must be 
multiplied by the relative value of the acromioclavicular joint to the upper extremity.  Dr. 
Vincent quotes from Section 16.7 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, in support of this 
opinion.  I find that Dr. Vincent’s analysis and application of the AMA Guides in this 
respect is more detailed and accurate.  I accept his opinion that, if applied literally, the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition would assign a permanent impairment of 2.5 percent of the 
upper extremity for the distal clavicle resection.  This rounds to 3 percent of the upper 
extremity and converts to 2 percent of the whole person pursuant to Table 16-3 of the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.   

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 7 
 
 
The 3 percent permanent impairment previously assigned by Dr. Vincent is 
combined with the 2 percent whole person impairment for the distal clavicle resection 
using the Combined Values Chart at page 604 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  This 
results in a 5 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the 
shoulder injury.  I find claimant sustained a 5 percent permanent impairment of the 
whole person as a result of the shoulder injury on July 29, 2016. 
With respect to restrictions, I find the initial opinion offered by Dr. Vincent of no 
restrictions is not accurate.  Dr. Bansal’s restrictions seem to be unnecessarily 
restrictive and limiting, particularly since claimant returned to work after both injuries 
and continued to work.  I find the restrictions outlined by Dr. Vincent, as documented by 
the Kruzich FCE, to be reasonable and accurate. 
Considering claimant’s age, her employment history, her continued employment 
with the employer, her educational qualifications, permanent restrictions, the lack of a 
healing period, her permanent functional impairment, her motivation to return to 
employment, as well as all other factors of industrial disability identified by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I find that Ms. Quinteros proved she sustained a 25 percent loss of 
future earning capacity as a result of the July 29, 2016 shoulder injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issue is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent 
disability benefits for the July 29, 2016 shoulder injury.  Prior to a statutory change in 
2017, shoulder injuries were compensable as unscheduled injuries.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(u) (2016).   
When disability is found in the shoulder, a body as a whole situation may exist.  
Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 N.W.2d 161 (1949).  In Nazarenus v. 
Oscar Mayer & Co., II Iowa Industrial Comm’r. Report 281 (App. 1982), a torn rotator 
cuff was found to cause disability to the body as a whole. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 8 
 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Having considered claimant’s age, education, employment history, ability to 
return to work, increased wages, motivation, impairment ratings, permanent restrictions, 
and all other factors of industrial disability, I found that claimant proved she sustained a 
25 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the July 29, 2016 shoulder 
injury.  This is equivalent to a 25 percent industrial disability.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(u) (2016). 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (2016), industrial disability is awarded 
based on a percentage of 500 weeks.  Accordingly, claimant is entitled to 25 percent of 
500 weeks, or 125 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits for the July 29, 2016 
shoulder injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (2016). 
The parties also submitted claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability for the 
carpal tunnel and trigger finger injuries occurring on May 30, 2017.  However, in their 
post-hearing briefs, both parties assert claimant is entitled to an award equivalent to 5 
percent of the arm for these injuries.  Arm injuries are compensated on a 250-week 
scheduled.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m) (2017).  Five percent of 250 weeks is 12.5 
weeks.  Accordingly, I conclude claimant is entitled to an award of 12.5 weeks of 
permanent disability for the May 30, 2017 carpal tunnel and trigger finger injuries. 
Claimant also asserts a claim for penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
86.13.  Ms. Quinteros asserts that the employer failed to re-evaluate the claim and pay 
more in permanent disability benefits.  She concedes that defendants paid permanent 
disability benefits consistent with the permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. 
Vincent for the shoulder injury.  However, she asserts that defendants should have re-
evaluated the claim and paid additional permanent disability benefits after claimant’s 
FCE with Mr. Short.  She asserts that it was unreasonable to delay or deny additional 
permanent disability benefits once an FCE demonstrated limitations in the face of Dr. 
Vincent’s full-duty release to return to work. 
Claimant further urges that defendants did later re-evaluate by obtaining an FCE 
of their own.  She urges that defendants needed to re-evaluate their position after the 
valid FCE was rendered by Mr. Kruzich and endorsed by Dr. Vincent.  Claimant 
contends that the defendants’ failure to pay additional permanent disability benefits after 
obtaining these FCE’s and permanent restrictions from Dr. Vincent was unreasonable 
and should result in imposition of a maximum penalty of 50 percent of the amounts 
delayed or denied. 
Defendants point out that they did re-evaluate the claim.  They initially paid a one 
percent permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. Vincent and subsequently paid 
additional permanent disability when Dr. Vincent increased his permanent impairment 
rating.  Defendants contend that their voluntary payment was reasonable and that it was 
fairly debatable whether additional permanent disability was owed given the full release 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 9 
 
 
by Dr. Vincent and claimant’s actual return to work and increased earnings after her 
shoulder injury. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 
(Iowa 1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 10 
 
 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
Weekly compensation payments are due at the end of the compensation week.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 229, 235. 
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Davidson v. Bruce, 594 
N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999).  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 338 (Iowa 2008).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 11 
 
 
A determination of whether the employer’s denial is reasonable does not turn on 
whether the employer’s factual basis for denial is ultimately accepted or correct.  
Rather, the question is “whether the employer was reasonable.”  Keystone Nursing 
Care Center v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 308 (Iowa 2005).  A return to work by the 
claimant was deemed a reasonable basis for disputing entitlement to permanent 
disability benefits in Craddock. 
In this case, defendants clearly had a reasonable basis to dispute entitlement to 
additional permanent disability benefits when Dr. Vincent released claimant to return to 
work without restriction.  The question is whether defendants maintained a reasonable 
basis for disputing additional permanent disability once Dr. Vincent adopted Mr. 
Kruzich’s FCE.   
In this instance, defendants paid the permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. 
Vincent.  Although Dr. Vincent ultimately imposed some permanent restrictions, he 
continued to maintain his permanent impairment rating was accurate.  Claimant also 
returned to work for the employer and earned more at the time of hearing than at the 
time of the shoulder injury.  Claimant has not turned in any restrictions to the employer 
or requested that she be issued a “yellow card” that documents permanent restrictions.  
Nevertheless, I found that claimant’s current restrictions permit her to continue working 
the full range of her current position with the employer.  Arguably, claimant’s failure or 
refusal to turn in restrictions to be documented on a yellow card by the employer also 
suggests she may not agree or may not want those restrictions to be applied.  At least 
arguably, no restrictions are currently documented or applicable for claimant, leaving it 
debatable whether claimant has any restrictions or industrial disability. 
Among the industrial disability factors to be considered are claimant’s age, ability 
to return to work, the length of healing period, and impairment rating, among other 
factors.  Each of the factors listed above suggests that claimant sustained little or no 
actual loss of earnings or loss of future earning capacity.  Considering the factors at 
play and the facts of this case, I conclude it was fairly debatable whether claimant 
sustained any significant loss of earning capacity as a result of the 2016 shoulder injury.  
Defendants acknowledged some minor loss of functional ability and paid permanent 
disability equivalent to the impairment rating offered by Dr. Vincent.  Ultimately, I 
conclude that defendants’ challenge of additional permanent disability was reasonable 
and fairly debatable in this case.  Therefore, I conclude that no penalty should be 
imposed in this situation.  Iowa Code section 85.13; Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 308 
(Iowa 2005).   
The next disputed issue submitted by the parties is whether claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of her independent medical evaluation fees.  
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 12 
 
 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
In this case, defendants obtained a permanent impairment rating from their 
authorized surgeon, Dr. Vincent, on November 26, 2016.  Claimant’s independent 
medical evaluation with Dr. Bansal occurred on March 6, 2020.  Dr. Bansal charged 
$3,342.00 for his IME.  There does not appear to be a dispute about the 
reasonableness of those fees.  Accordingly, I conclude that claimant established the 
prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 and qualifies to have her independent medical 
evaluation fees reimbursed pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Finally, claimant requests that her costs be taxed against defendants.  Costs are 
taxed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  However, costs 
statutes are construed strictly.  Coker v. Abell-Howe Co., 491 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 
1992).  
Ms. Quinteros seeks assessment of her filing fee ($100.00).  This is a reasonable 
and appropriate cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Defendants are taxed with the cost 
of the filing fee. 
Claimant seeks the cost of claimant’s deposition transcript.  This is a reasonable 
and permissible cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2).  Defendants elected to introduce this 
deposition transcript.  Therefore, I assess the cost ($102.50) of the deposition transcript 
against defendants. 
Claimant seeks costs related to obtaining medical records.  Claimant does not 
cite or rely upon a statute or administrative rule for this requested cost.  I conclude this 
is not a permissible cost to be taxed. 
Finally, claimant seeks the cost of Daryl Short’s physical therapy (FCE) report.  
Ultimately, I did not rely upon Mr. Short’s FCE findings.  I conclude this cost should not 
be taxed. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 13 
 
 
For the July 29, 2016 shoulder injury, defendants shall pay claimant one hundred 
twenty-five (125.00) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on July 
29, 2016. 
For the May 30, 2017 carpal tunnel and trigger finger injuries, defendants shall 
pay claimant twelve point five (12.5) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on May 30, 2017. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the weekly rate of four hundred ninety-five 
and 13/100 dollars ($495.13) per week. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for all weekly benefits paid to date. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal’s independent medical 
evaluation in the amount of three thousand three hundred forty-two and 00/100 dollars 
($3,342.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of two hundred two 
and 50/100 dollars ($202.50). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ____3rd _____ day of December, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dennis McElwain (via WCES) 
Patrick Waldron (via WCES) 

QUINTEROS V. JBS USA, L.L.C. 
Page 14 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
