Case Number: 1642100.01
Case Title:  SCHMIDT, RYAN V. LOVE'S TRAVEL STOPS & COUNTRY STORES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Schmidt Ryan-1642100.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RYAN SCHMIDT, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 1642100.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS & COUNTRY   : 
STORES,  
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 Head Note No.:  1801 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Ryan Schmidt, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Love’s Travel Stops and County Stores, employer, and 
Indemnity Insurance Company of North America, insurance carrier.  The claimant was 
represented by Randall Schueller.  The defendants were represented by Robert Gainer. 
The matter came on for hearing on November 23, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 
19; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 6; and Defense Exhibits A through E.  The defendants 
proposed Joint Exhibit 20 and then withdrew the exhibit at the time of hearing.  The 
claimant testified at hearing.  Tracy Barksdale was appointed the court reporter for the 
proceeding.  The matter was fully submitted on December 11, 2021, after helpful 
briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The primary issue is whether the claimant has reached maximum medical 
improvement.  Claimant is seeking a running award of temporary benefits. 
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to a penalty for late indemnity payments. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Apr-12  10:44:00     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on January 2, 2018. 
3. The parties amended the Hearing Report on the record.  The parties have 
stipulated to the average gross wages, marital status and exemptions and 
contend the weekly rate of compensation is $883.46. 
4. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit of 202 weeks of 
compensation prior to hearing. 
5. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
6. Medical benefits are not in dispute. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Ryan Schmidt was 38 years old as of the date of hearing.  He resides in 
Muscatine, Iowa.  Mr. Schmidt testified live and under oath at hearing.  I find him to be a 
highly credible witness.  His appearance was professional.  His testimony was 
consistent with the other evidence in the record.  He was a good historian under the 
circumstances.  There was nothing about his demeanor which caused me any concern 
for his truthfulness.   
Mr. Schmidt is married with two young children.  As mentioned, he resides with 
his family in Muscatine, Iowa.  He graduated from Waverly-Shell Rock High School in 
2002.  He also obtained a bachelor’s degree from Kaplan University in approximately 
2012.  He received excellent grades and he is obviously bright and industrious.  His 
work history is solid.  He worked for Hy-Vee for several years, working his way up from 
a part-time stocker to the position of assistant store director.  (Transcript, page 22)  In 
2012, he accepted a position for a business called Hawkeye International as service 
manager.  He then moved to the field of convenience store/truck stop as general 
manager.  He held two such positions before being hired by Love’s Travel Stops & 
Country Stores, the defendant employer in this case.   
As the general manager, Mr. Schmidt’s duties varied significantly.  He was 
responsible for the entire operation at Love’s.  His main duties were managerial, 
including payroll, scheduling, human resources, and inventory.  He was, however, a 
working manager who also performed other functions when necessary, such as 
cashiering and maintenance.  At his store location, he also oversaw a fast food 
restaurant and a tire shop.  Mr. Schmidt necessarily knew and was able to work all of 
those positions.  (Tr., p. 24)  He worked long hours on salary.  He started at $65,000.00 
per year and was given a raise after a positive job review in December 2017.  (Tr., p. 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 3 
25)  The parties have stipulated that his average earnings prior to January 2, 2018, 
were $1,272.40 per week.  I find that Mr. Schmidt is bright, well-educated and 
possesses significant employment skills in the competitive labor market. 
On January 2, 2018, Mr. Schmidt suffered, what would turn out to be a 
catastrophic work injury.  While performing routine mopping in his store he slipped and 
fell.  (Tr., p. 25)  Mr. Schmidt testified he remembered falling.  The next thing he 
remembered was being in his wife’s car sometime later.  (Tr., pp. 25, 44)  He has no 
recollection of being in the emergency room that night at all.  (Tr., p. 44)  Mr. Schmidt 
testified that he injured his head, neck and back.  He also developed mental conditions 
of depression and anxiety.  (Tr., p. 26)  He filled out an accident report a week later 
which is entirely consistent with the other evidence in the record.  (Cl. Ex. 5) 
There are numerous medical treatment records in evidence, 296 pages to be 
precise.  (See Joint Exhibits 1 through 18)  There is really very little dispute about his 
medical treatment per se.  The primary dispute is whether Mr. Schmidt has recovered 
from this stipulated work injury, and the legal consequences of his injury.  The employer 
and insurance carrier accepted the claim and has continuously directed and authorized 
his reasonable medical care.  Mr. Schmidt has not returned to work since his accident. 
After his initial emergency room visit, Mr. Schmidt was evaluated at Concentra 
where he was diagnosed with the following conditions: 
1. Concussion with loss of consciousness of 30 minutes or less, subsequent 
encounter 
2. Post-concussion headache 
3. Cervical neuropathic pain 
4. Sprain of right wrist, subsequent encounter 
5. Acute midline low back pain without sciatica 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 17)  His early symptoms are well-documented in the Concentra records.  
He was given treatment for these conditions by Concentra physicians and then quickly 
referred to specialists. 
On January 26, 2018, a neurologist, Irena Charysz Birski, M.D., examined Mr. 
Schmidt.  She documented his serious, debilitating ongoing headaches, as well as other 
associated symptoms. 
In addition he’s been dealing with dizziness, feeling off balance, poor 
concentration and memory, he feels tired and sluggish, he feels mentally 
slow but states these [sic] mental processing is fine.  This is all 
exacerbated when the patient is in public place.  He tries to go to Walmart 
or Menards just to get out, but notices that he needs to support himself 
with a cart due to feeling dizzy and off balance in addition that being in 
crowds of people results in panic anxiety aggravates his symptoms. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 24)  He has continued to be treated regularly by Dr. Charysz Birski.  By 
August 2018, she opined the following: 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 4 
Sadly enough that 7 months after initial injury the patient still deals with 
multiple symptoms of postconcussive syndrome including postconcussive 
headaches, persistent dizziness, nonradicular neck pain, and panic and anxiety.  
There is very minimal improvement with physical therapy that he will continue.  
However, it is certainly concerning that the patient still has not improved 
significantly as statistically speaking improvement is expected and we don’t see it 
yet. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 33)  His latest visit prior to hearing was in November 2020. 
Throughout his treatment records, Dr. Charysz Birski continued to document his 
lack of meaningful improvement despite numerous attempts at various treatments.  (Jt. 
Ex. 3, pp. 36-45)  His ongoing headaches are well documented in these records.  He 
was also evaluated and treated by pain management specialists who documented their 
efforts to control his pain symptoms for his neck and low back.  (Jt. Exs. 6 and 7)  
Joseph Brooks, D.O., followed Mr. Schmidt for his neck pain and migraines as well.  He 
attempted numerous treatments between October 2018 and September 2019, none of 
which helped significantly.  (Jt. Ex. 8) 
In April 2019, Mr. Schmidt was referred for a second neurological opinion from 
the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics Neurology Department primarily for his 
headaches and neck pain.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 113)  The result of this was referrals for a 
neuropsychological evaluation, as well as a mental health evaluation.  Later in April 
2019, he underwent neuropsychological examination with Joseph Barrash, Ph.D.  This 
evaluation documented Mr. Schmidt’s subjective symptoms at this time.  (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 
117-121)  Dr. Barrash opined that Mr. Schmidt’s conditions were not attributable to “a 
brain injury” but rather non-neurologic facts such as severe headaches, neck pain, 
disrupted sleep, fatigue and severe emotional distress.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 120)  Dr. Barrash 
recommended treatment for depression, anxiety and physical concerns.  He opined Mr. 
Schmidt was unable to work at the present time, however, he could eventually be eased 
back into work following treatment.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 120) 
In July 2019, Mr. Schmidt underwent psychiatric evaluation at the University of 
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, by Susan Duffy, M.D.  Dr. Duffy took history and performed 
a thorough evaluation.  She ultimately diagnosed generalized anxiety disorder and 
chronic pain.  She opined he did not suffer from major depression.  (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 128-
129)  She recommended medications, as well as psychotherapy treatment from a 
therapist who specializes in individuals with chronic pain.  (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 129)  As a 
result of this evaluation, Mr. Schmidt began treating with psychologist Valerie Keffala, 
Ph.D.  He also began seeing Delwyn Miller, M.D., and Devin Keenan, PA-C, in the 
Department of Adult Psychiatry on July 29, 2019, to manage medications. 
Dr. Keffala first examined Mr. Schmidt on July 12, 2019, and has continued to 
treat him through the date of hearing.  (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 131-247)  Much of her treatment 
has focused on managing his chronic pain.  Much of her focus was on education, 
meditation-type exercises and mindfulness.  Throughout her treatment of Mr. Schmidt, 
Dr. Keffala has documented his ongoing symptoms.  My interpretation of these notes is 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 5 
that he has shown little progress in his symptoms since beginning his treatment.  He 
has continued to suffer from essentially the same symptoms.  He has developed 
strategies for dealing with his more severe symptoms when they arise.  Dr. Keffala has 
never released him to any type of work. 
At his psychiatric evaluation in July 2019, Dr. Miller utilized the diagnosis of 
generalized anxiety disorder and increased his duloxetine in an effort to help with his 
sleep and anxiety.  (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 252)  Mr. Schmidt continues to treat with Adult 
Psychiatry, his last examination prior to hearing being August 26, 2021.  At that time the 
following is documented:  “Continues to experience dizziness, lightheadedness.  
Significant headaches, chronic pains.  Visual disturbance can accompany the 
symptoms.  Periodic loss of memory as above.”  (Jt. Ex. 17, p. 288) 
In addition, Mr. Schmidt had a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) in December 
2019, at Rock Valley Physical Therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 16)  The therapist noted that he was 
generally cooperative and “he worked hard to process information.”  (Jt. Ex. 16, p. 275)  
He was positive in 2 of 4 “inappropriate performance indicators” and was inconsistent in 
2 of 5 measures on the “consistency profile.”  (Jt. Ex. 16, p. 275)  Mr. Schmidt 
completed the FCE and was technically placed in the light work category.  (Jt. Ex. 16, p. 
276)  However, the following is also documented: 
RETURN TO WORK 
Does patient plan to return to work?  Yes 
Return to Work Status  No 
EVALUATOR COMMENTS 
Ryan presented today with 2 walking sticks.  His gait was slow and 
guarded.  He appeared to be really trying to focus in order to answer 
questions.  He expressed anxiety when being around people.  He 
appeared to be forcing himself to relax by closing his eyes and working on 
his breathing.  Ryan substantially perspired and exhibited a higher HR 
throughout testing.  His lumbar and cervical ROM were moderately to 
severely limited.  He was stronger with left grip strength vs right even 
though he is right handed.  He was unable to complete the knuckle to 
shoulder lift and not able to complete any other lifts or push/pull due to 
cervical pain and LBP pain, dizziness and headaches. Based upon his 
inability to lift, higher HR, cervical LBP pain and headaches, balance 
issues and anxiety around people I do not feel he is safe to return to work. 
(Jt. Ex. 16, p. 276) 
Mr. Schmidt has also been examined by the Department of Neuro-
Ophthalmology, Michael Wall, M.D., in June 2021.  This was a follow up evaluation as 
he had apparently been seen five months earlier.  (Jt. Ex. 18, p. 290)  His earlier record 
is not in evidence.  Mr. Schmidt testified that it took “a little over a year to get approval” 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 6 
from the insurance company for this eye examination.  (Tr., p. 38)  The insurance 
carrier, however, did ultimately approve and pay for the treatment.  It is noted that his 
December 14, 2020, appointment with Dr. Keffala, the following is documented.  “He is 
looking forward to his upcoming appointment with neuro-ophthalmology, hoping they 
may be able to help identify why he continues to have headaches and significant 
dizziness, particularly related to moving objects in his line of vision, and offer a way to 
treat his concerns.”  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 207)  Following his first visit to Dr. Wall, which is not 
in evidence, he reported to Dr. Keffala that he was hopeful that this treatment was going 
to help.  In fact, she quoted him as stating, “I am trying to psych myself up that this is 
going to work.”  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 209)  Mr. Schmidt testified that it took some time to get 
approval for the specialized glasses, even after the appointment had been approved. 
In his June 2021 evaluation, Dr. Wall documented Mr. Schmidt’s difficulties with 
vision.  “Ryan is a 37 year old male with dizziness and diplopia since his head trauma.  
He has reduced NPA for age but normal near vision OS today, amblyopia OD.  This 
reduced NPA is likely effort related.  He seems to be alternating fixating rapidly which is 
giving him his symptoms.”  (Jt. Ex. 18, pp. 292-293)  He was provided with special 
glasses described as fresnel OD, to use on a trial basis.  In his follow-up appointment in 
August 2021.  “He is happy with the double vision improving with the fresnel, but it is 
hard to tolerate the fresnel for long periods of time.”  (Jt. Ex. 18, p. 294)  An adjustment 
was made at that time to allow Mr. Schmidt to intermittently use an eye patch instead of 
the fresnel.  It appears he is supposed to return for evaluation following this adjustment, 
however, this had not occurred at the time of hearing.  I find that this is significant as 
this appears to be the treatment that Mr. Schmidt has the most belief could work to 
significantly reduce his symptoms and allow him to return to work.  At the time of 
hearing, Mr. Schmidt was under active, continuing medical treatment from Dr. Wall 
which may substantially decrease his overall disability if successful. 
Phil Davis, MS, provided an expert report which assessed his vocational abilities 
in October 2021.  Mr. Davis reviewed appropriate medical records and interviewed Mr. 
Schmidt and his spouse.  He opined that Mr. Schmidt’s prior work history involved work 
in the medium to heavy physical demand level, ultimately opining that “his current 
limitations both physically and mentally have now eliminated his ability to obtain full time 
gainful employment.”  (Jt. Ex. 19, p. 304) 
On May 26, 2021, Sanjay Sundar, M.D., examined Mr. Schmidt for a defense 
IME.  Dr. Sundar appears to be an orthopedist.  Dr. Sundar stated in the report that he 
“reviewed roughly 2-1/2 cartons of copious clinical documents … detailing Mr. Schmidt’s 
medical care since the time of his work-related injury.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  He examined 
Mr. Schmidt as well and took further history.  (Def. Ex. A, pp. 2-4)  He then answered a 
series of questions posed by defense counsel.  He opined the following: 
I do not attribute any of the patient’s current medical conditions to his 
work related injury.  Given his lack of any focal findings on imaging studies 
of the cervical spine or other neuro imaging, I do not feel that there is any 
diagnosis to be made related to his work-related injury.  With regards to 
the patient’s other medical conditions, including general anxiety, 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 7 
agoraphobia, panic attacks, and depression, I would defer to his other 
treating providers.  Once again, I do not feel that those medical issues are 
related to the patient’s fall and presumed loss of consciousness on the 
date of injury. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 4)  With regard to maximum medical improvement, he opined the 
following.  “Given the lack of focal findings or objective evidence of an injury, I would 
place him at MMI 4 weeks after the injury occurred.  This is primarly [sic] as he likely 
had myofascial spasm at that time which should typically resolve in this time frame.”  
(Def. Ex. A, p. 4) 
After receiving this orthopedic expert report, the defendants continued paying Mr. 
Schmidt his weekly benefits and authorizing medical treatment.  I find this was a wise 
decision by defendants.  I do not find Dr. Sundar’s medical opinions to be persuasive, 
particularly as it relates to Mr. Schmidt’s post-concussive syndrome and mental health 
issues.  While Dr. Sundar’s CV is not in evidence, it is apparent he is an orthopedist and 
not qualified to opine regarding claimant’s post-concussive syndrome or severe anxiety.  
In fact, he confusingly deferred to Mr. Schmidt’s authorized treating providers as it 
relates to these conditions.  Claimant’s authorized treating psychologist, Dr. Keffala has 
repeatedly related Mr. Schmidt’s ongoing mental condition to the work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 
12, pp. 155, 157, 161, 163, 165, 171, 179, 181, 183, 185, 187, 191, 193, 200, 205, 208, 
210, 213, 215, 220, 223, 226, 229, 232, 235, 239, 241, 244, 247)1 
Defendants have repeatedly asked Dr. Keffala to return Mr. Schmidt to work.  On 
each occasion, Dr. Keffala has declined.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 4; Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 150, 199)  Mr. 
Schmidt testified that he is still technically employed by the employer, however, he has 
never returned to work since the date of his injury.   
Mr. Schmidt testified that his symptoms have continued since the date of injury 
through the time of hearing.  The symptoms he described are severe.  (Tr., pp. 40-43)  
He has dizziness, significant difficulties with sleep, memory loss, and severe 
headaches.  These appear to be classic post-concussive symptoms.  He no longer 
drives at all, although has made some progress sitting in the driver’s seat of an 
automobile. 
The defendants contend that Mr. Schmidt has reached MMI at some point 
following his work injury.  The problem is that the only medical evidence presented is 
from Dr. Sundar, whose opinion is rejected.  Dr. Sundar opined claimant reached MMI 
on or about January 30, 2018, four weeks after his work injury.  On the other hand, 
claimant has not presented particularly compelling evidence that Mr. Schmidt is still 
actively healing or that significant improvement is expected in his condition.  The 
defendants therefore focus heavily upon Mr. Schmidt’s subjective impression of his own 
condition, pointing to his testimony that his condition has not changed much from the  
 
 
                                                 
1 Defendants did not even assert on the prehearing conference report that medical causation was an 
issue as it relates to temporary disability. 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 8 
date of his injury forward in spite of significant treatment efforts.  At hearing, the 
following exchange occurred on cross-examination: 
Q. 
From - - you started treating with Dr. Keffala in 2019.  Do you feel 
that you have gotten better? 
A. 
I feel like I’ve gotten a lot more tools at my disposal to help manage 
through or work through pain and issues I have. 
Q. 
But from overall health perspective, do you feel that your health has 
improved, stayed the same, or gotten worse from when you first started 
treating with Dr. Keffala? 
A. 
Stayed the same, improved a little, yes. 
(Tr., p. 50, lines 24-25; Tr. p. 51, lines 1-9) 
When asked by the undersigned about his understanding of his prognosis from 
his treatment conversations with physicians, Mr. Schmidt testified to the following: 
A. When I ask the question, I kind of feel like I get a blanket statement of 
everybody recovers differently, but then they throw out that there’s you know, 
typically we see X, Y, Z but there’s also times where it might be people take 
longer than normal from the X, Y, Z to get better. 
(Tr., p. 56, lines 22-5; Tr. p. 57, lines 1-3) 
While there is some truth to this perspective, it is also true that some of his 
treatment, in particular, the neuro-ophthalmology treatment from Dr. Wall did not even 
begin until 2021.  Mr. Schmidt testified that this treatment did not begin until then 
because of authorization delays by the insurance carrier.  Whether this is true or not, 
the fact is that this treatment appears to hold the most promise to significantly improve 
his condition such that he may be able to at least attempt to return to some type of 
work.  His treating physicians, in particular, Dr. Keffala have asked for patience, pointing 
out that everyone responds to treatment for post-concussive mental disabilities 
differently. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is whether Mr. Schmidt has reached maximum 
medical improvement at the time of hearing.  This issue is academic and significant only 
from a procedural perspective.  The parties have stipulated that Mr. Schmidt sustained 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of his employment and that this injury is a 
cause of temporary disability during a period of recovery.  The primary question is 
whether the period of recovery has ended, and if so, when. 
 
 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 9 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Schmidt had not returned to work and was not capable 
of substantially similar employment.  The issue is whether he is at maximum medical 
improvement.  In this case, defendants argue that claimant is at maximum medical 
improvement.  In their brief defendants argue the following.  “Given the claimant’s 
specific testimony, the appropriate date for maximum medical improvement would be 
either January 30, 2018 [Dr. Sundar’s MMI date], but not later than the first treatment 
with Dr. Keffala [July 12, 2019]”.  Up through the date of hearing, defendants continued 
to pay weekly benefits and the parties stipulated that 202 weeks of benefits had been 
paid.  Claimant argues he is still in his healing period and benefits should continue as a 
running award because no medical provider has returned him to work. 
The imposition of a rating of permanent impairment is equivalent to an opinion 
that further significant improvement from the injury is not expected. Absent a showing 
that further improvement was expected, healing period ends when a permanent rating is 
given. Brown v. Weitz Company, File No. 830840 (App. March 13, 1990); Miller v. 
Halletts Materials, File No. 861983 (App. November 23, 1992). The persistence of pain 
does not prevent a finding that the healing period is over, provided the underlying 
condition is stable. Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 1993). Medical 
stability is viewed in terms of industrial disability; if it is unlikely that further treatment of 
pain will decrease the extent of permanent industrial disability, continued pain 
management will not prolong healing period. Id. at 392.  Specifically, when a condition is 
stable medically further treatment “may extend the length of the healing period if a 
substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result.  Id. at 391.  On the 
other hand, if the continued treatment is merely expected to assist with the symptoms 
rather than “decrease the extent of permanent disability” then the healing period should 
end.  Id. 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
 
 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 10 
I find by a preponderance of evidence that the claimant has not reached 
maximum medical improvement.  While it is possible that his condition has plateaued, it 
is noted that his medical providers have not provided an impairment rating.  Based upon 
the record before me, it does not appear that the defendants have requested a rating 
from any of the treating physicians.  In April 2019, his neuropsychologist suggested that 
following a period of treatment, he could possibly be eased back into work and provided 
guidance for doing so.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 120)  This has never been attempted.  Shortly 
thereafter, Dr. Keffala began treating Mr. Schmidt.  Dr. Keffala has repeatedly told the 
insurance carrier that Mr. Schmidt was unable to return to work, however, she has not 
suggested that he has plateaued.  Rather, she has recommended patience.  It is also 
true that Dr. Keffala’s treatment records do not provide a great deal of hope that his 
condition will improve significantly, however, she has opined that everyone heals 
differently from this type of injury. 
I find it is significant, however, that Mr. Schmidt only began treatment with a 
neuro-ophthalmologist in 2021.  His last appointment with Dr. Wall was in August 2021, 
just a few months prior to hearing.  Dr. Wall had recommended treatment modifications 
to adjust his use of prescription lenses in order to help control his diplopia and dizziness 
which would presumably alleviate some of his anxiety and other symptoms.  These 
treatment efforts do not appear to be complete to make a finding of medical stability.  
Furthermore, while his treatment with Dr. Keffala has not placed him in a position to 
attempt to return to work yet, his treatment regimen is designed to eventually allow him 
to do this at some point.  All of his continued treatment seems to be focused upon 
getting him to a position where he is able and capable of working or at least attempting 
to return to work.  If this occurs, much better evidence will be available regarding his 
true loss of earning capacity.  Therefore, I find the greater weight of the evidence 
supports a finding that Mr. Schmidt is still in a healing period. 
Since the phrase maximum medical improvement is assessed in terms of an 
injured worker’s industrial disability, the issue is whether there is likely to be a change of 
his condition which would prolong healing period.  This is essentially the same issue 
which would be presented in any review-reopening case.  Therefore, much of this 
debate is academic.  If I had to assess Mr. Schmidt’s permanent disability at the present 
time, without the benefit of seeing if any of his ongoing treatment is successful, I would 
find that he is permanently and totally disabled at the present time.  He has never been 
released to attempt any type of work and given his current symptoms and limitations, 
such a prospect is unlikely, at least as of the time of hearing. 
The final issue is penalty. 
Claimant also seeks an award of penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 86.13.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 11 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the 
following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable 
investigation and evaluation by the employer or 
insurance carrier into whether benefits were owed 
to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and 
evaluation were the actual basis upon which the 
employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the 
denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. 
Claimant contends that the defendants unreasonably delayed benefits from 
March 30, 2021, through May 3, 2021.  Mr. Schmidt testified that he did not receive his 
regular weekly checks during this period of time.  (Tr.,p. 36)  He testified that 
defendants issued a check on April 26, 2021, for the period from March 30, 2021, 
through May 3, 2021.  (Tr. pp. 36-37; See also Cl. Ex. 4)  The employer’s payment logs 
verify this. (Def. Ex. E, p. 30)  Thus it is clear that four weeks of benefits were paid 
untimely. The defendants offered no evidence at hearing about these late payments.  It 
appears to have been some type of mistake which was immediately corrected once 
observed.  Nevertheless, a penalty is mandatory.  I find a penalty of $1,200.00 is 
appropriate to deter defendants from making such a mistake in the future. 
 
 

SCHMIDT V. LOVE’S TRAVEL STOPS AND COUNTRY STORES 
Page 12 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
This matter is bifurcated and only the issues addressed herein are final.  At such 
point in the future when either party contends that claimant has reached maximum 
medical improvement or other justiciable issues arise, said party may request a 
bifurcated hearing by motion on permanency, or any other disputed issue, without filing 
a new petition. 
All benefits shall be paid at the rate of eight hundred eighty-three and 46/100 
dollars ($883.46) per week. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant healing period benefits from the date of injury 
through the date of hearing, and ongoing until such time as the claimant reaches 
maximum medical improvement. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall be given a credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendants shall pay a penalty of one thousand, two hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($1,200.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants. 
Signed and filed this _12th __ day of April, 2022. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
