Case Number: 23009726.01
Case Title:  JENSEN, JEREMIAH V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Jensen Jeremiah-23009726.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JEREMIAH JENSEN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 23009726.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
    
 
 
  :                Head Notes: 3200; 3201; 3202; 
 
Defendant. 
  :                   
        3203 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Jeremiah Jensen, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Wells, employer, and Second Injury Fund of Iowa 
(Fund). Prior to the hearing, claimant and Wells settled their dispute, agreeing that 
claimant sustained a five percent scheduled member injury to the left hand. This case 
proceeded against the Fund only.  
This case was heard on September 24, 2024, and considered fully submitted on 
October 15, 2024, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1-2, Fund Exhibits AA through HH, 
along with the testimony of claimant.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained a first qualifying loss; 
 
2. Whether claimant sustained a second qualifying loss to the left upper 
extremity;  
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to benefits under the Second Injury Fund of Iowa 
Act; and if so, the amount of those benefits;  
 
4. The credit to which the Fund would be entitled if the claimant is found to be 
entitled to benefits pursuant to the Second Injury Fund of Iowa Act; and 
 
5. The commencement date of benefits.  
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-24  09:11:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The parties agree claimant was an employee at the time of the work injury of 
March 1, 2023, and that claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
his employment.  
At the time of the injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $806.00 per week. He 
was married and entitled to five exemptions. The weekly benefit rate is $540.15 based 
on the foregoing.  
The Fund waives all affirmative defenses.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Jeremiah Jensen, was a 39-year-old person at the time of the hearing. 
He has sole custody of four minor children who live with him at his residence. His 
educational background consists of graduation of high school in 2003. Claimant began 
working for Sara Lee Bakery in 2007. He worked at a production plant making 
hamburger and hot dog buns. His position at Sara Lee Bakery was pan stacker. He 
worked 12 to 14 hours a day, seven days a week. His entry-level wage was $21 to $24 
per hour. As a pan stacker, he would pull pans from a storage rack and place them onto 
the production line where the pans would travel through an oven. After completing their 
time in the oven, claimant would retrieve the pans and put them onto a cart. The pans 
were approximately 2 feet by 3 feet and weighed 15 to 20 pounds. Sara Lee Bakery 
was bought out, and all the production plants were closed.  
Claimant also worked as a full-time delivery driver for Jarco, his uncle’s 
construction business, for approximately one month earning $13.75 per hour. (Fund 
Exhibit DD, page 10) Claimant’s job duties included driving the delivery vehicle and 
loading and unloading materials using a forklift. (Ex. DD:10) This position ended due to 
a family argument; however, claimant believes he could do this position today despite 
his restrictions. (Ex. DD:10-11) 
He then obtained a job for Hantover, a storage facility of Tyson Foods, making 
$14 per hour. He was a picker who filled orders. Claimant believes that he could do this 
position today as well.  
During the time he was working there, claimant asserts he suffered a stroke. 
Defendant contends that claimant did not suffer a stroke but rather a conversion 
disorder. (Ex. AA:6) The August 18, 2017, discharge summary from Mercy Medical 
Center states as follows: 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
HOSPITAL COURSE: 
The patient is a 32-year-old male who presented to the Emergency 
Department with acute onset of right-sided weakness.  This was a fairly 
abrupt onset.  Also relates visual abnormalities and some other 
nonspecific symptoms.  He did undergo a complete evaluation included 
[sic] CT scan of the brain, CT angiogram of the head and neck, monitoring 
on telemetry, risk factor evaluation including fasting lipid panel and A1c as 
well as thyroid studies.  All were bland.  No acute abnormality.  The 
patient’s symptoms were inconsistent with each other and the patient was 
able to function well when testing in a distracted manner.  Ultimately, felt 
to be conversion disorder. 
(Ex. EE:1) His head CT and CTA were normal. (Ex. EE:10)   While the right side of the 
face was not moving, it was not drooping either. (Id.) There was no evidence of 
hemifacial spasm or tic. (Id.) Testing both upper extremities for strength simultaneously 
produced improvement in strength throughout the evaluation. (Id.)   
After his recovery from the 2017 incident, claimant then moved to Tyson Events 
Center and helped set up events such as hockey and football games and concerts, and 
then tore down and cleaned up after the events had concluded. He worked for Tyson 
Events Center from 2017 to 2021. Part of his job included assembling stages with 
platforms weighing approximately 50 pounds and carrying bike racks weighing 10 to 15 
pounds. Claimant does not believe he could perform these tasks today due to his left 
wrist pain. (Ex. DD:12)  
In 2020, claimant suffered a second incident that he described as a stroke. (Ex. 
EE:16) Claimant testified he was hospitalized for three weeks; however, the medical 
records indicate that he sought treatment on January 4, 2020, and then discharged on 
January 5, 2020. (Hearing Transcript, page 27; Ex. EE:16) He presented to the 
emergency department on July 8, 2021, with complaints of numbness in the right side of 
his face, and was seen by Joseph Liewer, M.D. (Ex. EE:17) It was noted that the 2017 
incident was felt to be a conversion disorder. (Ex. EE:17) Claimant denied weakness in 
his extremities and on examination he had equal grip strength bilaterally. (Ex. EE:18) 
Claimant also had a history of factor V Leiden and pulmonary embolism. (Ex. EE:17) 
Factor V Leiden is a genetic condition that can increase the risk of blood clots. (Ex. 
AA:5) Claimant was prescribed Eliquis to prevent blood clots from occurring.  
After leaving Tyson Events Center, claimant worked as a full-time picker for 
Chesterman’s earning approximately $17 per hour. He would pick pop from the shelves 
and place them on the pallet. The heaviest thing to be lifted was a 2-liter bottle of pop or 
a case of 12 to 24 cans. He passed a pre-employment physical for Chesterman’s. 
Claimant had no official restrictions or accommodations, but he did testify that he would 
drop things from time to time. He was terminated after a no-call / no-show absence. He 
does not believe he could return to that position today given the lifting and holding 
requirements.  

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
From 2018 to 2023, claimant spent two and a half years recovering from his 
stroke and working as a stay-at-home father to his four children.  
On or about May 1, 2022, claimant represented to the emergency department 
with an altered mental status and confusion dating back to five days or more. (Ex. 
EE:19) He returned to the emergency room on June 17, 2022, with right-sided facial 
numbness, droop, and right upper and lower extremity weakness two days prior. (Ex. 
EE:24) This incident was attributed to lack of hydration while working outdoors in the 
heat, although claimant had missed a dose of Eliquis. (Ex. EE:24) At the time of his 
discharge, the right-sided facial droop and numbness had resolved, but he still had 
some weakness in the right upper and lower extremity. (Ex. EE:24)  
In February 2023, claimant began working for Wells Enterprises on the ice cream 
production line. His job tasks included rapidly pulling ice cream bars off a production 
line, splitting them apart, and placing them into containers. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, page 
15) He had no accommodations or work restrictions at this position prior to his work 
injury of March 1, 2023. 
On May 23, 2023, claimant presented to the emergency department with 
complaints of intermittent numbness and tingling of the left hand which had been going 
on for about a month. (Ex. EE:27) He denied any severe pain in his arm and was able to 
wiggle his fingers and exhibit good grip strength. He followed up with Joanie M. 
Columbia, M.D., at CNOS for his ongoing left hand numbness and tingling. (Ex. EE:32) 
Claimant was documented as reporting that he had been having intermittent numbness 
and tingling for about a year, mostly in the thumb through the middle finger, and the 
condition had been worsening since March. (Ex. EE:32) He denied any recent injury to 
the wrist. (Ex. FF:1) A diagnosis of carpal tunnel was made. (Ex. FF:1) He was initially 
given work restrictions of no lifting, gripping, pushing, pulling, pinching more than ten 
pounds occasionally with the left upper extremity. (Ex. HH:1) A subsequent EMG 
conducted on August 30, 2023, showed moderately severe left-sided median 
neuropathy at the wrist. (CE 1:1) 
 On or around September 9, 2023, he was terminated from this position for 
excessive absenteeism, although claimant explains that his employer wanted him to 
work one-handed, and after four days of calling in sick due to pain and lack of function 
in his hand, he was terminated. Claimant filed a workers’ compensation claim with the 
employer and the employer’s insurer. That matter was settled with the parties agreeing 
to claimant sustaining a 5 percent upper extremity loss on the left.  
On or about June 5, 2024, claimant presented to the emergency department with 
a right wrist injury after falling while playing tag at a park. (Ex. EE:28) He was diagnosed 
with a distal radius fracture but required only splinting with no surgery or physical 
therapy. (Ex. EE:31)  
Claimant is currently working for Tyson Events Center. The work is seasonal. He 
is under no particular restrictions. Dr. Wendel has instructed claimant to work at the 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
level he feels comfortable. He testified that he primarily sweeps and mops, but does not 
participate in setup due to the inability to lift.  
 Pursuant to the IME conducted by Sunil Bansal, M.D., Dr. Bansal opined 
claimant sustained a left carpal tunnel injury due to repetitive work activities at his place 
of employment. (CE 2:15) Dr. Bansal assigned a left-sided 5 percent upper extremity 
impairment which was ultimately agreed upon by the employer and claimant. (CE 2:16)  
Dr. Bansal also found that as a result of several strokes, claimant suffered 
residual right upper extremity weakness demonstrated by his loss of grip strength on the 
right as compared to the left. (CE 2:16)  Claimant had muscle atrophy of the right 
forearm and hand compared to the left, decreased range of motion particularly with the 
fine motor movements of the fingers, weak finger abduction and adduction, impaired 
rapid alternating movements and finger-to-nose test on the right side, and mild 
spasticity with the right wrist and finger flexors. (CE 2:14) His grip strength was 
measured as follows:  
Right:  31 kg, 29 kg, and 31 kg. 
Left:    43 kg, 41 kg, and 42 kg. 
(CE 2:14)  
Based on the loss of grip strength between 10-30 percent, claimant has a 10 
percent upper extremity impairment based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (CE 2:16)  
Dr. Bansal recommended work restrictions of no lifting greater than 20 pounds 
with the left hand or 10 pounds with the right hand. Claimant was to avoid forceful 
turning or twisting with either hand and avoid the use of vibratory hand tools on the left. 
(CE 2:17)  
Joseph Chen, M.D., issued an IME report at the request of the Fund based on a 
review of claimant’s medical records. (Ex. AA) In Dr. Chen’s opinion, claimant suffers 
from a Somatic Symptom Disorder rather than a series of strokes or even conversion 
disorder. (Ex. A:5-6) Strokes occur when a blood vessel carrying oxygen to the brain is 
blocked or ruptured. (Ex. AA:5) Strokes are usually diagnosed with imaging including 
CT and MRI scans that show the specific areas of the brain that are damaged. (Ex. 
AA:5) Claimant’s advanced imaging studies of his brain did not identify any blood vessel 
blockage or damage to any brain tissue. (Ex. AA:6) His symptoms of right-sided 
paralysis eventually improved, and he was able to return to using his right arm and leg 
voluntarily. (Ex. AA:6)  Mr. Jensen’s medical records indicate that he had a pattern of 
developing similar unexplained neurological symptoms during times that he was either 
physically or mentally stressed. (Ex. AA:6) Dr. Chen concluded that claimant did not 
lose any permanent use of a hand, arm, foot or leg from the work injury nor had 
claimant suffered a previous loss of use of a hand, arm, foot or leg. (Ex. AA:6) 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
Claimant testified that he has good strength in the left hand but has pain with 
turning, twisting or holding objects for a long time. He still wears a brace at night. For his 
right hand, claimant cannot lift heavy objects and has difficulty with activities of daily 
living such as opening bottles, writing, fastening buttons and gripping. (CE 2:13) He 
stated at hearing that he has 10 percent of strength in the right arm. (Tr., p. 23) He has 
some balance issues as well and there are short-term memory issues that he believes 
will worsen as time goes on.  
He has been advised to stay out of the cold as well due to the Factor V Leiden. 
(Tr., p. 21) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Iowa Code section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of 
the Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have 
lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain 
a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable 
injury.  Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second 
injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789, 792 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, 
Lawyer, Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 471 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355, 358 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300, 304 (Iowa 1979). 
Claimant asserts that as a result of a stroke or a series of strokes he sustained 
the loss of use of his right hand. There is some dispute regarding whether claimant 
sustained a stroke or a conversion disorder. Dr. Chen opined claimant sustained either 
a conversion disorder, or, more likely, a somatic dysfunction.  It is more likely than not 
claimant’s 2017 and 2020 medical incidences were a conversion disorder rather than a 
stroke. The 2017 discharge diagnosis concluded that claimant sustained a conversion 
disorder. His radiographs showed no damage to the brain commonly found in stroke 
victims. His right-sided facial droop resolved after each of the emergency room visits. 
The June 2022 right-sided facial weakness was attributed to overwork and dehydration. 
The contemporaneous medical diagnoses, the lack of radiographic evidence of a stroke, 
and the occurrence of the symptoms at times of physical and mental stress, along with 
the resolution of such symptoms are more aligned with Dr. Chen’s opinion regarding 
causation.  
However, both a stroke and a conversion disorder affect the whole body and 
therefore the legal question is substantively the same - can a worker claim that 
symptoms from a whole body syndrome result in a first qualifying injury? 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
According to the Iowa Supreme Court, the question to be answered is whether 
the injury resulted in the loss of use of an enumerated member. The question 
presupposes that there are injuries that do not result in the loss of an enumerated 
member. It also reveals that the important consideration is the resulting loss of use, not 
the starting point of injury. In Nelson, the injured worker’s arm was “affected” but did not 
show a loss of use and, therefore, there was no qualifying injury. See Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Strable, File No. 24–0056, December 13, 2024.  
Consistent with the guidance in Strable, an examination must be had to ascertain 
whether claimant sustained a first qualifying loss to the right hand or foot, regardless of 
whether the inciting injury was a conversion injury or stroke. Claimant exhibited right-
sided loss of grip strength during his examination with Dr. Bansal and testified that he 
dropped items from time to time prior to the March 1, 2023, injury. From 2017 to 2023, 
claimant worked at Tyson Events Center helping set up for events. He testified that his 
job included assembling stages with platforms weighing approximately 50 pounds and 
carrying bike racks weighing 10 to 15 pounds.  After his second conversion disorder 
incident, claimant worked as a full-time picker for Chesterman’s handling cases of pop 
and 2-liter bottles of pop. He did not have any official work restrictions or 
accommodations and testified that he had no problems performing his job duties 
although he did drop things from time to time. When claimant was discharged on June 
19, 2022, following his third conversion disorder incident, he had slight weakness on the 
right as compared to the left. His right hand injury in May 2024 required only a splint 
with no physical therapy or surgery.  
For the same reasons, it was found claimant likely suffered a conversion disorder 
rather than a stroke. At the time of his medical visits, claimant exhibited right-sided 
weakness. At the time of his June 2022 discharge, claimant had weakness on the right 
as compared to the left. Dr. Bansal’s dynamometer measurements are more closely 
aligned with claimant’s past medical history. Dr. Chen did not see the claimant and thus 
had no measurements. Dr. Bansal’s findings are more aligned with the historical 
medical documentation as well as claimant’s testimony. Thus it is found that claimant 
sustained a 10 percent loss of use of the right upper extremity. Dr. Bansal also 
determined claimant sustained a 5 percent loss of use of the left upper extremity. 
Together these two injuries qualify claimant to recover from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa.  
In determining the extent of the Fund’s liability, the Strable decision requires a 
finding of an industrial disability considering both qualifying injuries as well as any 
sequelae injuries. In this case there does not appear to be any sequelae injuries argued 
as the conversion injury was a precedential injury; not a sequelae one. Then the amount 
associated with the second qualifying injury must be subtracted.  
Ten percent loss of function to the right upper extremity and the 5 percent loss of 
function to the left upper extremity precludes claimant from working a number of 
positions that require lifting, pushing, and pulling more than 10 pounds on the right. 
Claimant testified he would not be able to return as a picker and his position at the Sara 
Lee Bakery would also be outside his work restrictions. He is currently working for 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
Tyson Events Center with no official restrictions. He testified that he mostly cleans. He 
is capable of driving, operating a forklift, and doing the tasks at the Tyson Events 
Center. More than half of the jobs he performed in the past would still be available to 
him. He is a younger person and capable of job retraining. He appears motivated to 
return to work. It is found that the combined industrial loss of both right and left hand 
injuries is 50 percent or 250 weeks. The Fund is entitled to a credit of 5 percent of the 
upper right extremity or 12.5 weeks. The total fund liability is 237.5 weeks.  
According to Strable, the last step is to subtract the discrete industrial disability 
associated with the first qualifying injury and sequela without considering the effect of 
the second qualifying injury as the Fund is only liable for the remaining amount of an 
injured worker’s industrial disability associated only with the combination of two 
qualifying injuries—without considering the sequelae injuries. In this case, there are no 
sequelae injuries considered and thus no additional subtraction or reduction to the 
above finding of industrial disability.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
The Second Injury Fund shall pay claimant 237.5 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated weekly rate of five hundred forty and 15/100 dollars 
($540.15) commencing immediately upon termination of the employer’s payment of 
weekly benefits pursuant to the agreement for settlement between claimant and the 
employer.   
 The Second Injury Fund shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum.   
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30, interest accrues on unpaid Second Injury 
Fund benefits from the date of the filing of this decision.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. 
Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990).   
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33, the Second Injury Fund shall pay the cost of the 
hearing transcript.   
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2), the Second Injury Fund shall file subsequent 
reports of injury as required by this agency.   
Signed and filed this ___24th ___ day of March, 2025. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

JENSEN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Al Sturgeon (via WCES) 
Adrienne Williamson (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
