Case Number: 19004961.01
Case Title:  LORADITCH, JAMES V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Loraditch James-19004961.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JAMES LORADITCH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 19004961.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC.,   : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE 
  :            Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1803.1 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant James Loraditch filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Seaboard Triumph Foods, Inc., employer, and Ace 
American Insurance Company, insurer, for an accepted work injury date of October 12, 
2019. The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on March 18, 
2022. This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines. 
However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via internet-based video. Accordingly, this 
case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through E.  
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Tracy Walker testified on behalf of the 
employer. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
March 18, 2022. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on April 29, 2022, and the 
case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Aug-10  13:58:39     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
ISSUE 
1. 
The nature and extent of claimant’s permanent disability. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. While not a perfect historian, few witnesses are. Overall, claimant was a 
credible witness. 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 41-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
17) Claimant is married but going through a divorce. He has one child who lives with 
him. Claimant graduated from high school, but testified that he struggled with learning 
disabilities in the areas of math, spelling, and reading. (Tr., pp. 17-18) His grades were 
mainly Cs and Bs. (Tr., p. 44) He testified that he attempted to join the military but could 
not pass testing due to his limited math skills. (Tr., pp. 19-20) Claimant explained that 
he had seizures when he was young, which affected his learning abilities. (Tr., p. 43) 
Prior to the defendant employer, claimant worked in production at Wells Dairy in 
Le Mars, Iowa. (Tr., p. 20) He worked there for about two and a half years, and was 
fired when another employee said that he made certain threats. (Tr., p. 45) Claimant 
denies that accusation, but was still fired. (Tr., pp. 21, 45) Prior to Wells claimant 
worked at Methodist Manor, which is a retirement home. (Tr., p. 21) He worked in the 
kitchen, doing dishes and preparing food for the residents. (Tr., p. 22) He worked there 
for about eight months and left to work at Wells Dairy.  
Claimant started working at Seaboard Triumph Foods (“Seaboard”) on February 
5, 2018. (Tr., p. 22) His first job was “bagging butts,” after which he moved to “pulling 
ribs.” (Tr., p. 23) He only worked on pulling ribs for about two weeks, and was moved 
because he was not fast enough. He testified that he could not get the blades sharp 
enough and the job was difficult for him, so he was moved to the case sealer job. (Tr., 
pp. 23-24; 44-45) Claimant explained that after the product is packaged into boxes, 
some boxes are “strapped” and some are glued. (Tr., p. 24) Claimant’s job was to 
ensure the case sealer was running properly, making sure the boxes were getting glued 
correctly and not getting jammed on the conveyor belt, and making sure the glue was 
filled. (Tr., pp. 25-26)  
On October 12, 2019, while working the case sealer, claimant was injured. (Tr., 
p. 26) Claimant testified that a box was flipped the wrong way on the conveyor belt. He 
reached to grab the box and reposition it, and his coat sleeve got caught in the machine 
and pulled his left hand into the running conveyor belt. (Tr., pp. 26-27) Claimant testified 
that he initially panicked, and then began to yell for help as no one was around. (Tr., p. 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
27) He estimated his hand was stuck in the conveyor belt for 5 to 12 minutes, but he 
was not sure exactly how long. Eventually a coworker was able to help him get his hand 
out, and he was taken to St. Luke’s for initial emergency care. (Tr., p. 28)  
Claimant first saw Aaron Althaus, M.D., who noted a left hand degloving injury 
with extensor tendon injury to the index finger. (Claimant’s Exhibit 4, p. 2) He performed 
initial irrigation and debridement of the injury, and got claimant stabilized. He noted that 
there was an unclosable portion of claimant’s wound that measured roughly 4 by 4 
centimeters. Dr. Althaus called in Laura McNaughton, M.D., a plastic surgeon, for 
consultation. (Joint Exhibit 4, p. 2) Dr. McNaughton noted extensor tendon injuries and 
open wounds, but most pressing was the third-degree friction-type burn of the hand, 
which involved the dorsal aspect of three metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 3) The burn was roughly one percent total body surface area. Dr. McNaughton stated 
that due to the complex nature of the burn crossing joints and being on the hand, 
claimant met the criteria for transfer to a burn center.  
Claimant was transferred to the University of Iowa Burn Clinic on October 13, 
2019, where he first saw Robert Bertellotti, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bertellotti noted that 
claimant had a history of Crohn’s disease, and was there for a wound on the dorsum of 
his left hand with exposed tendons. The conveyor belt had abraded the dorsum of his 
left hand. He noted that there was a central non-blanching, insensate portion with a 
surrounding blanching, tender area. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) Claimant was able to flex at that 
time, but was not able to extend the left second digit. The following day claimant saw 
Ericka Lawler, M.D., who recommended physical therapy to work on active and passive 
finger range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13) 
On October 15, 2019, claimant saw Andrei Odobescu, M.D., in plastic and 
reconstructive surgery. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) Dr. Odobescu noted a full-thickness third-degree 
burn to the dorsum of the left hand with exposed extensor tendons and inability to 
extend the left index finger. He measured the skin defect at approximately 12 by 8 
centimeters. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) Dr. Odobescu’s plan was to defer to the burn surgery 
service for acute wound care and complete debridement of the involved skin, after 
which claimant would likely require either venous flap coverage or ALT (anterolateral 
thigh) flap coverage of the dorsum of the hand. He also noted claimant would require 
tendon transfer versus tendon graft from the palmaris to reestablish function of the 
extensor mechanism of the index finger. Finally, Dr. Odobescu noted that claimant was 
on Humira due to his Crohn’s disease, which may affect wound healing.  
On October 18, 2019, claimant was taken to the operating room for burn 
excision/debridement. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 19) The debrided area was then grafted with 100 
square centimeters of allograft. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 21) On October 25, 2019, claimant was 
taken for another surgery. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 5-7) This surgery consisted of a venous free 
flap closure. The right volar forearm was chosen as the donor site for the venous flap. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 6) Additionally, claimant’s right thigh was used as the donor site for a split-
thickness skin graft harvest to place over the donor site in claimant’s right forearm.  

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
Unfortunately, the venous flap failed, and claimant was returned to the operating 
room to have it removed on November 15, 2019. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 8) A “purulent pocket” 
was discovered underneath the flap, and some necrosis of the interosseous muscles in 
the second and third interosseous space was noted. There was exposed tendon and 
bone but due to the purulent drainage it was not covered at that point. Infectious 
Disease was consulted for antimicrobial treatment, and he was then returned to the 
operating room on November 17, 2019 for definitive closure with ALT flap coverage and 
resorbable antibiotic beads. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45) Claimant’s right leg was used as the donor 
site for the ALT flap, and a split thickness skin graft was then harvested from the left 
thigh to cover the donor site. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 10-11) 
Following this surgery, claimant was found to have MRSA and 
peptostreptococcus, and was treated with IV antibiotics for six weeks. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45) 
Meanwhile, the flap remained bulky, and he had “acquired syndactyly,” essentially 
meaning the graft incorporated the web spaces of his fingers, resulting in limited range 
of motion. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45; Defendants’ Exhibit B, p. 2)  
Claimant had a revision surgery on May 19, 2020, to release the second and 
third web space syndactyly and partial flap debulking. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 12-13; Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
45) Shortly thereafter he started physical and occupational therapy in order to improve 
motion and reduce sensitivity. (Def. Ex. E) Claimant did miss some sessions due to 
hospitalization for his Crohn’s disease, which also resulted in decreased participation in 
his home exercise program. (Def. Ex. E, p. 2) He also cut some sessions short due to 
the pain from his Crohn’s, but was still able to make some progress with range of 
motion. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 5-7) By July 30, 2020, claimant had cancelled several sessions 
due to his Crohn’s disease, and had not met his therapy goals related to range of 
motion and sensation, nor for his home exercise program. (Def. Ex. E, p. 8) The 
therapist recommended continuing therapy, and noted concern for claimant’s progress 
due to his decreased participation in therapy and home exercise.  
At claimant’s next therapy session on August 5, 2020, he reported that therapy 
was helping, and he no longer had pain in his hand and was starting to use it more. 
(Def. Ex. E, p. 9) However, he continued to have serious issues related to the Crohn’s 
disease. He next attended therapy on August 19, 2020, and reported increasing 
functional use of his hand, and no pain. (Def. Ex. E, p. 12) 
On October 26, 2020, claimant had another surgery for MCP tenolysis and dorsal 
capsulotomies in order to improve his MCP range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45; Cl. Ex. 4, 
p. 15) He then returned to occupational therapy, and on November 19, 2020, he 
reported frustrations with his current job duties and tightness in his MCP joints. (Def. Ex. 
E, p. 14) He also reported that he would be having surgery for his Crohn’s disease in 
December.  
The next medical record in evidence is dated February 1, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 
17-18) On that date claimant had his eighth and final hand surgery for flap debulking. 
He then returned to occupational therapy, and continued to make progress toward his 
goals. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 1-2) By May 3, 2021, claimant was progressing toward his goals for 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
range of motion and sensitivity, as well as fine motor coordination. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) By 
that time claimant had returned to light duty work in the personal protective equipment 
(PPE) room. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9; Tr., pp. 34-35) His job was essentially to ensure employees 
had the proper PPE and keep the area organized. The therapist noted his work status 
was light duty, with restrictions of “clean/warm environment, LUE as assist.” (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 9) 
At some point claimant was transferred to another position within the plant that 
fell within his restrictions. That job was on the “harvest floor,” or “hot side” of the plant. 
(Tr., p. 71) Claimant testified that his job on the “hot side” involved burning eyebrows off 
pig carcasses with a hand-held torch. (Tr., p. 37) He testified that the torch weighed 
“maybe 5 pounds” and the area where he worked was “90-plus degrees.” Claimant 
testified that he could not take the heat due to his skin grafts and his Crohn’s disease. 
With respect to the torch, he was able to use his uninjured right hand to grip the torch, 
but after time his hand would get tired, and he would need to also use his left hand to 
hold the torch. (Tr., p. 38) 
In a letter dated May 25, 2021, Paul Parmelee, D.O., recommended that claimant 
be transferred to a different department “due to his intolerance of increased 
temperatures.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 1) Dr. Parmelee is claimant’s personal care physician, who 
also treats his Crohn’s disease. (Tr., pp. 38, 46) Claimant testified that he took the note 
to the company nurse, who brought him to the office where he spoke to “Christina.” (Tr., 
p. 39) He testified that Christina told him the note did not have “the right language,” but 
he did not understand what language she meant. In any event, claimant testified he has 
not worked at Seaboard or anywhere else since that time. 
On May 27, 2021, Gretchen Kass, ARNP, with the plastic surgery clinic at UIHC, 
authored a letter indicating claimant would continue to work with restrictions of 10-
pounds lifting with the left hand; no gripping, pushing, pulling, or fine motor movements; 
and a compression sleeve to left hand as needed for comfort along with a glove on the 
left hand. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 1) 
Tracy Walker testified on behalf of defendants. (Tr., p. 70) Her testimony was 
consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and her demeanor at the time of 
hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her veracity. She was a very credible 
witness. Ms. Walker is the director of safety and workers’ compensation at Seaboard. 
She has been with the company since July 13, 2020, and has been in the director 
position since the end of September 2021. (Tr., p. 73) Ms. Walker testified that at the 
time of claimant’s injury, he was making $16.70 per hour. (Tr., p. 71) When he was 
moved to the hot job, he was making $18.45 per hour due to a plantwide pay increase. 
Ms. Walker testified that at the time he was moved to the hot side job, the job duties 
were within his restrictions, as the job could be performed one-handed, and the 
temperature was within the range of 60 to 90 degrees Fahrenheit. (Tr., pp. 71-72) 
Ms. Walker testified that the torch claimant used in the hot side position weighed 
around 4-pounds, and the job can be done using one hand. (Tr., pp. 74-76) She could 
not provide an exact number of carcasses that would go by claimant for eyebrow 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
singeing per hour, but estimated it would be more than 100 carcasses per hour. (Tr., pp. 
74-75) She testified that when she asked the operational leaders at the plant about jobs 
that would be within claimant’s restrictions this was the job in which he was placed. (Tr., 
p. 77)  
Ms. Walker testified that any note from an employee that comes in from a 
personal physician is forwarded to human resources, and it is then up to human 
resources to determine whether an accommodation will be made. (Tr., p. 79) As such, 
when claimant brought in the letter from Dr. Parmelee, he was referred to human 
resources, as Dr. Parmelee was not an authorized treating provider or otherwise 
involved in claimant’s care related to his workers’ compensation injury. (Tr., p. 78) In 
claimant’s case, human resources was unable to accommodate Dr. Parmelee’s 
restriction, and claimant was placed on a personal leave of absence starting May 28, 
2021. (Tr., p. 80) At the time of hearing, claimant was still considered an active 
employee on leave. Claimant testified that he has not worked anywhere since. (Tr., p. 
39) 
On June 1, 2021, claimant underwent a functional capacity evaluation (FCE), 
which was determined to be invalid due to claimant “performing inconsistently” and 
failing to give maximum voluntary effort. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 1) The FCE report indicates that 
claimant failed 7 of 7 validity criteria during the hand strength assessment; there was an 
absence of correlation between lifts of unmarked steel bars and the corresponding lifts 
on the XRTS Lever Arm; and claimant lifted and carried more weight than he indicated 
he could as his “maximum lifting capacity.” However, despite the invalid result, claimant 
was found to meet the material handling demands for a medium capacity position.  
Claimant advised the therapist during the FCE that he was not having any pain in 
his hand at rest, but with prolonged gripping his pain level increased to a 6 or 7 out of 
10. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 6) His main concerns with return to full duty work were his hand getting 
cold, any gripping, and lifting boxes. Prolonged gripping and cold weather aggravated 
his symptoms, and keeping his hand warm improved his symptoms. He reported that he 
could lift up to 15 pounds to waist height, but testing showed that he could lift between 
45 and 49 pounds. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 3-6) 
Following the FCE, claimant continued with occupational therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
15-25) By August 18, 2021, claimant had gradually improved with range of motion, 
strength, activity tolerance, sensitivity, swelling, and functional use. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) 
However, he still had range of motion deficits and stiffness in the second and third 
digits, which limited his ability to grasp items. On August 25, 2021, claimant saw ARNP 
Kass for a follow up. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45) ARNP Kass noted claimant had largely plateaued 
in therapy, with the plan to attend a few more sessions and then discharge to a home 
program. Her note states that claimant reported being happy about the progress he 
made, although he still had significant limitations. She noted he was able to work 
restricted work, and had a FCE to help “guide his return to work.” Finally, she noted that 
claimant “no longer has intolerance to temperatures as of recently.” 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
ARNP Kass stated that claimant’s exam was virtually unchanged from his last 
visit, so she agreed with the discharge from therapy to a home program. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
46) She noted claimant was unlikely to gain much additional range of motion with more 
releases, so she did not recommend additional surgery. She placed claimant at MMI as 
of August 25, 2021, and kept the same work restrictions in place from her May 27, 2021 
letter. She noted the FCE was difficult to interpret, and referred to occupational 
medicine to review and help determine safe permanent work restrictions.  
Claimant returned for his last approved occupational therapy sessions and was 
discharged. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 27-28) On October 8, 2021, claimant attended an 
independent medical examination (IME) at defendants’ request with Dean Wampler, 
M.D. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1) Dr. Wampler interviewed and examined claimant in person and 
reviewed medical records. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 1-3; See also Tr., p. 59) Claimant advised 
Dr. Wampler that he still had some cold sensitivity along the radial border of his graft 
and left index finger. (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) He stated he previously had difficulty working in a 
cold environment, and “does not register any heat intolerance, but has not really thought 
he was next to a radiant heat source in the recent past.”     
Claimant reported wearing his compression glove sometimes at home, and 
confirmed “modest decreased sensibility” in the graft on the dorsum of his hand. He 
reported his biggest frustration was the lack of mobility in his index and ring fingers, 
such that he was unable to pinch grasp with them to his thumb. Dr. Wampler noted that 
he was able to get a “fairly forceful” pinch grasp with his fourth and fifth fingers against 
his thumb. Claimant reported he was able to care for all of his personal needs at home 
and help with light chores. He was able to do light grasping with the left hand of larger 
objects. He also noted he had done some yardwork and cleanup as a handyman for an 
older woman through his church. Other than that, claimant reported that he “can’t work 
until this is all settled.” 
On physical examination, Dr. Wampler stated that he examined the left upper 
extremity, and also assessed claimant’s skin graft donor sites since he reported some 
occasional prickling feeling in those. (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) With respect to the donor sites on 
claimant’s thighs and right forearm, the scars were well healed. There was no dryness, 
and claimant was not using any lotion on the sites. There was no evidence of skin or 
scar breakdown, hypertrophic changes, or hyperpigmentation. Dr. Wampler concluded 
that all scars from the skin graft donor sites were benign. 
With respect to claimant’s left hand, Dr. Wampler noted some slight webbing 
remaining between the index and middle finger, and middle finger and ring finger. (Def. 
Ex. B, p. 4) However, abduction at those joints was essentially normal. Claimant had 
good radial and ulnar artery circulation, and skin temperature testing showed that the 
graft was about two degrees Fahrenheit less than the surrounding tissues, but it did not 
feel cold nor did claimant register cold in normal environments. Dr. Wampler concluded 
the temperature difference was typical of a full thickness graft without its own blood 
supply. Dr. Wampler found slightly diminished sensation to touch, and claimant reported 
occasional sharp or burning feelings under the graft, but said it was uncommon and 
unpredictable and did not limit his activities of daily living.  

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
When asked to make a fist, claimant could bring his fourth and fifth fingers down 
reasonably well, but the index and ring fingers were substantially limited. During range 
of motion testing of claimant’s finger joints, his findings were “nearly identical” to the 
findings of the FCE. He determined those findings were valid, and did not find the loss 
of motion surprising given the duration of claimant’s recovery and periodic interruptions 
in occupational therapy.  
Using the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Dr. Wampler provided a total combined impairment of 41 percent of the left 
hand. (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) This rating was based on the loss of multiple finger mobility, 
which he combined for a total of 40 percent, and sensory loss to the dorsum due to the 
skin graft, for which he provided an additional one percent. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 4-5) Dr. 
Wampler specifically determined there was no impairment to the skin graft donor sites, 
as he previously found them to be benign. (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) In a second letter dated 
October 13, 2021, Dr. Wampler addressed work restrictions. (Def. Ex. B, p. 8) He 
recommended following the FCE outcomes. He noted that while the examiner 
repeatedly stated the FCE as a whole was not valid, the parts of the test that were not 
reproducible were static lift and grip strength. However, the inconsistencies were not 
reflected in claimant’s material handling abilities, so Dr. Wampler found he could lift 50 
pounds to waist height and 30 pounds to chest height if using both hands. His main 
limitations were related to overhead lifting and poor left hand function, as reflected in his 
examination. (Def. Ex. B, p. 8) 
On December 15, 2021, claimant attended an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal’s report is dated January 7, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) Although not 
explicitly noted in his report, Dr. Bansal’s IME was not in-person, but took place via 
Zoom. (Tr., pp. 58-59) As such, Dr. Bansal did not perform a physical examination or 
take any measurements or perform any testing as part of his evaluation. Dr. Bansal 
reviewed medical records, and spoke to claimant regarding his injury and current 
condition. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-6) According to Dr. Bansal, claimant reported “constant” left 
hand pain, especially when it is cold. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) Claimant reported being unable to 
tie his shoes at times and also reported his left hand gets colder compared to his right 
hand. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-6) He reported difficulty and limitations with movement of his 
index and middle fingers. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) He reported occasional numbness and tingling 
in his fingers, as well as electric shock and odd sensations in his hand, as well as the 
areas of his arm and legs where the donor sites are located. Finally, he noted sunlight 
bothers the graft sites, and he has to use sunscreen. 
Dr. Bansal’s report reflects that claimant was no longer working due to his last 
position at Seaboard requiring him to work in 90-degree heat, which he could not 
tolerate due to his graft sites. He stated that he was not working elsewhere because “he 
could not get hired because they would not take a risk due to his hand.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) 
Dr. Bansal’s diagnosis was left hand crush injury with third degree friction burn 
and index finger extensor tendon injury. His prognosis was poor. With respect to 
impairment, Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Wampler’s 41 percent rating to the left hand 
based on finger range of motion and sensation. However, Dr. Bansal provided 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
additional impairment for the skin burn that resulted in a graft to the hand and skin loss 
from the thighs. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 6-7) He stated that the grafted burn site is sensitive to 
heat and sunlight and requires moisturizers and sunscreen. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) Using Table 
8-2 of the AMA Guides, he stated that skin conditions from burns that result in grafts are 
ratable as whole person impairments. He opined that claimant’s burn is sensitive to heat 
and sunlight, meeting the criteria for a Category I impairment. As such, he provided a 5 
percent whole person impairment rating, in addition to the 41 percent of the hand. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 7) 
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Bansal recommended no lifting greater than five 
pounds with the left hand; no frequent grasping or gripping with the left hand; and 
avoiding exposure to prolonged heat, cold, or sunlight. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) For future 
treatment, Dr. Bansal recommended scar desensitization treatment and continued 
occupational therapy.  
 
Claimant testified that Dr. Wampler did not talk to him about his skin grafts, and 
only looked at the one donor site on his left forearm. (Tr., p. 16) However, given Dr. 
Wampler’s report describing his questions and examination of the skin graft donor sites, 
it is clear claimant’s testimony on the issue was inaccurate. (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) 
Additionally, Dr. Wampler examined claimant in person, while Dr. Bansal’s examination 
took place via Zoom. (Tr., pp. 58-59) As a result, Dr. Bansal did not perform any 
physical examination of claimant, or take any measurements of his own. Further, with 
respect to Dr. Bansal’s additional 5 percent rating for the skin, he bases that rating on 
the fact that claimant told him the grafted burn site is sensitive to heat and sunlight, and 
he requires moisturizers and sunscreen. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) However, he told ARNP Kass 
that he no longer experienced temperature intolerance. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45; Tr., p. 56) 
Additionally, he told Dr. Wampler that while he still has cold sensitivity, he does not 
register any heat intolerance. (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) He also told Dr. Wampler that he did not 
use lotion on the donor sites, and Dr. Wampler found no dryness or other ratable 
findings with respect to those sites. The only rating Dr. Wampler provided related to the 
graft on claimant’s hand was the one percent of the upper extremity he added due to 
sensory loss. (Def. Ex. B, p. 5)  
Based on all of the above, I find Dr. Wampler’s IME report to be more credible 
and carry greater weight overall than that of Dr. Bansal. As such, I find claimant 
sustained a 41 percent impairment to his left hand. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The only issue to determine in this case is the nature and extent of claimant’s 
permanent disability. Claimant argues that claimant’s skin grafts and scarring to the 
donor sites has resulted in impairment to the body as a whole, and he is entitled to 
industrial disability. Defendants argue that claimant’s injury is limited to the left hand, 
and he is only entitled to Dr. Wampler’s functional impairment rating. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after-effects or 
compensatory change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole. Such 
impairment may in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability. It is the 
anatomical situs of the permanent injury or impairment that determines whether the 
schedules in section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) are applied. Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 
834 (Iowa 1986); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey 
v. Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 
222 Iowa 272, 268 N.W. 598 (1936). 
Claimant argues that Dr. Wampler’s opinion should be disregarded because he 
did not examine or rate claimant’s skin grafts, his opinion is not reliable as he is “an 
insurance company minion,” and he did not use “the guidelines,” presumably meaning 
the AMA Guides, in proving his rating. (Cl. Brief, pp. 5-6) He further argues that Dr. 
Bansal’s opinion is more reliable as he did examine claimant’s skin grafts, asked 
questions about sensitivity to heat and cold, and referenced Table 8-2 of the guides in 
providing his rating. 
First, as noted above, Dr. Wampler’s report makes clear that he did, in fact, 
examine claimant’s skin graft, as well as the donor sites “on the thighs and right 
forearm.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) He made specific findings in his report regarding those 
areas, and found all scars from the donor sites to be benign, and therefore, specifically 
stated there was no impairment. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 3, 5) Additionally, he did provide an 
impairment rating related to the skin graft on claimant’s hand, based on loss of 
sensation to the dorsum. (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) He provided, in great detail, the steps he 
took using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, to reach both the 40 percent rating for loss of 
multiple finger mobility, and the one percent for the sensory loss. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 4-5) 
Additionally, he provided color photographs of claimant’s hand, as recommended by the 
AMA Guides when rating scars and skin grafts. See AMA Guides, p. 176. 
With respect to claimant’s argument that Dr. Wampler is an “insurance company 
minion” and his rating cannot be trusted, there is no evidence in this case that Dr. 
Wampler provided anything other than his medical opinion regarding claimant’s 
permanent functional impairment based on the medical records, his physical 
examination of claimant, and the AMA Guides. The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The expert 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey 
v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Dr. Wampler’s prior medical opinions are not a part 
of the record in this case, and the two cases cited in claimant’s brief involve his opinions 
regarding causation, not impairment. In short, claimant’s argument that Dr. Wampler is 
biased toward defendants in this case based on his past opinions in unrelated cases is 
not convincing. 
Claimant’s argument is further undermined by the fact that Dr. Bansal agreed 
with Dr. Wampler’s impairment rating as it related to the loss of motion in multiple 
fingers. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) Presumably, Dr. Bansal had little other choice as he did not 
perform his own physical examination of claimant’s hand. As for the remainder of Dr. 
Bansal’s opinion, I do not find it more reliable than Dr. Wampler’s opinion. While he may 
have looked at claimant’s scars via videoconference, he did not provide any information 
regarding dryness, skin or scar breakdown, hypertrophic changes, or 
hyperpigmentation, as Dr. Wampler provided. Further, he did not provide a detailed 
description or photographs of the full thickness skin graft across the dorsum of 
claimant’s hand, as Dr. Wampler provided. He did not measure claimant’s circulation or 
skin temperature, perform sensory testing, or make any objective findings whatsoever. 
The entire basis for Dr. Bansal’s 5 percent rating for the skin is that claimant’s “grafted 
burn site is sensitive to heat and sunlight and requires moisturizers and sunscreens,” 
which is contrary to information claimant provided to other medical providers. When 
looking at the record as a whole, Dr. Wampler’s opinion is supported by the greater 
weight of evidence, and more reliably based on his more thorough and complete in-
person physical examination. 
Claimant essentially argues that because Dr. Bansal’s rating to the skin is a 
rating to the body as a whole, his injury should be compensated industrially. Having 
rejected Dr. Bansal’s 5 percent skin rating, claimant’s position has no merit. However, 
even if Dr. Bansal’s skin rating were accepted, that alone would not make claimant’s 
injury extend to the body as a whole. First, a finding of impairment to the body as a 
whole found by a medical evaluator does not equate to industrial disability. Dikutole v. 
Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 5054404 (App. May 2018) (citing Smith v. Aramark, File No. 
1199677 (App. April 2001)). Impairment and disability are not synonymous. Id.  
Additionally, the fact that the skin covers the entire body does not render an 
injury to the skin of a scheduled member an injury to the body as a whole. Id. (citing 
Topete v. Global Food Processing, File No. 1167910 (Arb. June 1999)). Rather, an 
injury to the skin that is limited to one scheduled member is confined to and 
compensated as a scheduled member loss. Id. (citing Second Injury Fund v. Armstrong, 
801 N.W.2d 628 (Iowa App. 2011) (Table of Unpublished Decisions); see also Gacek v. 
Second Injury Fund, File No. 5030637 (Arb. Feb. 2011); Singleton v. Newton 
Correctional Facility, File No. 5041430 (Arb. Oct. 2013); Bryan v. Kiowa Line Builders, 
Inc., File No. 5062947 (Arb. March 2018); Deffenbaugh v. 1st Interiors, Inc., File No. 
5047330 (Arb. April 2018)).  

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
Similar to the cases cited above, in this case, claimant’s burn and graft is specific 
to his left hand. The injury did not result in a skin disorder that spreads about the body 
such as dermatitis or psoriasis. Additionally, the scarring at the donor sites was not 
rated by any physician, as even Dr. Bansal’s whole body rating was limited to “the 
grafted burn site” on claimant’s left hand. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) Claimant makes no allegation 
that the scars on his thighs and forearm where the skin grafts were taken cause him any 
ongoing issues or disability. The mere fact that skin grafting was performed, or that a 
whole person impairment rating was rendered, does not convert the case from a 
scheduled member injury to be compensated pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(l) 
into an unscheduled injury to be compensated pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v). 
The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is 
entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is "limited to 
the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf 
Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 
1998).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
This agency has adopted The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for 
determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial 
disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4. 
As noted above, I found Dr. Wampler’s opinion regarding permanent functional 
impairment to be more credible than that of Dr. Bansal. As such, I found claimant 
sustained a 41 percent impairment to his left hand. Under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(l), a hand is compensated based on the proportional loss relative to 190 weeks 
of benefits. I conclude that 41 percent of 190 weeks is equal to 77.9 weeks of benefits. 
Therefore, claimant is entitled to 77.9 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. 
 

LORADITCH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant seventy-seven and nine-tenths (77.9) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits, commencing August 25, 2021, at the stipulated 
rate of five hundred fifty-two and 72/100 dollars ($552.72). 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
Signed and filed this ____10th ___ day of August, 2022. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Al Sturgeon (via WCES) 
Meredith Ashley (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been grante d, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
