Case Number: 19700131.01
Case Title:  MCFARLAND, PATRICK V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      McFarland Patrick-19700131.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PATRICK MCFARLAND, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                      File No. 19700131.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS, 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :                Head Note Nos.:  1803, 1803.1 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Patrick McFarland, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendant John Deere Waterloo Works, a self-insured 
employer.  The hearing occurred before the undersigned on June 15, 2020. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  In the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision.  The parties are bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of: Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1, and 3 through 6, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through F.  Claimant testified on his own 
behalf.  No other witnesses were called to testify.  The evidentiary record closed on 
June 15, 2020, and the case was considered fully submitted upon submission of post-
hearing briefs on July 31, 2020. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary partial disability benefits (TPD) from 
October 2, 2017, through December 17, 2017; 
2. Whether defendant is entitled to credit for overpayment of temporary disability 
benefits in the amount of $756.04; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-24  09:42:48     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 2 
 
 
3. Whether the claimant’s stipulated September 28, 2017, work injury should be 
compensated with permanent disability benefits as a scheduled member 
injury to the shoulder, or as an unscheduled injury; 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability, if any; and 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits for defendant’s delay in 
paying temporary disability benefits. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Patrick McFarland was born on November 29, 1968, making him 55 years old as 
of the date of the evidentiary hearing.  (Hearing Transcript, page 13)  Mr. McFarland 
resides in LaPorte City, Iowa.  (Exhibit B, Deposition Transcript, p. 3)  He is a high 
school graduate, with one semester’s worth of classes at Hawkeye Community College.  
(Hr. Tr., p. 13) 
Claimant was performing an assembly job at John Deere Waterloo Works on 
September 28, 2017.  (Ex. B, Depo. Tr., p. 5)  Mr. McFarland experienced an acute 
onset of pain in his shoulder when he attempted to grab a falling tractor mirror with his 
left upper extremity.  (Hr. Tr., p. 13)  Mr. McFarland was attempting to hang the mirror 
on the outside of the cab with a short pin when the mirror slipped off the pin.  Id.  
Claimant reported the injury to his supervisor and presented to John Deere’s medical 
clinic.  (Hr. Tr., p. 14)  Shelli Grapp, ARNP ordered an x-ray and MRI of the left 
shoulder, and restricted claimant to limited use of the left hand, no lifting or pushing over 
five pounds, and no work above shoulder height.  (JE2, p. 3) 
While on light duty, claimant served as an advisor to the individuals assigned to 
perform his job while he was laid up.  (See Hr. Tr., p. 14)  According to claimant, his 
light duty position mostly consisted of him sitting in a break room unless and until 
someone had a question for him.  (See Hr. Tr., p. 14) 
The MRI, dated October 2, 2017, revealed an extensive SLAP tear and some 
degenerative chondral thinning of the glenohumeral joint.  (JE4, p. 47)   
Thomas Gorsche, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon, evaluated claimant’s left 
shoulder on October 19, 2017.  (JE5, p. 50)  After reviewing the results of the MRI, Dr. 
Gorsche recommended and administered a cortisone injection into the subacromial 
space of claimant’s left shoulder.  (JE5, p. 51)  When injections and physical therapy 
failed to alleviate claimant’s symptoms, Dr. Gorsche reluctantly provided claimant with 
the option to pursue surgical intervention.  The operative notes indicate that Dr. 
Gorsche performed a debridement, subacromial decompression, and manipulation of 
claimant’s left shoulder on December 19, 2017.  (JE4, pp. 48-49)   

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 3 
 
 
Postoperatively, claimant was provided a sling and scheduled for physical 
therapy.  Unfortunately, claimant’s condition did not progress as well as he had hoped 
following surgery and he eventually required manipulation under anesthesia on April 10, 
2018.  (JE5, p. 67)  After claimant had recovered from the April 10, 2018, manipulation, 
Dr. Gorsche placed claimant at maximum medical improvement and assigned 9 percent 
impairment to the left upper extremity as a result of the September 28, 2017, work 
injury.  (See Ex. D, p. 1)  Dr. Gorsche recommended permanent restrictions of no 
overhead lifting on the left side greater than 12 pounds.  (JE5, p. 68)  It should be noted 
that Dr. Gorsche wrote, “Permanent restriction No overhead lifting [greater than] 12 #s 
[left] side” on claimant’s August 27, 2018 work release, but listed “20 pounds” in his 
August 31, 2018, opinion letter to defendant.  (Compare JE5, p. 68 with Ex. D, p. 1) 
Sarvenaz Jabbari, M.D., reviewed Dr. Gorsche’s final report on September 28, 
2018.  (JE2, p. 10)  Dr. Jabbari agreed with the impairment rating and permanent 
restrictions assigned to claimant by Dr. Gorsche; however, as noted above, there 
appears to be some confusion as to what restrictions were actually assigned by Dr. 
Gorsche.  In her notes, Dr. Jabbari provides that claimant, “was given permanent 
restrictions of no overhead lifting on the left side greater than 20 pounds.”  Id.  As 
previously mentioned, Dr. Gorsche also restricted claimant to no overhead lifting on the 
left side greater than 12 pounds.  (JE5, p. 68) 
Mr. McFarland returned to work on or about September 13, 2018.  (See JE5, p. 
69)  He was unable to return to the position he held prior to the date of injury due to his 
permanent restrictions.  (Hr. Tr., p. 17)  Unfortunately, Mr. McFarland was also unable 
to tolerate his new position, which required him to hold a light at an elevated position 
with his left hand, while he fastened bolts with his right hand.  (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  Claimant 
was taken off work and referred back to Dr. Gorsche on October 10, 2018.   
After obtaining an updated MRI of the left shoulder, Dr. Gorsche revised 
claimant’s permanent restrictions.  Dr. Gorsche restricted claimant from performing any 
overhead lifting whatsoever.  (JE5, p. 72)  Dr. Gorsche did not change his opinion 
regarding claimant’s maximum medical improvement (MMI) date or permanent 
impairment rating.  Id. 
John Deere was able to accommodate claimant’s new restrictions.  (Hr. Tr., p. 
19)  However, claimant has since moved to yet another position within the John Deere 
plant.  He continues in this role, today.  Id.   
After being released by Dr. Gorsche, claimant sought an independent medical 
examination (IME), performed by Arnold Delbridge, M.D., on May 6, 2019. (Ex. 1)  Dr. 
Delbridge placed claimant at MMI as of November 1, 2018.  (Ex. 1, p. 3)  He assigned 
12 percent impairment to the left upper extremity due to claimant’s loss of range of 
motion, and endorsed the restrictions assigned by Dr. Gorsche.  (Ex. 1, pp. 4-5) 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 4 
 
 
Dr. Delbridge was asked to address several questions regarding injuries to the 
shoulder area.  (See Ex. 1, p. 5)  Dr. Delbridge opined that from a medical perspective, 
the shoulder is specified as anything distal to the glenohumeral joint.  He added, 
“Something that is not totally shoulder is something that arises or is affected proximal to 
the shoulder joint.”  (Ex. 1, p. 5)  Dr. Delbridge noted that claimant’s injury and surgery 
involved structures that were proximal to the glenohumeral joint, or what he considers 
the shoulder.  Id.  Dr. Delbridge opined it would be appropriate to convert the upper 
extremity rating to a whole person impairment rating in this case.  (Ex. 1, p. 6)   
Outside of the May 6, 2019, IME with Dr. Delbridge, claimant has not presented 
for medical treatment related to his left shoulder since November 1, 2018.  (Ex. B, pp. 8-
9)  Claimant takes no prescription medications for his left shoulder injury; however, he 
continues to take over-the-counter medications such as Tylenol and ibuprofen.  (See 
JE2, pp. 14-15)  Since being released to return to work, claimant has engaged in 
several hobbies and activities, including hunting, camping, and woodworking.  (Ex. B, 
pp. 14-15) 
With respect to the competing expert opinions, I accept Dr. Delbridge’s 
impairment rating as the most convincing and credible.  He appears to have had access 
to all relevant medical records.  Dr. Delbridge provided the specific measurements he 
used in calculating claimant’s impairment rating.  Dr. Gorsche, on the other hand, simply 
provided which figures in the AMA Guides were used to reach his nine percent rating.  
Since claimant’s impairment rating was calculated according to his range of motion, I do 
not find it particularly relevant that Dr. Gorsche did not provide an updated impairment 
rating following a change in claimant’s permanent restrictions.  I accept Dr. Delbridge’s 
impairment rating and find that Mr. McFarland sustained a permanent functional 
impairment rating equivalent to 12 percent of the left upper extremity as a result of his 
stipulated work injury. 
I find Dr. Gorsche’s permanent restrictions, which were endorsed by Dr. 
Delbridge, to be reasonable and appropriate.  I therefore accept the restrictions 
assigned to claimant by Dr. Gorsche.   
Mr. McFarland seeks an award of additional TPD and penalty benefits.  These 
issues will be addressed in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
As an initial matter, many of the disputes in this case arise out of the legislature’s 
2017 amendments to Iowa Code section 85.34.  As a result, a number of the 
determinations turn on this agency’s interpretation of the legislative changes.  I 
recognize the Iowa Supreme Court has stated that this agency lacks the authority to 
interpret workers’ compensation statutes.  See e.g., Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, 
LLC, 878 N.W.2d 759, 770 (Iowa 2016).  Practically speaking, however, the agency acts 
as the front-line authority in interpreting statutory workers’ compensation provisions, 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 5 
 
 
particularly when statutory amendments are enacted.  Thus, while the appellate courts 
will have the final say, statutory interpretation by this agency is inevitable.   
The question to be determined in this case is whether claimant’s injury 
constitutes a “shoulder” injury under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) or an unscheduled 
injury to the body as a whole under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Our workers' compensation statute provides compensation for permanent partial 
disability (PPD) for injuries to specific parts of the body pursuant to an established 
schedule.  See Iowa Code § 85.34(2) (1995); Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 544 
N.W.2d 258, 269 (Iowa 1995).  This schedule sets the compensation at a percentage of 
a workers' average weekly earnings over a certain number of weeks based on the 
location of the injury.  Id.  The purpose of scheduling injuries is to provide certainty of 
compensation after a specific injury has been sustained by a worker and to avoid 
controversies.  Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 404, 407 (Iowa 1994).  It 
has long been understood that an injury must be compensated as a scheduled injury if 
the legislature saw fit to list the injured body part in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u).  
See Williams v. Larsen Construction Co., 125 N.W.2d 248 (Iowa 1963).  A permanent 
partial disability to an area of the body not identified in the schedule is compensated as 
an injury to the body as a whole.  Nelson, 544 N.W.2d at 269.  This disability is 
compensated by industrial disability, taking into account the loss of earning capacity.  
Gilleland, 524 N.W.2d at 407.  The amount of compensation for an unscheduled injury 
is often much greater than for a scheduled injury.   
The Iowa Legislature enacted significant amendments to the Iowa workers' 
compensation laws, which took effect July 1, 2017.  Of particular relevance to this case, 
the Iowa Legislature modified section 85.34 in 2017 by adding the shoulder to the list of 
scheduled members.  The new subsection states, in its entirety: “For the loss of a 
shoulder, weekly compensation during four hundred weeks.”  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n).  
The legislature did not include a statement of the general assembly’s legislative intent in 
adopting the amendments to Iowa Code section 85.34. 
Claimant asserts that his injury extends beyond the left shoulder and into the 
body as a whole.  Specifically, claimant argues that the affected areas from this injury 
are proximal to the glenohumeral joint and, as such, the injury should be determined to 
be an unscheduled injury compensated with industrial disability pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v) (2017).   
First, claimant asserts that the legislature is presumed to know and intend the 
agency’s previous definition of “shoulder.”  Simbro v. Delong’s Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 
886, 889 (Iowa 1983).  More specifically, claimant asserts the agency defined “shoulder” 
when it said, “[t]he wrist is the joint between the arm and the hand just as a shoulder is 
the joint between the arm and the trunk” in Miranda v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 
5008521 (App. Aug. 2, 2005).  Claimant understands this sentence to mean the 
“shoulder” is the glenohumeral joint.   

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 6 
 
 
I do not find claimant’s argument convincing.  In a recent appeal decision, the 
commissioner determined that the term “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) is not 
limited to the glenohumeral joint.  Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883 (App. 
Dec. Sept. 29, 2020). 
Second, claimant asserts the term “shoulder” is otherwise ambiguous, and 
requires a liberal interpretation in favor of the injured worker.  Again, I do not find this 
argument convincing.  In Deng, this agency acknowledged that the legislature’s use of 
the generic term “shoulder” in section 85.34(2)(n) has resulted in an ambiguity in the 
statute.  This agency looked to the study bills that preceded the senate file, and later the 
house file, that ultimately became law and found the original proposal was to make the 
shoulder joint and everything on the “arm side” of the joint compensable as an arm 
under section 85.34(2)(m).  This proposal, however, was not carried over into the 
version of the bill that was eventually signed by the governor to become law.  Instead, 
on March 20, 2017, amendment S-3172 was adopted, which struck the changes to 
subsection (m) and instead created an additional subsection adding shoulder to the list 
of scheduled member injuries.  These changes in amendment S-3172 were ultimately 
included in the version of the bill (House File 518) that was sent to the governor and 
signed into law.  H.F. 518, 87th G.A. § 7(2017).  Such an amendment was significant, as 
it reflected the legislature’s consideration, but ultimate rejection, of adding the shoulder 
joint to the existing definition of an arm.  It also suggests there is an intentional 
distinction between shoulder and shoulder joint.  Had the legislature intended to limit 
“shoulder” to the joint, they could have maintained the amendments in the study bills 
that would have made the shoulder joint part of the schedule as an “arm” under 
subsection (m), or they could have added the word “joint” in subsection (n). 
Claimant further asserts that – prior to the Deng appeal decision – the agency 
had construed the term “shoulder” narrowly as meaning only the glenohumeral joint.  
(See Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270 (Arb. Feb. 5, 2020); Smidt v. 
JKB Restaurants, LC, File No. 5067766 (Arb. May 6, 2020)).  The prior agency 
decisions concluded that the legislature, “should have been aware that anatomic parts 
proximal to the specified scheduled member have been determined to be compensable 
to the more proximal body part or body as a whole.”   
In Deng, this agency reached the conclusion that prior cases involving the 
“proximal to” analysis are not directly comparable to the scenario in this case.  I agree.  
In those cases, the injuries were to joints that were not specifically listed as a scheduled 
member, and the agency and courts were tasked with determining which member those 
joints “belonged to” under section 85.34(2).  What developed was a fairly 
straightforward and bright line rule of looking to the body part proximal to the joint to 
classify the unlisted injury.  Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812 (Iowa 2008).  In 
this case, claimant's injury involves a joint that is now specifically listed as a scheduled 
member in section 85.34(2).  It cannot be assumed the legislature intended or even 
expected that the bright line “proximal” rule would be applied to section 85.34(2)(n).  
Given the differences between the “new” shoulder cases and past cases in which the 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 7 
 
 
agency and courts looked to the proximal body part to classify injuries, the 
commissioner did not find past holdings to be decidedly illustrative of the legislature’s 
intent when drafting section 85.34(2)(n).  Again, I agree with the commissioner’s 
analysis.   
In Deng, it was determined that the rotator cuff is essential to the function of the 
glenohumeral joint. 
Given the entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that 
make up the rotator cuff, including the infraspinatus, and the importance of 
the rotator cuff to the function of the joint, I find the muscles that make 
up the rotator cuff are included within the definition of “shoulder” 
under section 85.34(2)(n). 
Deng, at 11 (Emphasis added).  The muscles that make up the rotator cuff include the 
supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis.  In the matter at hand, Dr. 
Delbridge provided that claimant has, “considerable atrophy of the supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus, teres minor, and deltoid muscles” as well as a Type I SLAP tear.  (See 
Ex. 1, p. 5)  Given that three of the four muscles discussed by Dr. Delbridge are part of 
the rotator cuff, it naturally follows that these muscles are included within the definition 
of “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n). See Deng, at 11.  This leaves the undersigned 
with determining whether injuries to the deltoid muscles and the labrum are also 
included in the definition of “shoulder.”   
It was unnecessary to analyze whether the labrum was included within the 
definition of “shoulder” in Deng, as the claimant’s attorney in Deng acknowledged that 
the labrum is located entirely within the glenohumeral joint space and should therefore 
be compensated under section 85.34(2)(n).  Claimant’s only argument with respect to 
the SLAP tear being classified as an unscheduled injury, is that it is proximal to the joint 
itself.  The undersigned has already rejected the argument that areas proximal to the 
glenohumeral joint are considered injuries to the body as a whole.  Moreover, in his IME 
report, Dr. Delbridge provides that a SLAP tear is on the glenoid portion of the shoulder 
proximal to the joint.  (Ex. 1, p. 5)  While this is true, a SLAP tear is a tear at the 
glenohumeral joint.  The glenohumeral joint is the ball and the socket.  (Emphasis 
added)  An injury to the glenohumeral joint cannot be proximal or distal to the 
glenohumeral joint.  Therefore, even if an appellate court determines that areas 
proximal to the glenohumeral joint are not injuries to the shoulder, claimant’s SLAP tear 
would still fall under claimant’s proposed definition of “shoulder” under section 
85.34(2)(n).   
This leaves the deltoid muscle.  This agency has previously found that, “the 
deltoid muscle is part of the muscle complex which operates the shoulder joint.”  Farmer 
v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, File No. 5021559 (App. Nov. 20, 2008)  The “muscle 
complex” described by the commissioner in Farmer likely includes the biceps, triceps, 
as well as the rotator cuff muscles, all of which are attached to the glenohumeral joint 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 8 
 
 
and surrounding structures by tendons.  Claimant presents no evidence that he 
sustained a permanent injury to the deltoid muscle.  Moreover, claimant presents no 
arguments specific to the deltoid muscle for the undersigned to consider.  As such, I find 
claimant has failed to carry his burden of proving his injuries extend into the body as a 
whole.  
Claimant’s injury is to the shoulder.  Such an injury is compensated as a 
scheduled member pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n).  In the event the 
claimant believes an inequity exists in the current statutory scheme, it is a matter for the 
legislature to consider and not this agency.  The place to make new legislation, or 
address unwanted consequences of old legislation, lies in the state legislature.  When it 
comes to statutory interpretation, this agency’s role is limited to applying the law’s 
demands as faithfully as we can in the cases that come before us. 
Having determined claimant's injuries must be compensated as a “shoulder” 
under section 85.34(2)(n), the next question is the extent of his permanent disability.   
I found Dr. Delbridge’s impairment rating to be the most convincing and accurate 
in this matter.  I accepted Dr. Delbridge’s impairment rating as accurate.  I found 
claimant sustained 12 percent impairment to the left upper extremity as a result of his 
injury.  For a single scheduled member injury, this agency has historically not utilized a 
whole person impairment rating.  Thus, I conclude it is appropriate to apply the upper 
extremity impairment rating for this shoulder injury.  Permanent partial disability 
compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based on a maximum of 400 weeks.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2)(n).  Having adopted Dr. Delbridge’s 12 percent impairment rating, I 
conclude claimant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to 
receive 48 weeks of PPD benefits. 
The next issue to be addressed is claimant’s alleged entitlement to additional 
temporary benefits.   
Claimant asserts he is entitled to additional temporary partial disability (TPD) 
benefits.  More specifically, claimant asserts he is entitled to additional TPD benefits 
from October 30, 2017 to November 5, 2017, and from December 11, 2017 through 
December 17, 2017.   
Prior to the evidentiary hearing, defendant paid claimant TPD in the amount of 
$1,112.42.  Defendant asserts this amount is the extent of their liability for TPD benefits.  
(Defendant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 7)  Defendant also paid $122.25 in interest, and 
$278.10, representative of a 25 percent penalty.   
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 9 
 
 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability. 
The formula for computing temporary partial disability benefits is two-thirds of the 
difference between the employee's weekly earnings at the time of injury and the 
employee's actual gross weekly income from employment during the period of 
temporary partial disability. 
For the wages paid on November 10, 2017, claimant’s calculation shows gross 
pay of $664.47, while defendant’s exhibit shows gross pay of $1,735.49.  (Ex. 5, p. 13; 
Ex. F, p. 1).  According to claimant, the money he received for this pay period included 
compensation for work performed prior to that pay period and therefore should not be 
included in defendant’s TPD calculation. 
The wage summary shows that the wages paid on November 10, 2017, included 
payments for “BAAOT” ($9.85), “Base Adjust Allowance” ($493.38), and “CIPP 
Reserve” ($577.79).  (Ex. 5, p. 15).  Claimant asserts these amounts were not 
compensation for work he performed during the period of October 30, 2017, to 
November 5, 2017.  He asserts these amounts are reserve payouts for previously 
completed periods under defendant’s CIPP plan.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 21-23) 
I do not find claimant’s argument convincing.  The Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner issued a Declaratory Order Regarding Profit Sharing Bonus and 
Continuous Improvement Pay Plan on July 12, 2017.  The order states, “The weekly 
CIPP earnings should not be included in gross earnings and the quarterly CIPP 
payment should be included in gross earnings when determining an employee's weekly 
rate for workers' compensation benefits.”  The order also provides that the “most recent 
quarterly CIPP payment should be used in calculating the employee's gross earnings 
when determining the rate.”  In the same Declaratory Order, the commissioner found 
that John Deere had not established that the quarterly CIPP payments are retroactive 
pay.  Similarly, I find that claimant has failed to establish the BAAOT, Base Adjust 
Allowance, and CIPP Reserve are retroactive payments.  If this was a question 
regarding claimant’s average weekly wage, claimant would undoubtedly assert the 
quarterly CIPP payments were to be included as gross earnings.  I see no reason to 
exclude the same from defendant’s TPD calculation.   
The wage summary provides wages paid on December 22, 2017, included 
payment for “Holiday” pay ($332.48) and “Shutdown” pay ($645.91).  (Ex. 5, p. 16).  
Claimant asserts that these amounts were compensation for pay periods subsequent to 
the December 22, 2017, pay period and should be excluded from defendant’s TPD 
calculation.  Claimant testified that defendant issues holiday and shutdown pay the 
week before the holiday actually occurs.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24)  Again, claimant is 
asserting that these payments should not be included in defendant’s TPD calculation.   

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 10 
 
 
“Gross earnings” means recurring payments by the employer to the employee for 
employment, before any authorized or lawfully required deduction or withholding of 
funds by the employer, excluding irregular bonuses, retroactive pay, overtime, penalty 
pay, reimbursement of expenses, expense allowances, and the employer's contribution 
for welfare benefits.  It cannot be said that either the Holiday Pay or Shutdown pay was 
retroactive pay.  I find the Holiday Pay and Shutdown Pay in this instance are not 
excluded from gross earnings under Iowa Code section 85.61(3).   
Therefore, I accept the defendant’s TPD calculations and find claimant is not 
entitled to additional TPD benefits from October 30, 2017 to November 5, 2017, and 
December 11, 2017 through December 17, 2017. 
The next issue to be decided is whether defendant is entitled to a credit for its 
overpayment of temporary total disability benefits.  For injuries occurring on or after July 
1, 2017, an employer can claim a credit for excess payments of temporary total 
disability, healing period, or temporary partial disability benefits against any future 
weekly benefits due for any injury to that employee.  
Defendant paid TTD benefits to claimant in the amount of $660.10 per week.  
(Ex. C)  Claimant’s workers’ compensation rate is $641.66.  Between December 19, 
2017, and November 1, 2018, defendant paid claimant $29,630.74 in temporary 
benefits.  Defendant asserts claimant should have only received $28,874.70, a 
difference of $756.04.  Aside from asserting he is entitled to additional TPD benefits, 
claimant makes no other arguments regarding the above credit.  I find defendant is 
entitled to a credit of $756.04 against any future weekly benefits due for any injury to 
claimant.   
Lastly, claimant asserts he is entitled to penalty benefits for defendant’s delay in 
paying TPD benefits.  Additionally, claimant asserts he is entitled to penalty benefits for 
defendant’s failure to investigate the TPD issue in a timely manner.  Prior to the 
evidentiary hearing, defendant paid claimant TPD in the amount of $1,112.42.  
Defendant also volunteered $278.10 in penalty benefits for their delay.  From this 
information, it appears defendant concedes the issue of whether penalty, in general, is 
appropriate in this case.   
Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(a) provides: 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 11 
 
 
In Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and Robbennolt 
v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse. A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee's entitlement to benefits. A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  
Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 (Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if 
substantial evidence exists which would support a finding favorable to the employer.  
Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 254.  The factors to be 
considered in determining the amount of the penalty include the length of the delay, the 
number of delays, the information available to the employer and the employer's past 
record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
Claimant’s entitlement to TPD benefits had fully accrued by December 17, 2017.  
Defendant did not pay TPD benefits until approximately two and one-half years later.  
Claimant has established a delay in the payment of benefits as required by section 
86.13(4).   
Pursuant to section 86.13(4)(b)(2), the burden therefore shifts to defendant to 
establish a reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delay.  Section 86.13(4)(c) 
sets forth the elements defendant must satisfy in order to establish the existence of a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delay. 
In its post-hearing brief, defendant asserts claimant is not entitled to any 
additional penalty benefits.  Defendant offers no other viable argument with respect to 
the delay.  Defendant has failed to establish the existence of a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for its delay.  As such, penalty benefits are warranted on this basis.  
Penalty benefits are applicable for the TPD benefits in question at the rate of 50 percent 
given the length of delay, the lack of investigation, and defendant’s history regarding 
penalty benefits.  Fifty (50) percent of $1,112.42 is $556.21.  Prior to the evidentiary 
hearing, defendant paid $278.10 in penalty benefits.  Defendant shall pay claimant an 
additional $278.10 in penalty benefits. 

MCFARLAND V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 12 
 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant shall pay claimant forty-eight (48) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on November 1, 2018.  All weekly benefits shall be paid 
at the stipulated rate of six hundred forty-one and 66/100 dollars ($641.66). 
All accrued weekly benefits shall be paid in lump sum with interest pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant shall pay claimant two hundred seventy-eight and 10/100 dollars 
($278.10) in penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13.  
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this        24th       day of November, 2020. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin R. Roth (via WCES) 
James F. Kalkhoff (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
