Case Number: 20008643.01
Case Title:  MYERS, THOMAS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Myers Thomas-20008643.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
THOMAS MYERS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 20008643.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
TECHNOLOGY INSURANCE  
  :    Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1200, 1402.30, 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
1600, 1601, 1602, 1801, 1802, 
 
 
  :  
 
1803, 1804, 1806, 2206, 2502 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Thomas Myers, filed a petition for arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Shinn Construction, Inc., employer, and Technology 
Insurance Company, insurer, both as defendants.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on November 3, 2021, via Court Call, and considered fully submitted 
on December 2, 2022 upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record was left open to allow statements and/or depositions from witnesses 
Alicia Loman and Ryan Bates.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-11, claimant’s exhibits 1-15, and 
defendants exhibits A-M along with the testimony of the claimant, Sandy Carlson, 
Alesha Nikky Maddison, and Michael Church.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury on July 20, 2020, which arose out of 
and in the course of employment; 
2. Whether claimant’s claim is barred because of the affirmative defense of 
intentional effort to injure oneself under Iowa Code section 85.16; 
3. Whether claimant’s claim is barred because of the affirmative defense of 
intoxication under Iowa Code section 85.16(2);  
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Apr-29  11:04:30     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability and, if so, the 
extent; 
5. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and, if so; 
6. The appropriate commencement date of permanent disability benefits; 
7. Whether the alleged disability is a scheduled member disability or an 
unscheduled disability; 
8. The extent of claimant’s scheduled member/industrial disability; 
9. Whether there is a causal connection between claimant’s injury and the 
medical expenses claimed by claimant; 
10. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME under Iowa Code 
section 85.39;  
11. Whether defendants are entitled to a reimbursement of medical expenses;  
12. Whether defendants are entitled to apportionment for successive disabilities 
and/or a credit pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(7); 
13. Whether defendants are entitled to an order under Iowa Code section 85.21 
and/or Iowa Code section 85.22 for reimbursement or subrogation;  
14. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits;  
15. And costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties stipulate claimant sustained an injury on July 20, 2020, and that he 
was an employee at the time of that injury.  
Following the July 20, 2020, injury, claimant was off work from July 20, 2020, 
through August 19, 2021, the period of time for which claimant seeks temporary total 
disability benefits.  
At the time of the injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $1,200.00 per week. He 
was married and entitled to two exemptions. Based on the foregoing the parties believe 
the weekly benefit rate to be $771.91. 
The parties agree that the claimant was not paid any benefits prior to the hearing 
including medical expenses.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant dropped out of high school after the ninth grade and entered the labor 
force. He began working for a bowling alley in his local town, moved onto construction 
work and eventually settled into a position as a concrete laborer. He worked in concrete 
until approximately 2004 to 2005 when he began work as an equipment operator.  

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 3 
From the age of approximately 28 to the present time, claimant worked as a truck 
driver in some fashion. He obtained his first chauffeur’s license in 1985. He has worked 
for Ben Shinn Trucking or Shinn Construction for approximately 15 years. 
For approximately 12 to 14 weeks prior to July 20, 2020, claimant’s truck sat in 
his driveway. His wife had suffered a major stroke and he cared for her. He also 
underwent a knee replacement surgery. At one point during his recuperation period, 
claimant served as a dispatcher for Shinn Construction.  
In 2014, claimant suffered from right sided low back and quadriceps weakness 
and pain. (JE1:1) MRIs later showed that he had large disc herniation at L2-3 and 
smaller herniation at L4-5. (JE 1:5) On April 3, 2014, claimant underwent 
decompression and discectomy surgery with Lynn M. Nelson, M.D. (JE 1:7) Claimant 
was found to be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) on July 22, 2014. (JE 1:11) At 
that time he had pain in his low back and weakness in his right quadriceps. (JE 1:11) He 
had difficulty climbing ladders and had concerns about being able to work full time. (JE 
1:11)  
The functional capacity evaluation (FCE) conducted in 2015 placed claimant in 
the light work category with restrictions of no lifting greater than 20 pounds from floor to 
waist and frequently lifting 10 pounds from floor to waist. (DE H:30-31)  
He was awarded 40 percent industrial disability as a result of his work injury. 
In January 2015 and then again in January 2017, claimant underwent injection in 
the left shoulder for impingement syndrome. (JE 2:24, 25) 
In 2019, claimant had complaints of bilateral knee pains.  David A. Vittetoe, M.D., 
found claimant was suffering from advanced degenerative disease, particularly in the 
right knee. (JE 1:16) Claimant had been using a walker at times (JE 1:14) In addition to 
his knee difficulties, he has a history of Charcot-Marie-Tooth and wore bilateral lower 
extremity AFOS. (JE 1:14) Claimant underwent right total knee replacement surgery on 
May 21, 2020. (JE 1:20) On July 17, 2020, claimant was seen by his surgery Thomas D. 
Dulaney, M.D., in follow up. (JE 1:23) “He is very pleased with the results of his total 
knee replacement,” Dr. Dulaney documented. “Tom is doing great. He will continue 
activities as tolerated. Any recurrent concerns, he will simply call. He is very comfortable 
with this plan.” (JE 1:23)  
Claimant has been on and off depression medication for approximately 10 years. 
He attributed this to the stress of life, working 90 hours a week and trying to keep the 
home fires burning.  
In summer of 2017, claimant underwent marriage counseling. (JE 3:48) The 
therapist noted that claimant was experiencing panic attacks, mood swings, grief and 
loss, anxiousness and worry, pessimism, irritability, lying and sadness. (JE 3:48) He 
had no history of mental hospital hospitalizations and no current or past self-harm 
ideation. He did have thoughts such as “as wishing he was dead out of distress, but has 
no plan or intention.” (JE 3:51) The therapist noted that claimant desired to reclaim his 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 4 
wife and marriage and that he was a hard worker, a dedicated employee and strong 
leader. (JE 3:51)  
As he was recuperating from his surgery, claimant regularly took Oxycodone and 
then medical marijuana. Approximately four days prior to his return to work, he stopped 
taking narcotics and the marijuana so that his blood stream would be clean. However, 
there was THC in his system at the time of the collision. (JE 5:87) Claimant did not 
exhibit any signs of impairment or altered state according to Deputy Shadduck. (DE M 
p. 63)  
Based on claimant’s testimony that he ingested the marijuana gummy several 
days before the collision, the remnant result would not have intoxicating results. (CE 
1:22) Marijuana can be detected in a person for up to 3-5 days for an occasional user 
and up to 14 days for a chronic user or even up to 30-45 days for a chronic user who is 
a large person. (CE 1:22, 42)  
On the day of July 20, 2020, claimant planned to drive to the shop in Eddyville, 
find a belly dump trailer and then haul rock and sand to a highway project in Eastern 
Iowa on Highway 2. The shop in Eddyville is a Ben Shinn Trucking stop although 
claimant testified that the shop served both Ben Shinn Trucking and Shinn Construction 
vehicles.   
He had spoken to Troy DeJong, an employee of Ben Shinn Trucking, about his 
work plans as well as Roger Shinn but not to Sandy Carlson at Shinn Construction. 
Roger Shinn is the president for Shinn Construction and Ben Shinn Trucking.  
At home with him on the morning of July 20, 2020, were his sister and daughter. 
The sister, Martha, had moved into to help watch claimant’s wife while he returned to 
work. His daughter, Alesha “Nikky” Maddison, lived close by.  
In preparation for his work plans, claimant left the house and climbed into his 
2015 Peterbilt 389. He started the engine, performed his pre check, and began to back 
out of his property when the brakes locked up. He attempted to work the breaks by 
going from first gear to reverse gear several times. When that did not work, he got out of 
the truck and thumped on them with a hammer. That maneuver was unsuccessful so he 
returned to the driver’s seat and worked the brakes again until they released. He did not 
inform his employer that his brakes were not working that morning.  
A home health aide, Alicia Loman, was present at the time waiting to enter the 
driveway. Ms. Loman had begun providing care for claimant’s wife shortly before July 
20, 2020. (JE P:61) She has no relationship with the claimant or claimant’s family and 
no longer provides care to Ms. Myers. She has never spoken with claimant prior to the 
deposition nor with claimant’s attorney. She is acquainted with claimant’s daughter, Ms. 
Maddison, who is Ms. Loman’s hair stylist.  
She testified that when she pulled into the claimant’s driveway, claimant was in 
his vehicle attempting to back out. He spent five to ten minutes trying to back out and 
was getting in and out of his semi-truck at least three times. She observed him working 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 5 
on his brakes while he was out of the semi-truck. She believed that he was working on 
the brakes due to the brake lights coming on while he was in the truck. She also 
observed the semi-truck lurch. It would jerk, then stop, and repeat that sequence.   
Ms. Madison also testified that she saw her dad the morning of July 20, 2020. 
She described him as “the happiest I had seen him in a while. My dad loves to work. So 
he was very excited about a sense of normalcy, being able to go and work again since 
my mom’s stroke.” (Tr. 124) She also testified that he was walking well, as well as she 
had seen him walk her adult life. Claimant himself gave the same account. He testified 
he was excited to return to work and that his knee replacement surgery was life 
changing for him. For the first time in a decade, he could walk around a grocery store 
with a cart and traverse a parking lot.  
Claimant testified that he drove along a gravel road, 165th Street, for 
approximately three and a half to four miles until he reached Wappello County Line 
Road, a paved roadway. From the intersection of 165th Street, Wappello County Line 
Road has a slight slope down and continues uphill to a stop sign where the road 
intersects with the highway. At the bottom of an incline and before the road intersects 
with the highway, there is a train track. Claimant has driven this route hundreds of times 
and is aware that trains run all day long.  
Claimant testified that he did not use his brakes at the stop sign. Instead, he 
would shift into first gear until he was barely rolling and possibly then use his engine 
brake (Jake Brake) to help slow the vehicle down. He testified that unless you are in a 
hurry, he would use the clutch to slow to a stop, and then turn left onto the highway, 
accelerating to highway speed. The speedometer was at 49-50 at the scene. (JE 8:216) 
Claimant’s memory then cuts out until he awakens from his coma in Des Moines 
17 days later. On July 20, 2020, Ms. Maddison shared via Facebook that her father’s 
brakes failed in his semi and he hit a train at a railroad crossing. (DE I:43) This is also 
what was relayed to the emergency services team.  (JE 4:58)  
Defendants argue that claimant was impaired because of his marijuana usage or, 
in the alternative, claimant accelerated, or, failed to break, into the train in an attempt to 
take his own life. 
In June or July 2020, claimant called to see if he could access his 401(K) and he 
transferred property to a revocable trust in June 2020. He also set up a living will in 
June 2020.   
Deputy Sheriff Christopher Shadduck was deposed on October 1, 2021. (DE 
M:56) He been part of law enforcement for over 23 years. (DE M:56, p. 4) He has 
limited educational experience as an accident investigator having undergone only basic 
accident investigation training at the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy but he has 
undertaken several hundred actual accident investigations. (DE M:56, p. 5)  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 6 
Deputy Shadduck described the scene as chaotic when he arrived. (DE M:56 p. 
8). According to his investigation, claimant’s semi did not stop and struck the side of an 
empty coal train. The semi was then drug quite a distance to the west of the 
intersection. (DE M:56, p. 10) Deputy Shadduck was not certain the speed at which 
claimant was going at the time of the collision. The speedometer showed 50 mph. (JE1 
8:216) 
Claimant was pinned inside the vehicle on the passenger side. When questioned 
by Deputy Shadduck, claimant maintained he did not remember what happened.  
The County-Line Road is usually highly traveled, particularly between 6:30 a.m. 
and 7:00 a.m. Deputy Shadduck was surprised that there was no one else on the road 
at that time. (DE M:56, p. 13)  
The day was clear with no visibility issues. The crossing arm was snapped off, 
lying on the ground to the left of the intersection. Someone, either Mr. Shinn or an office 
person, relayed to Deputy Shadduck that it was claimant’s first day back at work after a 
long period of being off.  
There were no skid marks on the roadway that indicated claimant braked prior to 
the collision. Deputy Shadduck testified that air pressure holds the calipers away from 
the brakes so that if there was a malfunction of the brakes and air pressure is lost, the 
brakes automatically engage. Based on his investigation, he concluded the driver, a/k/a 
the claimant, did not apply the regular brakes nor did he engage the emergency braking 
system. That stop switch was still in position after the collision.  While the engine brake 
would not have stopped the semi, it could have slowed the vehicle. Further downshifting 
could have slowed the vehicle. It was unknown how fast claimant was going at the time 
of the collision. Deputy Shadduck also concluded that the brakes were functional prior 
to the accident.  
Deputy Shadduck testified that Mr. Shinn relayed claimant was on his way to 
Eddyville to have the shop look over his vehicle. (DE M:56 p. 53) There was no damage 
to the seatbelt and no indication such as ligature marks that claimant was restrained at 
the time of the collision.  Claimant testified that he was “very good” about wearing his 
seatbelt.  
At the time of the collision, claimant’s vehicle was in the northbound lane. This 
lane was the appropriate lane for the path of his travel. He testified that it would be 
difficult to keep his vehicle on the road going downhill if he was not engaged in steering.  
Deputy Shadduck stated that Officer Davidson was an expert on certain types of 
inspections that Deputy Shadduck was not. (DE M: p. 55) Officer Michael Davidson was 
deposed on October 1, 2020. (DE N:57) He is currently a DOT motor vehicle 
enforcement officer and has been since January 2007. (DE N:57, p. 5) Officer Davidson 
testified that when the brake pedal is applied, air is pushed into the brake chamber. The 
chamber puts a certain amount of pressure against the slack adjuster and the slack 
adjuster has a push rod that rotates the brake camshaft. On the end of the brake 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 7 
camshaft, there is an S-shaped end that spreads the brake linings. The brake linings 
then come in contact with the inside of the brake drum and when those two friction 
surfaces come together, braking occurs.  (DE N:57, p. 19) 
If the system is working properly, when the air press is low enough the springs 
inside the brake chamber will engage the brakes. (DE N:57, p. 20)  
The emergency stop switch is a red knob made out of plastic that is about one 
and a half or two inches wide. It is meant to be pulled out. When it is pulled out, a valve 
is closed thereby engaging the brakes. (DE N:57, p. 21) Officer Davidson noted that 
there was rust on the brakes consistent with claimant’s testimony that the semi-truck 
had not been in use for some time but that there was also evidence that the two friction 
surfaces were coming together at some point as the rust was smooth with lines 
indicating contact. (DE N:57, p. 22, 26)  
Because of the extensive damage to the vehicle, Officer Davidson was not sure 
whether the air valves within the brake system were allowing any movement of air. (DE 
N:57, p. 41) 
If there was a loss of pressure, the switch should pop out but in this case, the 
switch was intact. Officer Davidson admitted that if the switch was not popped out and 
the system was without air, it implied there was some sort of malfunction in the system.  
(DE N:57, p. 45-46)  
The brakes did lock up after the collision and to move the semi-truck, the brakes 
on axle 2 had to be released. (DE N:57, p. 17) This indicates that the brakes engaged 
despite the emergency switch still being in the default position which could be consisted 
with a malfunction according to the testimony of Officer Davidson.  
Sandy Carlson, office manager of Shinn Construction, and romantic partner of 
Roger Shinn, testified that she arrived on the scene before the paramedics. She 
observed young men pulling broken parts out of the truck. She approached the driver’s 
side and spoke with claimant. She asked who was with his wife. He replied his sister, 
Martha. She encouraged him to hold still and asked what happened.  
She later heard from someone at the scene that claimant once said he was going 
to drive his motorcycle into the train. She reported this to Deputy Shaddock, the 
investigator in charge. At hearing, she said that she did not remember from whom she 
heard the comment that claimant had thought about taking his life. Later Ryan Bates 
became the focus of the defendants. When asked about Mr. Bates at hearing, Ms. 
Carlson was evasive.  
Q.  The morning of the accident, you spoke with Deputy Shaddock 
regarding this rumor you had heard about my client driving a 
motorcycle into a train.  
Right? 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 8 
A.  I don’t know if it was that morning or if it was that afternoon, or if it was 
the next day.   
Q.  And you said you heard that rumor from somebody standing at the 
accident site, but you couldn’t remember who that was.  
Is that right? 
A. I don’t know who it was.  
Q.  Was that person, the source of that rumor Mr. Ryan Bates? 
A.  I did not see Ryan Bates at the accident scene.  
Q. Well, eventually, your attorney was sent to go find Mr. Bates as being 
the originator of this rumor. 
Do you disagree with that? 
A. Mr. Bates called me about that. 
Q.  And did he tell you that you were incorrect that he did not start that 
rumor? 
A.  He most certainly did not tell me that.  
Q. You’ve seen Mr. Bates’s affidavit, that is part of the record here, have 
you? 
A.  I have seen it.  
Q.  And do you disagree with his affidavit? 
A.  It is 100 percent contradictory to what he told me on the phone in 
August when he called me.   
(Transcript, p. 171, lines 15-25; p. 172, lines 1-23)  
Initially, she testified she did not know who started the rumor and then when 
asked if the rumor started with Ryan Bates she replied she did not see Mr. Bates at the 
accident scene instead of answering that she did not know. Yet Ryan Bates is one of 
the witnesses that the defendants were adamant needed to be deposed and the record 
was held open after the hearing in order for his testimony to be obtained. Further, she 
admitted to speaking to him on the phone in August.  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 9 
Mr. Bates provided a sworn statement as part of the late evidence admitted into 
the record. He stated that he has only spoken to claimant a few times and that claimant 
had never reported any thoughts of self-harm nor had he ever implied that he was 
intending to commit or was considering committing acts of self-harm. He further stated:  
“I also never told Roger Shinn or Sandy Carlson that Mr. Myers told me directly that he 
planned to ‘drive a motorcycle into the side of a train.’ or something similar.” (JE 0:58)  
However, he did hear of comments made by others at the scene of the July 20, 
2020, accident speculating that claimant felt down and out and that he was considering 
driving his motorcycle into a train. He thought these comments were something Mr. 
Shinn and Ms. Carlson should know and reported that he heard these comments to 
Michelle Provenzano, Ms. Carlson’s sister, assuming that Ms. Provenzano would pass 
the information on to Mr. Shinn and Ms. Carlson.  
In the days following the accident, Mr. Bates spoke with a close friend of claimant 
who said that at some point in the months before the July 20, 2020, accident claimant 
made the statement that he was considering driving his motorcycle into a semi-truck 
because he was feeling down and out. After hearing this comment, the friend became 
concerned about driving his own semi-truck to his shop because he was afraid he would 
meet claimant on the road. (JE 0:60) 
Defendants were critical claimant failed to take evasive maneuvers such as 
utilizing the emergency braking systems, driving the semi-truck into the ditch or field, or 
even jumping out of the moving vehicle. To fail to take these actions is highly suggestive 
of intent to inflict self-harm argues defendants.  
Counsel for defendants questioned claimant as to why he did not engage the 
Jake Brake. Claimant testified that he believed he would have but he has no memory of 
what happened immediately preceding the accident. Counsel for defendants also 
questioned claimant as to why he took no evasive maneuvers to which claimant replied 
that it was a matter of seconds in which this occurred.  
Ms. Carlson is the main proponent of the theory that claimant planned to take his 
own life. At hearing, she testified that she has driven all sorts of trucks from step decks, 
vans, belly dumps, end dumps, liquid tanks, and Peterbilt’s similar a to claimant’s semi-
tractor.  
She was familiar with claimant’s July 20, 2020, route and testified that when 
claimant leaves his home to get to County Line Road, he drives past her house. She 
filmed the video in Exhibit D which reflects the route claimant took the date of the 
accident.  
Ms. Carlson testified to personal opinions of how the accident occurred, the 
importance of the lack of braking, whether claimant was in control of his vehicle at the 
time of the collision, when he should have applied brakes, how he should have engaged 
in evasive maneuvers. Ms. Carlson has experience as a truck driver and an office  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 10 
manager but she is not an accident reconstruction expert and her personal opinions are 
given low weight. 
She did admit that the drum of the brakes can rust if the truck is not used for 
several months but once the brakes are free from rust, there should not be further 
issues with them. She also testified that she felt a reasonable truck driver should have 
checked his brakes if he felt there was a problem and called the shop. Further, she felt 
that even if the brakes failed and the parking brake did not cause the air pressure to 
evacuate the system, claimant still could have used the engine brake or Jake Brake to 
slow his truck. She was critical that claimant did not engage in evasive maneuvers 
stating, “I would have hit a bridge before I hit a train.”  
While Ms. Carlson may have done something different does not mean the failure 
to do so is willful intent to take one’s own life.  
Just prior to the hearing, defendants proposed a new defense which was that the 
wrong employer had been sued. It is a convoluted argument based on the theory that 
there are two entities that employed claimant, both of which are owned by Ben Shinn 
who did not testify at hearing or via deposition. At no time prior to the hearing did 
defendants file a motion to indicate that the named employer on the caption was 
inaccurate.  
During cross examination, Ms. Carlson was asked if it was her idea that the 
actual employer in this case should be Ben Shinn Trucking instead of Shinn 
Construction. In response, she replied as follows: 
Q.  Was it you who came up with the idea that maybe it should have 
been Roger Shinn Trucking instead of Shinn Construction as the 
Defendant? 
A.  It wasn’t an idea of anything.  It’s just a fact that Mr. Myers worked 
for both Ben Shinn Trucking and Shinn Construction in 2020 and 
2019 and 2018 and 2017, and so on.  
Q.  So was it you that brought up the fact that as of yesterday, that 
should become an issue as far as this case goes? 
A.  I don’t know what issue you’re speaking to.  
Q.  You weren’t involved in the decision to try to bring Ben Shinn 
Trucking in as another Defendant? 
A.  What decision are you referring to? 
Q.  Were you aware that that happened yesterday? 
A.  I may have been aware that it happened yesterday when it 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 11 
happened by –  
Q.  Were you aware that was going to happen prior to yesterday? 
A.  I don’t know that I was aware that it was going to happen until it had 
happened.  
(Tr. p. 169, lines 1-25) 
The non-answers are as telling as if she had replied with straightforward 
admissions.  
Ben Shinn Trucking and Shinn Construction are two entities owned by the same 
people. Ben Shinn started a tanker division to haul for Green Energy.  Up until 
approximately three or four years ago, all of claimant’s benefits came from Ben Shinn. 
Around 2016 or 2017, individuals who worked Shinn Construction were then 
compensated from the corporate entity of Shinn Construction. In 2016, he received a 
W2 from Ben Shinn Trucking for $53,193.93. (CE 13:219) In 2017, his W2 was issued 
by Ben Shinn Trucking in the mount of $49,586.56. (CE 13:220) In 2018, the W2 was 
issued by Ben Shinn Trucking for $47,114.86. (CE 13:221)  
In 2019, claimant was paid $14,873.96 from Ben Shinn Trucking and $28,212.16 
from Shinn Construction. (CE 13:223, 222) In 2020, claimant was paid $3,086.38 in 
2020 from Ben Shinn Trucking and $31,184.88 from Shinn Construction. (CE 13: 224, 
225)  
Claimant was a salaried employee with Shinn Construction of approximately 
$1,200.00 per week beginning April 10, 2020. His health insurance in 2020 was paid 
through Ben Shinn Trucking.  
Claimant testified he was moved from Ben Shinn Trucking to Shinn Construction 
in approximately 2018 or 2019 with paychecks during those years issued by Shinn 
Construction. However, tax forms show that in 2019 and 2020, claimant was paid by 
both Shinn Construction and Ben Shinn Trucking.  (CE 13)  Ms. Carlson testified 
claimant was an employee of both entities. Ms. Carlson, herself, is an employee of both 
companies.  
She further admitted that Roger Shinn does not pay special attention or make 
sure whether he is directing an employee to a Ben Shinn Trucking job or a Shinn 
Construction job.  
In questioning, even the defendants’ counsel became confused and said, “All 
right, and Shinn Construction sometimes, it’s basically the same company, it sounds 
like, would have you go do Shinn Trucking projects.” (Tr. p. 117, lines 22-25)  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 12 
This shell game of employers is not the only evasive maneuver the companies 
have conducted. Shinn Construction failed to put the money they were taking out of the 
employee’s paychecks and put them into a 401K program as had been previously 
promised. As a result, Shinn Construction was penalized and the 401K program was 
transferred to a law firm for administration. 
Ms. Carlson testified that claimant did not provide a work release to Shinn 
Construction and thus was not working for Shinn Construction. However, Roger Shinn 
shared with Deputy Shaddock that he had spoken with claimant the morning of July 20, 
2020, and authorized claimant to do the work previously detailed.  
During her testimony, Ms. Carlson hedged her answers and attempted to 
misdirect in an effort to not answer questions she did not like. When claimant’s counsel 
asked her a straightforward question about whether claimant could be employed by the 
Shinn trucking companies if he was not able to climb into the cab, she refused to 
answer directly several times and had to be directed by the undersigned to answer.  
Because of Ms. Carlson’s overall evasiveness and questionable behavior 
regarding the identity of the real parties in interest, her credibility is found to be low.  
Claimant was issued several citations including failure to maintain control, failure 
to stop at a railroad crossing, and failure to maintain a seat belt. (DE M:56, p. 7)  
Defendants challenged claimant’s credibility. They point to the following, among 
other things, as evidence of his lack of credibility:  
1) Reporting to Deputy Shadduck he did not remember what happened but 
reporting to the EMS crew that his brakes failed 
2) Falsely reporting he was restrained  
3) A fraud charge in the remote past  
At hearing, however, claimant’s answers were direct during cross examination. 
His testimony was consistent at the time of the hearing when compared to previous 
statements given to the workers compensation investigator. His account of how the 
incident occurred and his medical health were consistent in the medical records. There 
was no demeanor cues such as constant shifting, inability to look directly in the camera, 
looking to his attorney for guidance during questioning, evasiveness, or equivocation 
during questioning.  
Claimant testified that he regularly wore his seat belt and believed that he was 
wearing one at the time of the collision. I do not find this to be a false reporting. The 
fraud charge was in the remote past. Relating to Deputy Shadduck he did not remember 
what happened is not inconsistent with claimant’s condition at the time Deputy 
Shadduck was questioning him. Claimant suffered multiple traumas and while he might 
not have lost consciousness at the scene, he did following the collision and remained  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 13 
unconscious for over two weeks. It is not implausible that claimant has suffered some 
memory loss.  
I find that the claimant is a credible witness.  
The Mercy Emergency Transport Services notes that claimant reported that his 
brakes did not work, causing him to collide with train cars moving across the track. (JE 
4:58)  Claimant was hospitalized from July 20 to August 25. After discharge, he was 
admitted to Ridgewood Care Center, a nursing rehabilitation facility.  
During his hospitalization, he underwent numerous surgeries including laceration 
repair of a scalp wound, positioning, soft tissue retraction, limb manipulation, fracture 
reduction, fixation and wound closure of the lower extremities on July 20, 2020, a chest 
reconstruction with mesh due to multiple rib fractures on July 29, 2020,  (JE5:81, 98, 
111)  
His discharge diagnosis included bilateral pulmonary contusion, close fracture of 
eight or more ribs on the right side, pneumothorax on the right, close fracture of the 
nasal bone, close fracture of six ribs on the left, traumatic hemothorax, Bilateral 
comminuted condylar femur fractures status post open reduction internal fixation, left 
radial head fracture, and hemorrhagic shock. (JE 5:117; 6:122) 
On the intake notes for his admission to Ridgewood for ongoing Skilled Care, his 
past medical history was enumerated as follows: 
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY: 
1. Right-sided pneumothorax. 
2. Severe bilateral pulmonary contusions, right greater than left.  
3. Right severely comminuted ribs 3 – 10 fracture with [TIME: 02:48] 
chest. 
4. Left ribs 3-7 fractures, which were not displaced.  
5. Bilateral comminuted condylar femur fractures status post open 
reduction internal fixation.  
6. Left radial head fracture.  
7. Hemorrhagic shock.  
8. Lactic acidosis. 
9. Hypothyroidism. 
10. Diabetes mellitus type 2. 
11. Chronic hepatitis C. 
12. Adjustment disorder with mixed depression and anxiety.  
13. Muscular dystrophy.  
14. Insomnia.  
15. Benign prostatic hyperplasia with lower urinary tract symptoms.  
16. Hypertension.  
17. History of osteoarthritis status post right total knee replacement. 
(JE 6:122) The assessment of his current condition on August 24, 2020, included 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 14 
bilateral femur fracture status post open reduction internal fixation, multiple rib fractures 
status post motor vehicle accident, diabetes mellitus type two, currently fair control, 
constipation, critical illness myopathy, and history of muscular dystrophy. (JE 6:124) 
Claimant spent approximately eight weeks at Ridgewood recovering and was 
discharged on October 23, 2020. (JE 6:140) On September 24, 2020, he had a left 
shoulder injection due to aggravated arthritis in both shoulders. (JE 6:134) He had had 
a previous right shoulder injection the week before. (JE 6:134) He was discharged from 
Ridgewood with the following medications: 
DISCHARGE MEDICATIONS: 
1. Bariatric walker with 2 wheels secondary to bilateral comminuted femur 
fractures. 
2. Biofreeze as needed. 
3. Bupropion extended release 300 mg daily.  
4. Gabapentin 200 mg 3 times a day.  
5. Metformin 1000 mg extended release daily.  
6. Furosemide 20 mg daily.  
7. Levothyroxine 137 mcg daily.  
8. Lisinopril 20 mg daily. 
9. Melatonin 5 mg at bedtime.  
10. MiraLax 17 grams daily twice a day for constipation prevention.  
11. Oxycodone 5 mg up to 3 times a day as needed for pain.  
12. ProAir inhaler as needed.  
13. Tamsulosin 0.4 mg at bedtime 
14. Tylenol as needed for pain. 
(JE 6:141) At that time he was able to walk short distances with the assistance of a 
walker and pain was adequately controlled with Tylenol and the occasional oxycodone. 
(JE 6:141)  
He was also given a prescription for in home skilled nursing from October 27, 
2020, through December 25, 2020. (JE 7:143) Ultimately, he met his goals on 
December 22, 2020, and was discharged from skilled nurse on the same. (JE 7:152)  
On November 11, 2020, he was provided an injection in both shoulders by 
Gerald Haas, D.O., for bilateral impingement symptoms which was aggravated by the 
train collision incident. (JE 2:27) On December 2, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Haas’ 
office and was seen by Chandra Brown, ARNP, for a one-month med check. The 
claimant described his pain as well controlled and at a 2 out of 10, pain level. (JE 2:29–
30) 
On February 15, 2021, claimant returned to Dr. Haas’ office for a possible 
injection on his left side due to increased left shoulder pain. (JE 2:32) It was noted that 
he continued to make improvement and had advanced to walking with a cane short 
distances within his home. He also used a walker and a powered scooter occasionally 
both within the home and trips outside the home. The injection was provided. (JE 2:33) 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 15 
On March 1, 2021, claimant returned to Dr. Haas’ office reporting a fall and 
having right sided rib pain following the fall. (JE 2:34) X-rays did not reveal any acute 
trauma. (JE 2:34) 
On March 3, 2021, he returned to Dr. Haas’ office and was seen by Chandra 
Brown for a med check. Claimant reported that his pain was well-controlled with the 
medication but was having increased pain on the right side following the fall. Pain was 4 
out of 10 on a 10 scale. (JE 2:37) Swelling was noted on the right side. (JE 2:39) 
On June 3, 2021, claimant received bilateral shoulder injections from Dr. Haas 
for the bilateral shoulder pain. (JE 2:43) Claimant returned for a med check on the same 
date reporting well-controlled pain of 4 on a 10 scale. (JE 2:44)  
In the six months preceding the hearing, claimant’s progress appears to have 
stagnated. He has a motorized scooter. His daily routine includes using the scooter next 
to his bed to move from his bedroom to the kitchen. He makes coffee, lets the dog out, 
takes his medications, and eats breakfast. He then attempts to walk on his own power.  
His ribs, which were crushed in the injury, bulge out. There are a couple places 
that are still tender. He cannot lean over without pain. He is not able to ride in a vehicle 
for more than approximately 45 minutes. He testified that while his back did hurt from 
his previous injury, the train collision intensified the symptoms. He complains of left-
sided pain in the low back and pain radiating into the right leg.  
He does not believe he could safely operate a semi-tractor in his current status 
due to the condition of his legs and feet if he could even manage to get into a truck 
which he does not believe he could do. He installed a handicap ramp outside of his 
home and inside everything is on one level.  
Claimant is taking a battery of medications including gabapentin, indomethacin, 
oxycodone, orphenadrine, lisinopril among others. He has applied for and been 
approved for Social Security disability. (CE 9)  
Ms. Maddison, his daughter, who has lived next door to claimant since 2018, 
described him as unsteady on his feet with weak legs and that walking was difficult for 
him. According to Ms. Madison claimant uses his motorized scooter frequently to 
maneuver. She has observed him in discomfort during car rides, holding his ribs and 
clutching his side. He rarely does mowing, shoveling or carrying pellets for his pellet 
stove.  
Michael Church, a former co-worker of about 15 years, testified that he has 
observed claimant have limited mobility. According to Mr. Church, claimant uses a 
walker, scooter, and canes. Claimant has visited Mr. Church’s home and had to be 
assisted up onto Mr. Church’s deck to traverse one step. Prior to the collision, claimant 
did not have these agility problems and was fairly functional.  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 16 
In July 2020, claimant was making the same pay rate and overall earnings than 
what he did earn at the time of his 2014 back injury. He testified that he was salaried 
since his back injury which resulted in an increase in earnings.  
Claimant is currently not working and does not believe there is a job he can 
perform. He does not have computer skills or has he worked as a manager or in sales. 
He has not looked for new employment nor sought any job retraining.  
There is almost no mental health expert testimony. When asked about claimant’s 
mental state, Dr. Haas wrote on June 3, 2021, “I have no information about any suicidal 
ideation in the past and I never had any concerns about this whenever I had seen him in 
the past.” (JE 2:47) 
On August 19, 2021, Dr. Haas agreed that claimant was at or near MMI and that 
further improvement would be minimal and that an FCE would be appropriate (CE 3:68)   
He underwent two IMEs, one for the defendants and one for claimant. Claimant 
testified he felt that the Dr. Stoken evaluation was more thorough than that of Dr. 
Kimelman. Jacqueline Stoken, D.O., performed strength tests and measured range of 
motion with a tool which Dr. Kimelman did not do.  
At Dr. Stoken’s September 7, 2021, examination, claimant complained of pain in 
the back that ranged from 1 to 6 on a 10 scale with an average of 5. Rest and 
medications alleviated pain. Walking, standing, lifting, and laying down worsened the 
pain. (CE 1:16)  
Pain in his ribs ranged from 3 to 9 on a 10 scale with an average of 6. 
Medications and rest alleviated pain while movement, twisting, pressure and coughing 
worsened pain. (CE 1:16)  
He complained of pain in his right shoulder that ranged from 1 to 8 on a 10 scale 
with an average of 6. Rest and medicine alleviated pain and lifting, use, and lifting 
above his head worsened the pain. (CE 1:17)  
He complained of bilateral leg pain that was lessened with heat, rest and 
medication but worsened with standing, walking, and lifting. (CE 1:17)   
Overall, medications, muscle relaxants, and physical therapy provided moderate 
amount of relief. (CE 1:17)  The pain did not interfere with writing or typing but did 
interfere mildly with showering and dressing.  It also interfered moderately with his 
ability to lift 10 pounds, do chores around the house, sleep, and travel. (CE 1:17) 
At the time of the examination, he was using medical marijuana. (CE 1:17) 
Dr. Stoken concluded claimant sustained bilateral upper extremity injuries, low 
back injuries, and left knee injury. (CE 1:20) As a result of these injuries, Dr. Stoken 
opines claimant has sustained a total of 15 percent whole body impairment.  

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 17 
A functional capacity examination was completed the same date. (CE 2:55) 
Claimant gave maximal, consistent effort. (CE 2:56) As a result of the examination, it 
was determined that claimant’s functional ability placed him within the sedentary work 
category. (CE 2:58) He should avoid all lifting, carrying, pushing/pulling activities, as 
well as prolonged standing or walking activities. (CE 2:58) He had good grip strength 
bilaterally, as well as good sitting tolerance. (CE 2:57) He was able to sit without 
restrictions. (CE 2:63)  
Based on the FCE, Dr. Haas agreed that claimant would not be capable of 
performing any work on a regular basis. (CE 2:69) Dr. Haas opined even if claimant 
were to find a position within his restrictions, he would miss work on a regular basis due 
to his injuries. (CE 2:69) This irregular attendance would likely occur more than once a 
week. (CE 2:69)  
On September 20, 2021, claimant underwent an IME with Joshua D. Kimelman, 
D.O. (DE A:1) In the subsequent report, Dr. Kimelman records that claimant begins his 
day with pain at 8 on a 10 scale and that the pain is reduced after taking either percocet 
or oxycodone. (DE A:1) At the examination, claimant’s pain in his left shoulder, left arm 
and bilateral leg pain was 8 on a 10 scale. (DE A:2) Dr. Kimelman observed claimant to 
walk with a markedly difficult gait using a single cane and wearing ankle and foot 
orthoses which he has used since 2006 when he was first diagnosed with Charcot-
Marie-Tooth. (DE A:4) He had absent knee and ankle reflexes and weakness in all 
planes of motion of feet and ankles, as well in the quadriceps bilaterally. (DE A:4) He 
had reduced range of motion in the bilateral knees and left upper extremity but full 
range of motion of the cervical spine (DE A:4)  
His gait disturbance was in the moderate range with a 20 percent impairment of 
the whole person partially due to Charcot Marie Tooth and in part due to the varus in the 
bilateral lower extremities. (DE A:4) As a result of the July 20, 2020, incident, he has 
impairment in the left elbow and right knee and left knee. (DE A:4) Dr. Kimelman 
assigned 10 percent loss of function for each leg and 20 percent whole body impairment 
due to his gait. (DE A:4) It appears Dr. Kimelman forgot to assign impairment for the left 
elbow but did note that claimant had restriction of motion in the left elbow representing 
24 degrees loss of supination and 25 degrees loss of flexion, as well as 20-degree loss 
of left wrist extension. (DE A:4)  
Claimant’s medical expenses for Mercy, Ridgewood Specialty Care, Dr. Haas, 
and in home care is $757,099.11. (CE 4:70) The bulk of his expenses are from his 17 
days at Mercy Medical Center while he was in a coma. (CE 4:70) Pharmacy charges 
are $122.99. (CE 6:199)   
Dr. Stoken charged $2,000.00 for the exam and $2,400.00 for the report. (CE 
1:54)  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 18 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The first issue at hand is whether claimant was an employee of the defendant 
Shinn Construction. Defendants raised a late defense that the real party in interest is 
Ben Shinn Trucking instead of Shinn Construction. Claimant was headed to the 
Eddyville shop which was a Ben Shinn Trucking shop. Claimant also spoke with Troy 
Dejong who worked exclusively for Ben Shinn Trucking. Claimant testified without 
rebuttal that the Eddyville shop served both Ben Shinn truckers and Shinn Construction 
truckers. Sandy Carlson is the office manager of Shinn Construction but she testified 
she had not received any paperwork releasing claimant to return to work.  
Complicating matters is that Roger Shinn is the president of both corporate 
entities. He directed claimant to the Eddyville shop.  
Defendants were asked to brief this issue but provided no case law nor legal 
guidance. It is possible defendants are arguing claimant was serving as a special 
employee of Ben Shinn Trucking on July 20, 2020, although it is not expressly stated. 
“[I]n cases involving the question of whether an employee of a general employer 
became the employee of a special employer, the presumption is that the general 
employer continues as the sole employer. O'Brien, 72 A.D.2d at 860, 421 N.Y.S.2d at 
730; 1B Larson § 48.14, at 8–455.” Parson v. Procter & Gamble Mfg. Co., 514 N.W.2d 
891, 894 (Iowa 1994). 
This legal argument does not appear to be applicable in the current case or, at 
least, there is not sufficient evidence to prove that Ben Shinn intended to enter into a 
legal employment contract with the employee on the day of the truck accident that 
would supersede claimant’s employment with Shinn Construction. See Procter & 
Gamble Mfg. Co., 514 N.W.2d at 894 (noting that intent of the parties controls).  

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 19 
It would also be odd to disregard defendants’ previous admissions. In the 
November 2020, answer defendants admitted they were the employer on the date of the 
alleged injury. Sandy Carlson and Roger Shinn are the individuals that are in the best 
position to determine the claimant’s employment status both in November 2020 and 
continuing forward. There was some vague attempts to explain that the defendants 
were not aware of claimant’s conversation with Troy DeJong until the deposition of 
claimant but even after the deposition, there was no attempt to amend the answer or 
revise answers to interrogatories.  
Rather, it appears that the defendants are engaging in a shell game, as 
characterized by the claimant, in an attempt to avoid liability.  It is disingenuous to 
present, at the eve of hearing, that the claimant sued the wrong defendant when both 
companies employed and paid claimant concurrently, when both companies are run by 
the same person, Roger Shinn, who conveniently did not testify, when the answer and 
the hearing report contained admissions from defendants that the employer was Shinn 
Construction. Even Sandy Carlson admitted she was employed by both companies or, 
at least, paid by both companies. Further, the only testimony that Ben Shinn Trucking 
was the correct employer came from Sandy Carlson who was previously found to be not 
credible.  
It is found based on the defendants’ admissions that they are the real party in 
interest and the employer of the claimant at the time of the alleged injury.   
Defendants seek to preserve their rights under Iowa Code section 85.21. Iowa 
Code section 85.21 and 85.22 applies to parties to the case. There are only three 
parties in this case: claimant, defendant Shinn Construction and insurer Technology 
Insurance Company. Iowa Code sections 85.21 and 85.22 cannot be applied in this 
case to entities not a party to the suit.  
Having determined that claimant was an employee of Shinn Construction at the 
time of the July 20, 2020, collision and that his injury arose out of and in the course of 
this employment, the question turns to whether claimant is barred from recovery due to 
an affirmative defense.  
Defendants have pled two affirmative defenses. First, they argue that the 
claimant did not overcome the presumption that he was intoxicated at the time of the 
collision and second, they argue that he intentionally intended to harm himself.  
The legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.16 in 2017 to create a 
presumption of intoxication upon a positive test result reflecting, among other things, the 
presence of depressant. More specifically, the section provides as follows: 
(1) If the employer shows that, at the time of the injury or immediately 
following the injury, the employee had positive test results reflecting the 
presence of alcohol, or another narcotic, depressant, stimulant, 
hallucinogenic, or hypnotic drug which drug either was not prescribed by 
an authorized medical practitioner or was not used in accordance with the 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 20 
prescribed use of the drug, it shall be presumed that the employee was 
intoxicated at the time of the injury and that intoxication was a substantial 
factor in causing the injury. 
(2) Once the employer has made a showing as provided in 
subparagraph (1), the burden of proof shall be on the employee to 
overcome the presumption by establishing that the employee was not 
intoxicated at the time of the injury, or that intoxication was not a 
substantial factor in causing the injury. 
Iowa Code § 85.16(2)(b) (2017).  
Claimant tested positive for cannabis on July 20, 2020, and thus a presumption 
of intoxication exists. Deputy Shadduck who was on the scene and spoke to claimant 
while claimant was still pinned inside the cab stated that claimant did not appear to be in 
an altered state. Claimant testified that he ingested weed-laced gummies but ceased at 
least a couple days before July 20, 2020. Dr. Stoken opined that the positive results 
represented remnant result without intoxicating effects.  There was no other medical 
opinion rebutting that of Dr. Stoken.  
Defendants point out that the claimant knew that a positive test result would be in 
violation of Iowa’s OWI laws and that it was also a violation of the defendant employer’s 
policies. Claimant was also a regular user of cannabis in the past. (JE 3:50) However, 
these pieces of evidence only support claimant’s admission that he took cannabis in the 
form of gummies preceding the collision but not that he was intoxicated or impaired at 
the time of the collision. Instead, greater weight is given to unrebutted medical 
testimony, as well as the unrebutted testimony of the investigating officer.  
Based on the observations of Deputy Shadduck, an accident reconstruction 
expert with over 17 years of experience on the job, and the medical opinion of Dr. 
Stoken, it is found that claimant overcame the 85.16(2)(b) presumption of intoxication.  
Claimant’s claim for workers’ compensation benefits is not barred by the defense 
of intoxication.  
Iowa Code also prevents workers’ compensation benefit recovery in the event 
that the employee engaged in willful self-harm.  
No compensation under this chapter shall be allowed for an injury caused: 
1. By the employee's willful intent to injure the employee's self or to willfully injure 
another. 
Iowa Code.§ 85.16(1).  
Claimant maintains that he did not attempt to kill himself by driving his Peterbilt 
into the train on July 20, 2020. The evidence shows that the day was clear with no 
visibility issues. The crossing arm of the train was in working order at the time of the 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 21 
collision. Claimant was in the northbound lane, the correct lane for his path of travel, at 
the time of the collision which would be difficult to maintain if claimant were not in 
control of the steering. There were no skid marks to indicate that the brakes had been 
engaged.  Deputy Shadduck, one of the accident investigators, believed there was no 
attempts to brake.  
Claimant did not take any evasive maneuvers such as swerving into a field or 
jumping out of the moving truck. He was not belted which was not ordinary for claimant 
according to his own testimony. 
One of claimant’s close friends purportedly relayed worry that claimant would 
harm himself. In June 2020, claimant moved property into a revocable trust to remove 
assets out of the control of his stepsons. He called to find out if he could access his 
401K and he set up a living will. Claimant had expressed suicidal ideation in the distant 
past according to 2017 marital counseling records.   
It is possible that there was brake failure. When the caregiver arrived on the 
morning of July 20, 2020, she observed claimant getting in and out of his truck 
consistent with claimant’s own testimony that he was moving around the truck, trying to 
loosen his brakes. There was rust on the brake drums that further buttressed claimant’s 
testimony about the condition of his brakes on July 20, 2020.  Officer Davidson 
conceded that the emergency brake button being intact could be suggestive of some 
sort of brake malfunction.  
Claimant testified credibly that he was in a good mood that day and excited to 
return to work. His daughter confirmed this testimony with observations of her own that 
claimant was more mobile than he had been in her memory.  
Claimant underwent right total knee replacement surgery in May 2020 which 
does not appear to be behavior of an individual with self-harm ideation. “He is very 
pleased with the results of his total knee replacement,” Dr. Dulaney documented. “Tom 
is doing great. He will continue activities as tolerated. Any recurrent concerns, he will 
simply call. He is very comfortable with this plan.” (JE 1:23) None of his other doctors 
preceding July 2020 made notations of suicide or depression. He was actively going 
through physical therapy to improve his knee condition.  
When asked about claimant’s mental state, Dr. Haas wrote on June 3, 2021, “I 
have no information about any suicidal ideation in the past and I never had any 
concerns about this whenever I had seen him in the past.” (JE 2:47) 
The greater weight of the evidence does not give rise to a finding that claimant 
intended to harm himself on July 20, 2020. That he failed to take evasive maneuvers 
such as braking, by driving into a ditch, a field or an embankment or even jumping out of 
a semi-truck going 50 or 60 miles an hour is not sufficient evidence to support a finding 
that claimant intended to harm himself. There are other plausible explanations for 
claimant not taking evasive maneuvers including panic or lack of foresight.  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 22 
Even if he did express suicidal ideation preceding the collision, there are other 
signs that he was actively working to get healthy enough to return to work including 
undergoing significant surgery and physical therapy.  
It is found defendants did not carry their burden to prove by a preponderance of 
the evidence that claimant engaged in the willful intent to injure himself.  
Having decided claimant’s pursuit of worker’s compensation benefits is not 
barred by the affirmative defenses of intoxication or intent to injure oneself, the next 
issue is to what benefits claimant is entitled.  
The parties agree that claimant was off work from July 20, 2020, through August 
19, 2021. It was during this period of time that claimant was recovering from injuries that 
arose out of and in the course of his employment. Therefore, claimant is entitled to 
temporary benefits from July 20, 2020, through August 19, 2021.  
Per the hearing report, the parties dispute the nature of claimant’s injury and 
whether it is scheduled member or industrial. Claimant sustained injuries to his chest, 
ribs, low back, and bilateral lower extremities, and nose. The chest and ribs are part of 
the torso and those are deemed to be body as a whole or industrial injuries. Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v)  
Thus, claimant has sustained a permanent disability to the whole body and is 
entitled to an industrial disability award. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Claimant did have extensive pre-existing injuries and diseases such as Charcot-
Marie-Tooth which affected his gait and ability to walk, his right knee degenerative 
disease which necessitated a total knee replacement, his bilateral shoulder issues 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 23 
which have required almost annual injections. He was assigned to light duty work in 
2015 due to a previous work injury and Dr. Kimelman assigned a 20 percent rating due 
to gait impairment that included claimant’s pre-existing disease.  
Despite the pre-existing disease and impairments in 2013, claimant returned to 
work as a truck driver.  
Dr. Stoken concluded claimant sustained bilateral upper extremity injuries, low 
back injuries, and a left knee injury. (CE 1:20) As a result of these injuries, Dr. Stoken 
opined claimant has sustained a total of 15 percent whole body impairment. A valid FCE 
placed claimant within the sedentary work category with restrictions of no lifting, 
carrying, pushing/pulling activities, as well as prolonged standing or walking activities. 
He had good sitting tolerance. Dr. Haas adopted the FCE restrictions. No doctor has 
rejected them. Dr. Haas further opined claimant would not be capable of performing any 
work on a regular basis and that even if claimant were to find a position within his 
restrictions, he would miss work on a regular basis due to his injuries.  
No doctor has told claimant he cannot drive and he does not have any 
restrictions on his license.  
Claimant testified that he cannot pull himself into a semi-tractor so while he may 
be able to drive distances similar to what he was doing before the injury, his injuries 
hamper his ability to climb into a semi. This does not preclude him from doing other 
work as a driver. Claimant has looked for no work, has sought out no job retraining.  
He has extensive trucking experience and served as a dispatcher at one time. He 
has not applied for those types of jobs. It is true that he has limited sedentary work 
experience, but the lack of motivation to return to work in this case is one of the factors 
to determine the extent of disability.  
On the other side, claimant is an older worker. His injuries were quite serious. He 
has no computer experience or office experience. While claimant may still be employed 
by defendant employer in some capacity absent his violation of the drug policy this is 
evidence of the defendant employer’s generous employment policies rather than the 
labor market available to claimant. 
He has difficulty moving within his trailer, using his motorized scooter to traverse 
the distance from his bed to his kitchen. He is not able to climb into the cab of a semi-
tractor. He could drive but he would not be able to lift, carry, push or pull. It is not clear 
what positions would be available to a person for driving only. Even if he was able to 
climb into the cab, claimant worries about his ability to brake or clutch consistently. 
Additionally, his ability to drive a truck is impeded by the medications he is taking that 
are necessary to control his pain.   
In weighing the factors above, while it is unfortunate claimant has not looked for 
work or investigated job retraining, the greater weight of the evidence supports a finding 
that he is permanently and totally disabled.  Dr. Haas opined without rebuttal that 
claimant would not be capable of performing any work on a regular basis and that even 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 24 
if there was a position within claimant’s restrictions, claimant would miss work on a 
regular basis.  
Total disability is not a state of absolute helplessness but when an injury wholly 
disables the employee from performing work that the employee's experience, training, 
education, intelligence and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich 
v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935).  
Defendants seek an apportionment against claimant’s industrial disability. Iowa 
Code section 85.34(7) was revised in 2017 to eliminate the previous rule that 
permanent total disability awards are not subject to apportionment. See Drake Univ. v. 
Davis, 769 N.W.2d 176, 184 (Iowa 2009). The revision also eliminated the formula for 
how the liability for the combined disabilities should be apportioned. Roberts Dairy v. 
Billick, 861 N.W.2d 814, 820 (Iowa 2015), as amended (June 11, 2015); Warren 
Properties v. Stewart applies. 864 N.W.2d 307, 319 (Iowa 2015), as corrected (July 1, 
2015). 
Iowa Code section 85.34(7) says that an employer is not liable for compensating 
an employee’s pre-existing disability that arose out of and in the course of employment 
from a prior injury with the employer, to the extent that the employee’s preexisting 
disability has already been compensated. Iowa Code section 85.34(7) (2017)  
Defendants do not provide a calculation for the apportionment and claimant does 
not address this issue in his brief. There is no expert testimony differentiating previous 
injuries from the present. Dr. Kimelman opined claimant’s whole body impairment is 20 
percent and that some of the impairment is due to the claimant’s Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
condition and some from the claimant’s injuries sustained on July 20, 2020, but no 
percentage breakdown is given.  
The burden is on the defendants to prove apportionment and without expert 
testimony, the undersigned can but guess at how much of the current disability is 
related to the July 20, 2020, injury and how much is from prior injuries.  
He had returned to work and was driving a truck for defendant employer for 
several years prior to his July 20, 2020, injury. He had been out of work immediately 
preceding the injury, but from degenerative disease rather than a work-related injury for 
which he had already been compensated.  Based on the foregoing, it is found 
defendants have not provided sufficient evidence to prove entitlement to an 
apportionment.  
Permanent total disability benefits are payable during the period of the 
employee's disability. Iowa Code § 85.34(3)(a). As a result, permanent total disability 
benefits generally commence on the date of injury. See Sandhu v. Nordstrom, Inc., File 
No. 5046628 (App. January 24, 2019). Thus, the commencement date for claimant's 
permanent total disability benefits is July 20, 2020. This renders claimant's claim for 
temporary disability benefits moot. (See Hearing Report, p. 1) 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 25 
Claimant asserts a claim for penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
86.13. This issue is not briefed by either party so it is not clear under what theories 
claimant believes supports his entitlement to penalty benefits.  
It is presumed that given that no benefits are paid, the claim for penalty benefits 
arises from an unreasonable denial. Iowa Code section 86.13 requires the imposition of 
additional benefits unless the employer shows reasonable cause or excuse for the delay 
or denial. Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996). It is 
defendants' burden to prove a reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial. 
Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996). 
The applicable statutory standard for penalty benefits is codified at Iowa Code 
section 86.13(4), which provides: 
(b) The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
(c) In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b)-(c). 
Delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable investigation is 
not unreasonable. Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 (Iowa 1995). 
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer's liability fairly debatable. An issue of law is fairly debatable if 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party. Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 (Iowa 
1993). An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which would 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 26 
support a finding favorable to the employer. Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 
194 (Iowa 2001). 
An employer's bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable, however, is 
insufficient to avoid imposition of a penalty. The employer must assert facts upon which 
the commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.” Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996). 
This case was a challenging one for the undersigned. The issues were heavily 
fact based and it cannot be said that the denial was unreasonable given that the 
claimant tested positive for cannabis and there were no signs of braking on the day of 
the incident. Based on the previous findings of fact, it is found that the claim was fairly 
debatable and imposition of penalty benefits is not appropriate.  
Claimant also seeks medical expenses as set forth in Claimant's Exhibit 4 and 6. 
While defendants asserted on the hearing report that these expenses were not 
authorized, defendants lost their authorization defense upon their denial of the claim. 
See Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010). It 
appears all of the expenses contained in Claimant's Exhibit 4 and 6 were for treatment 
of claimant's injuries arising out of the work injury of July 20, 2020. Thus, defendants 
are responsible for the expenses contained in Claimant's Exhibit 4 and 6. 
Defendants argue that the entirety of the amount in Claimant’s Exhibit 4 and 6 
should not be assessed and only the amount that was paid by the health insurer. In 
support of this argument, defendants cite Pexa v. Auto Owners Inc. Co., 686 N.W.2d 
150, 156 (Iowa 2004) as controlling precedent. Pexa is a personal injury case and not a 
worker’s compensation case. In that case, the Supreme Court stated that the amount 
charged, standing alone, is not evidence of reasonable and fair value of services 
rendered. Id. The billed amount is relevant only if that figure was paid or an expert 
witness has testified to the reasonableness of the charges. Id. The amount charged is 
not, in the absence of proof of the reasonableness of the billed sum, support recovery of 
medical expenses. Id. The court also stated that an injured party’s recovery for past 
medical services should be limited to the amount actually paid for medical services and 
that such a position would be contrary to the long-standing principle that such damages 
are measured by the reasonable value of medical services and the amount paid is but 
one form of probative evidence on this issue. Id. Medical charges may be compromised 
for reasons other than the unreasonableness of the billed amount. Id.  
Pexa’s holding is that jury decides what is the reasonable and necessary cost of 
medical care as a jury is not bound by the testimony of an expert but may use their own 
judgment in such matters. Id.  
The Pexa case is persuasive but not authoritative because Iowa Code section 
85.27 controls in workers’ compensation cases.  
 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 27 
The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter or chapter 85A, 
shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services. The employer shall also furnish reasonable and necessary crutches, artificial 
members and appliances but shall not be required to furnish more than one set of 
permanent prosthetic devices. 
Iowa Code § 85.27. If it is believed that the charges are excessive or 
unnecessary, the defendants can bring a separate action, requesting a determination of 
the reasonableness of the charges. Iowa Code § 85.27(3)  
In this case, the medical bill from the hospital was sent to a collection agency 
who pursued a recovery of $57,727.84. (CE 4:71) The letter from the collection agency 
also indicated that the claim may increase if additional health benefits are paid. (CE 
4:71) It would not be appropriate for the claimant to have to pay out of pocket for his 
medical expenses that arose out of the work injury. To that extent, the defendants are 
ordered to reimburse the payor of the medical expenses the amount paid. Should there 
be future disputes about the reasonableness of charges, the parties should avail 
themselves of the avenues of relief provided by the statute.  
Claimant seeks reimbursement for expenses related to his IME with Dr. Stoken 
under Iowa Code section 85.39. Iowa Code section 85.39, as amended in 2017, 
provides in relevant part: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination. The physician chosen by the employee has the right to 
confer with and obtain from the employer-retained physician sufficient 
history of the injury to make a proper examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (2017).  
In this case, there was no opinion obtained by an employer-retained physician 
prior to the examination of Dr. Stoken and thus the trigger for Iowa Code section 85.39 
examination was not initiated. Claimant is not entitled to a recovery of the IME of Dr. 
Stoken pursuant to Iowa Code 85.39.  
In cases where defendants have denied liability, the commissioner has 
concluded that medical opinions or reports obtained for the purposes of determining 
causation, regardless of whether they are obtained from a treating or expert physician, 
are not the equivalent of an impairment rating for purposes of Iowa Code section 85.39. 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 28 
See Reh, File No. 5053428 (App. March 2018); Soliz v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 
5047856 (App. March 2018). 
Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(6) permits the assessment of the reasonable costs of 
“obtaining no more than two doctors' or practitioners' reports.” The agency has 
previously determined this administrative rule permits assessment of the cost of FCE 
expenses and vocational expert reports. Caven v. John Deere Dubuque Works, File 
Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009); Pastor v. Farmland Foods, File No. 
5050551 (Arb. April 2016); Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010). However, the Iowa Supreme Court has held that only the cost of 
drafting the expert's report is permissible in lieu of testimony. Des Moines Area Regional 
Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 845-846 (Iowa 2015). 
Thus claimant is entitled to recover the cost of the report of Dr. Stoken or 
$2,400.00. The cost of the filing fee is also appropriate to be assessed.  
ORDER 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant permanent total disability benefits at a 
rate of seven hundred seventy-one and 91/100 dollars ($771.91) commencing July 20, 
2020 and continuing during the period of permanent total disability. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
That defendants shall pay the past medical bills as detailed above, as well as 
future medical expenses associated with claimant’s work-related injuries.  
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33 
including the report fee of Dr. Stoken in the amount of two thousand four hundred and 
no/100 dollars ($2400.00) and the filing fee.  
Signed and filed this _29th __ day of April, 2022. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
John Dougherty (via WCES) 
Nicholas Pellegrin (via WCES) 
 

MYERS V. SHINN CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
