Case Number: 22001746.01
Case Title:  GRUETZMACHER, LUCAS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Gruetzmacher Lucas-22001746.01D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
LUCAS GRUETZMACHER, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
 File No. 22001746.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS, 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :     Headnotes: 1100; 1108; 1400; 1401; 
 
Defendant. 
  :                         1402; 1402.30; 1402.40;  
 
 
  :                         1800; 1803;3700 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
The claimant, Lucas Gruetzmacher, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from self-insured employer John Deere Davenport Works (“John 
Deere”). James Hoffman appeared on behalf of the claimant. Benjamin Patterson 
appeared on behalf of the defendant.   
 
 
The matter came on for hearing on May 8, 2023, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips. Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom. 
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
 
Prior to the hearing, both the claimant and the defendant submitted certain 
motions. Argument on the motions was heard at the outset of the hearing. On April 27, 
2023, the claimant submitted a motion for leave to file a report after the deadline, or in the 
alternative a motion to continue. The motion to continue was denied, as the matter was 
hearing-ready, but for the potential inclusion of a report of a “treating surgeon,” Dr. 
Hoffman. The motion argued that Dr. Hoffman was on vacation or in surgery, so he could 
not complete an impairment rating until “approximately May 6.” The claimant requested 
leave to introduce the physician’s report when received.   
 
 
At hearing, the defendant objected to inclusion of the report. Upon oral argument, 
claimant’s counsel cited to changes made to Iowa Code section 85.39 in July of 2017. 
Specifically, the claimant alleged that a claimant could not “get paid an IME…until after 
the defendant…gets their report on percentages or no percent.” Based upon this, the 
claimant argued that the defendant was “playing a trick on the claimant by waiting till [sic] 
it’s totally and completely impossible and [sic] allow them only the ability to introduce their 
rendition of what percentages may apply.” The claimant argued that they attempted to 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Aug-16  12:10:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 2 
 
comply with certain deadlines, but could not get the report ahead of the hearing or within 
the deadlines allowed for by the Hearing Assignment Order.   
 
 
The defendant indicated that their objection to the motion was that Dr. Hoffman 
declared the claimant to have achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) in July 
of 2022. The defendant argued that Dr. Garrels also assessed an impairment rating of 
zero percent in July of 2022. The defendant aptly noted that, at any time after July of 
2022, the claimant could have received an impairment rating pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.39. However, according to the defendant, it was not until April 17, 2023, that 
the claimant named Dr. Hoffman as a provider who would give an opinion as to permanent 
impairment.   
 
 
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.19(3)(b) provides the rule for introducing evidence 
from expert witnesses. While the certification of expert witnesses is not required as it 
relates to a treating physician, provided all parties are aware of the physician, the reports 
“are served on opposing parties prior to the date when certification is required.” See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.19(3)(b). For a claimant, this would be 120 days before the 
hearing; for a defendant this would be 90 days before the hearing; and for a rebuttal 
report, this would be 60 days before the hearing. Id. Additionally, 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.19(3)(c) requires that the parties serve all discovery responses, depositions and 
reports from independent medical examinations on opposing parties at least 30 days 
before the hearing. The claimant failed to meet this well-known and well-established 
deadline. The claimant was declared at MMI and provided with a zero percent impairment 
rating in July of 2022. The claimant had ample opportunity to obtain an impairment rating 
prior to the hearing, and failed to do so. The evidence shows that, despite the claimant’s 
arguments that they were unable to obtain an IME without using the procedures of Iowa 
Code section 85.39, they would have had seven months in which to obtain an impairment 
rating and report from Dr. Hoffman (or any doctor of their choosing). I would note that the 
claimant had their evaluation by Dr. Hoffman in late April of 2023. This is likely inside of 
the deadlines established in our rules. Also, the provisions of reimbursement for the 
reasonable costs of an IME, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, were triggered by the 
zero percent impairment rating issued by Dr. Garrels in July of 2022. To allow the claimant 
to introduce a report at such a late time, in contravention of well-established and well-
known rules, would prejudice the defendant. Effectively, the claimant is attempting to do 
what they accuse the defendant of pursuing, namely, a trial by surprise. Our system is 
set up to avoid a trial by surprise, and it creates inherent prejudice against one party to 
allow another to simply disregard the rules and serve a report in contravention of our 
rules.     
 
The objection was sustained, the motion was denied, and the record was 
not held open to receive the report of Dr. Hoffman. 
 
 
It should be noted that the claimant reiterated their motion in their post-hearing 
brief. My decision remains the same, and additional evidence from Dr. Hoffman was not 
received into the record. 
 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 3 
 
 
The defendant filed a motion to submit the testimony of Clarissa DeMeyer, a 
registered nurse who examined and treated the claimant. The defendant argued that Ms. 
DeMeyer was set to testify in person, but could not make the hearing as she had an ill 
child. Since she could not attend the hearing, the defendant proposed taking her 
deposition after the hearing and holding the record open for submission of the deposition 
testimony. The defendant admitted upon questioning by the undersigned that Ms. 
DeMeyer was not listed as a testifying witness on the witness and exhibit lists exchanged 
between the parties on April 10, 2023. The defendant argued that Ms. DeMeyer was a 
witness that fell under a “catch-all” provision in their witness and exhibit list of “any witness 
for the purpose of rebuttal and/or impeachment.” (Transcript).   
 
 
The claimant objected to the motion, initially simply because their competing 
motion was denied. After the undersigned noted that their argument should be based in 
some sort of substance rather than simply “tit-for-tat,” the claimant presented an argument 
for their objection. The claimant argued that Ms. DeMeyer was not listed as a witness on 
the witness and exhibit lists exchanged by the parties ahead of the hearing, and therefore, 
her deposition should not be included in the record.  
  
 
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.19(3)(d) provides that, “[a]t least 30 days before 
hearing, counsel of record….shall serve a witness and exhibit list on all opposing 
counsel…and exchange all intended exhibits that were not previously required to be 
served.”  The witness list should contain “all persons, except the claimant, who will be 
called to testify at the hearing or who will be deposed prior to the hearing in lieu of 
testifying at the hearing.” See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.19(3)(d). The rule is 
specific in requiring the witness list to contain “all persons” expected to testify at the 
hearing, or to be deposed prior to the hearing. Much like my ruling on the previous motion, 
this ruling is to protect the claimant from a “trial by surprise.” While the claimant would 
have had the opportunity to cross-examine the witness, the late disclosure of the witness 
is the issue here. The defendant had access to the medical records and could have 
named Ms. DeMeyer on their witness and exhibit list.  Additionally, the argument that Ms. 
DeMeyer is a rebuttal witness when no testimony had been elicited to which she may 
rebut strains credulity.  
 
The motion was denied, the objection was sustained, and the record was not held 
open for submission of testimony via deposition. 
 
 
Considering the foregoing, the record in this case consists of Claimant’s Exhibit 1 
and Defendant’s Exhibits A-J. All of the exhibits were received into evidence without 
objection. 
 
 
The claimant testified on his own behalf. Ricky Garrels, M.D. and Eddie Austin 
testified on behalf of the defendant.   
 
 
Heidi Krafka was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of the 
proceeding. The evidentiary record closed at the end of the hearing, and the matter was 
fully submitted after the parties submitted post-hearing briefs on June 12, 2023.    

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 4 
 
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, the 
parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury.   
 
2. That the claimant sustained an injury to his left shoulder, which arose out of, 
and in the course of employment on November 29, 2021.   
 
3. That the alleged injury was a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That, at the time of the hearing, the claimant’s gross earnings were eight 
hundred forty-three and 60/100 dollars ($843.60) per week, and that the 
claimant was single and entitled to three exemptions. Based upon the 
foregoing, the parties stipulated that the weekly compensation rate is five 
hundred fifty-three and 46/100 dollars ($553.46).   
 
5. Under section 10, “Additional Issues, Stipulations, and/or Explanation”, the 
parties stipulated as follows: 
 
a. 
That the defendant paid claimant two weeks of temporary total disability 
benefits from February 7, 2022 to February 20, 2022, at the stipulated 
rate. 
 
b. 
That the defendant paid claimant one week of temporary partial disability 
benefits from February 21, 2022 to February 27, 2022, in the amount of 
two hundred forty-five and 07/100 dollars ($245.07).  
  
c. 
That the defendant paid a total of eleven thousand nine hundred 
seventeen and 33/100 dollars ($11,917.33) to claimant’s medical 
providers. 
 
d. 
That the defendant paid a total of two thousand six hundred ten and 
30/100 dollars ($2,610.30) in transportation costs.  
  
 
Entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits was no longer in 
dispute. Credits against any award are no longer in dispute as the defendant paid no 
weekly benefits to date. The defendant waived most of their affirmative defenses.  
 
 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
 
 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 5 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury to his right shoulder on November 29, 
2021, that arose out of and in the course of his employment with the defendant.   
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.  
 
3. Whether the injury is an industrial disability.   
  
4. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, 
should any be awarded.     
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an IME pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39.     
 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to a specific taxation of costs, and the amount 
of those costs.   
 
7. Whether the defendant has proven their affirmative defense that the claimant 
did not provide timely notice of a right shoulder injury pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.23.   
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 
Lucas Gruetzmacher, the claimant, was 27 years old at the time of the hearing. 
(Testimony). He graduated from high school in 2012. (Defendant’s Exhibit F:40). He then 
attended and earned a bachelor's degree from St. Ambrose University in 2021. (DE F:40). 
Mr. Gruetzmacher works for John Deere. (Testimony). At the time of the hearing, he had 
worked there for five years. (Testimony).   
 
 
On November 29, 2021, while at work for John Deere, Mr. Gruetzmacher testified 
that he pulled an improperly placed 94.5-pound bumper for a loader frame towards him 
in order to place a lifting device on it. (Testimony). As he did this, he claims that both of 
his shoulders “popped.” (Testimony). After feeling his shoulders pop, he “lost all strength 
in both shoulders” and experienced a burning sensation with numbness in his left arm. 
(Testimony). Mr. Gruetzmacher testified that he told his supervisor, Eddie Austin, that he 
injured both of his shoulders, did not have any strength in either arm, and could not 
continue to work. (Testimony).   
 
 
After Mr. Austin took the claimant’s injury report, he was sent to the onsite medical 
providers at John Deere on November 30, 2021. (Testimony; DE B:20-21). Mr. 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 6 
 
Gruetzmacher complained of dull left shoulder pain at rest, and sharp left shoulder pain 
with activity. (DE B:20). He recounted how his injury occurred, including mentioning a pop 
in the left shoulder followed by burning, weakness, and numbness in his left shoulder. 
(DE B:21). Mr. Gruetzmacher told Ms. DeMeyer that the injury happened on November 
29, 2021, at about 7:00 p.m., but that he did not report it at the time. (DE B:21). Instead, 
the claimant went to his chiropractor, but found that his symptoms worsened. (DE B:21). 
Dr. Garrels provided the claimant with restrictions and an order for physical therapy. (DE 
B:21).     
 
 
An incident report was filled out and signed by the claimant on November 30, 2021. 
(DE B:11). The incident report recounted the claimant pulling a bumper towards himself 
when he felt a pop in his left shoulder followed by burning, numbness, and weakness in 
that shoulder. (DE B:11). At the time the report was filled out, the left shoulder had a dull 
ache at rest, and a sharp pain with activity. (DE B:11). The pain diagram showed marks 
to the front of the left shoulder, and nowhere else on the body. (DE B:11). Mr. 
Gruetzmacher noted a previous injury to his right shoulder, and that he played football. 
(DE B:11). Mr. Gruetzmacher testified that Mr. Austin filled out the form and reviewed it 
with him prior to his signing it. (Testimony).   
 
 
There also was an A3 Accident Investigation Form completed by John Deere on 
November 30, 2021 and December 1, 2021. (DE C:22-23). The form outlined the incident, 
made no mention of the right shoulder, and provided potential corrective actions to 
prevent reoccurrence of a similar incident. (DE C:22-23).   
 
 
On December 3, 2021, Mr. Gruetzmacher began physical therapy at John Deere’s 
on-site facility with Beth Bryant, P.T. (DE B:19-20). The claimant recounted feeling a pop 
in his left shoulder followed by sharp pain and burning in his left arm. (DE B:19). He had 
no change in his symptoms despite working restricted duty. (DE B:19). At the time of 
therapy, his symptoms were localized to his left shoulder, and were aggravated by 
“everything.” (DE B:20). He rated his pain between 4 out of 10 and 7 out of 10. (DE B:20). 
Mr. Gruetzmacher found that holding his arm in a “supported, close-packed position,” to 
be best. (DE B:20). Upon examination, the claimant showed symptoms at the site of the 
attachment of the rotator cuff. (DE B:20). The record made no mention of any issue with 
his right arm. (DE B:19-20).   
 
 
Mary Huesmann, N.P. examined the claimant on-site at John Deere on December 
6, 2021. (DE B:18-19). Mr. Gruetzmacher reported that his symptoms were unchanged. 
(DE B:18). He displayed normal sensation in the left fingers and hand, but had pain if he 
laid on his left shoulder for a long time. (DE B:19). He took ibuprofen to alleviate the pain. 
(DE B:19). Mr. Gruetzmacher told the provider that he experienced decreased strength 
and decreased stability in his left arm and shoulder. (DE B:19). The provider verified these 
complaints through testing during the appointment. (DE B:19). He showed no pain during 
certain bilateral shoulder testing. (DE B:19). Again, there was no mention of any right arm 
issues. (DE B:18-19). The provider noted that an MRI arthrogram of the left shoulder was 
in the process of being scheduled. (DE B:19). A subsequent note in the record indicates 
that an MRI was scheduled for December 15, 2021. (DE B:18).   

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 7 
 
 
 
Michelle Whiteside, P.T. saw Mr. Gruetzmacher for another physical therapy 
appointment at John Deere on December 7, 2021. (DE B:17-18). The claimant showed 
the therapist where his pain began, which was the left long head of the biceps tendon 
origin. (DE B:17). Mr. Gruetzmacher opined that it felt “like it rolled on left” which caused 
him to guard his left upper extremity. (DE B:17). Mr. Gruetzmacher found that kinesiotape 
provided during his previous therapy visit helped support his left shoulder. (DE B:18). The 
therapist opined that the claimant had left shoulder pain with increased pain with O’Brien’s 
testing of a labral lesion. (DE B:18). Ms. Whiteside found the claimant to have “AROM” 
and strength within functional limits. (DE B:18). There was no mention of right arm issues 
in the record. (DE B:17-18).  
    
 
Mr. Gruetzmacher saw Ms. Whiteside for another physical therapy appointment on 
December 9, 2021. (DE B:17). Ms. Whiteside found that the claimant had no reported 
pain during passive range of motion in all planes for the left shoulder. (DE B:17). There 
was no mention of a right shoulder injury, or right shoulder pain in the medical record. 
(DE B:17).   
 
 
Dr. Garrels visited with Mr. Gruetzmacher on December 15, 2021, following his 
MRI. (DE B:21a-b). Dr. Garrels is an employee of UnityPoint Health. (Testimony).   
 
UnityPoint has a contractual relationship with John Deere to provide medical 
services to their employees at an onsite clinic. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels is board certified 
in occupational medicine. (DE I:47). Dr. Garrels diagnosed the claimant with a SLAP tear 
of the left shoulder. (DE B:21b). He recommended conservative treatment, but also made 
an orthopedic referral for the claimant. (DE B:21b). 
 
An MRI performed on the same date showed minimal insertional tendinopathy of 
the intact inserting supraspinatus tendon. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1:3). It also showed a 
“[p]rominent superior labral tear extending through the superior half of the anterior labral 
segment and the superior half of the posterior labral segment.” (CE 1:3).   
 
On January 18, 2022, the claimant reported to the offices of John Hoffman, M.D., 
at Orthopaedic Specialists. (DE D:24-25). Mr. Gruetzmacher relayed the history of his 
shoulder issue and work injury on November 29, 2021. (DE D:24). The history portion of 
the medical record contains no mention of the claimant’s alleged right shoulder issue. (DE 
D:24). Mr. Gruetzmacher complained of dull and achy pain in the anterior aspect of his 
left shoulder. (DE D:24). He rated this pain 7 to 8 out of 10 at its worst. (DE D:24). Mr. 
Gruetzmacher indicated that physical therapy at work provided him with little 
improvement. (DE D:24). Upon physical examination, no issues were noted with the right 
shoulder. (DE D:25). The left shoulder had normal, but painful range of motion. (DE D:25). 
X-rays of the left shoulder were normal, but when Dr. Hoffman reviewed the MRI, he found 
tendinosis of the rotator cuff along with a large anterior to posterior labral tear with a SLAP 
tear. (DE D:25). Dr. Hoffman placed the claimant on one-handed work duty with no use 
of the left upper extremity. (DE D:25). Dr. Hoffman recommended that the claimant have 
surgery. (DE D:25).   

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 8 
 
 
          Dr. Hoffman performed a left shoulder surgery on the claimant on February 9, 2022. 
(CE 1:4). He performed a left shoulder debridement of labrum, biceps tenodesis, and 
arthroscopic shoulder decompression. (CE 1:4). Dr. Hoffman’s postoperative diagnoses 
was left shoulder superior labrum anterior and posterior lesion, biceps tendinosis, and 
impingement syndrome. (CE 1:4).   
 
On February 11, 2022, the claimant had post-surgical therapy visit with Dr. 
Hoffman’s office. (DE D:26). He reported soreness since the surgery but rated his pain 3 
out of 10 during the visit and 8 out of 10 at its worst. (DE D:26). The examiner noted some 
issues with range of motion, and that they did not formally test the claimant’s strength. 
(DE D:26).   
 
 
Dr. Hoffman examined the claimant on April 19, 2022, for a post-surgical 
examination. (DE D:27). Mr. Gruetzmacher told the doctor that he had mild pain and was 
no longer taking pain medication. (DE D:27). Dr. Hoffman found that the claimant was 
improving with physical therapy and recommended that he continue the same. (DE D:27). 
Dr. Hoffman allowed the claimant to return to light duty work with restrictions including 
lifting 20 pounds to waist level, 10 pounds to chest level, and limited overhead work with 
the left shoulder. (DE D:27). Again, there was no mention of right shoulder issues. (DE 
D:27).   
 
 
On May 17, 2022, Mr. Gruetzmacher returned to Dr. Hoffman’s office. (DE D:28-
29). He denied any pain, stiffness, numbness, or tingling in his left shoulder, and he 
continued to attend physical therapy. (DE D:28). The claimant again made no report of 
right shoulder issues. (DE D:28-29). He also had no tenderness to his right shoulder on 
physical examination. (DE D:29). Dr. Hoffman observed Mr. Gruetzmacher to have diffuse 
tenderness to the left shoulder; however, he had normal and pain-free active and passive 
range of motion. (DE D:29). Dr. Hoffman increased the claimant’s restrictions by allowing 
him to lift up to 30 pounds to waist level, 15 pounds to chest level, and 10 pounds 
overhead with the left shoulder. (DE D:29). Again, there was no mention of any right 
shoulder issues. (DE D:29).   
 
 
The claimant had another follow-up with Dr. Hoffman on June 23, 2022. (DE D:30-
32). He again denied any pain, stiffness, numbness, or tingling. (DE D:30). He recovered 
well from his surgery and felt he was “ready to go to full duty work.” (DE D:30). 
Accordingly, Dr. Hoffman returned the claimant to full duty work without restrictions. (DE 
D:30). Again, there was no mention of right shoulder issues. (DE D:30-32).   
 
 
On June 23, 2022, Michael Matson, A.R.N.P. visited with Mr. Gruetzmacher as a 
follow-up on his left shoulder issues. (DE B:16). The claimant noted that he completed 
physical therapy following his surgery, that he was “doing well” and that surgery “fixed his 
problem.” (DE B:16). He was released to work without restrictions by “his surgeon.” (DE 
B:16). Mr. Matson observed that the claimant’s left shoulder had full range of motion and 
excellent strength. (DE B:16). Mr. Matson allowed the claimant to return to work without 
restrictions. (DE B:16).   

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 9 
 
 
 
Dr. Garrels examined Mr. Gruetzmacher on July 5, 2022, at John Deere. (DE B:14-
15). He noted Dr. Hoffman’s release of the claimant to full duty, and that the claimant had 
no active complaints. (DE B:14). Dr. Garrels clarified that the meaning of “no active 
complaints” in the July 5, 2022, medical record, would include any complaints to the left 
or right shoulder. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels found the claimant to have full range of motion 
in his left shoulder and rated his strength 5 out of 5. (DE B:14). Dr. Garrels opined that 
the claimant achieved MMI. Dr. Garrels also noted that he would have tested both 
shoulders for range of motion and strength, as he compared the left shoulder 
measurements to the right shoulder measurements, and vice versa. (Testimony). Dr. 
Garrels used the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
to provide the claimant with a zero percent left upper extremity impairment rating based 
upon Figures 16-40, 16-43, 16-46, and Table 16-35. (DE B:15). Dr. Garrels elaborated 
on his impairment rating, including that his rating was based “pretty much [on] motion,” 
and potentially strength. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels also testified that he did not touch the 
claimant in performing his range of motion measurements. (Testimony). The claimant 
contradicted this on rebuttal testimony in claiming that Dr. Garrels “physically 
manipulated” him during the evaluation. (Testimony).   
 
 
The claimant testified that Dr. Garrels’ note that he had full range of motion in his 
shoulder was not correct. (Testimony). He indicated that he only had full range of motion 
in his shoulder when the doctor exerted significant pressure on his shoulder and made 
him cry due to the pain. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels contradicted this insofar as he noted 
that the claimant had no pain behavior. (Testimony). According to Dr. Garrels, this means 
that he did not observe the claimant crying. (Testimony). He would have documented any 
crying or pain behaviors had the claimant exhibited the same. (Testimony). On rebuttal, 
the claimant testified that he cried in front of Dr. Garrels due to his pain, and that he cried 
after the appointment. (Testimony).   
 
 
On July 19, 2022, Dr. Hoffman visited with Mr. Gruetzmacher again. (DE D:33-35). 
Mr. Gruetzmacher noted that he was disqualified from welding work due to his being 
unable to hold or lift the welding whip. (DE D:33). Mr. Gruetzmacher had minimal pain in 
the left shoulder, and moderate pain with pushing, pulling, overhead lifting, and reaching. 
(DE D:33). Upon examination, both shoulders were found to be normal, pain-free, and 
had normal range of motion. (DE D:33-34). There were no issues in the right shoulder 
noted. (DE D:34). Dr. Hoffman opined that the claimant had “done well with his left 
shoulder.” (DE D:34). Mr. Gruetzmacher felt that he could pass the welding test, but noted 
the downgrade in his employment from welder. (DE D:34). Dr. Hoffman placed the 
claimant at MMI as of this visit. (DE B:34-35). Dr. Hoffman noted that an impairment rating 
would follow if requested. (DE B:35).   
 
 
Amy Mitton, L.P.N. examined the claimant on July 22, 2022. (DE B:14). Mr. 
Gruetzmacher complained of right shoulder pain claiming an original date of injury in 
November of 2021. (DE B:14). Mr. Gruetzmacher claimed that he injured his right 
shoulder when he injured his left shoulder. (DE B:14). Dr. Garrels then examined the 
claimant. (DE B:13-14). Dr. Garrels documented that the claimant told him that his right 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 10 
 
shoulder developed a popping sensation during high school. (DE B:13). Dr. Garrels 
documented that Mr. Gruetzmacher told Ms. DeMeyer that he had a prior right shoulder 
condition. (DE B:13). Dr. Garrels found the claimant to have full range of motion and no 
pain behavior in his right shoulder.  (DE B:13).  Based upon his examination, Dr. Garrels 
concluded that the claimant’s right shoulder issues were not related to his work, and 
specifically not related to the November 29, 2021, injury. (DE B:13).   
 
 
Dr. Garrels also provided testimony as to the July 22, 2022, visit. (Testimony). He 
noted that the claimant presented with right shoulder issues, that he was attempting to 
connect to the original injury. (Testimony). In response to this, Dr. Garrels reviewed the 
documentation from the original reporting of the injury with his staff. (Testimony). They 
concluded that there was no report of a right shoulder injury at the time of the initial 
examination. (Testimony). This included reviewing the initial incident report from 
November 30, 2021. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels testified that this was the first mention of 
right shoulder pain connected to a work injury on November 29, 2021, that he was aware 
of. (Testimony). He also noted his conclusion that the right shoulder was not a work-
related issue. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels recalled the claimant outlining a previous injury to 
his right shoulder. (Testimony). This included development of a popping sensation dating 
back to his time in high school. (Testimony).   
 
 
Counsel for the defendant drafted an e-mail to counsel for the claimant on August 
6, 2022, indicating that John Deere would not be paying any permanent partial disability 
benefits for the claimant’s right shoulder injury. (DE E:36-37). They indicated that this 
denial was based in the opinions of Dr. Garrels. (DE E:36-37). In the same e-mail, John 
Deere denied the claimant’s right shoulder pain based upon the terms of Iowa Code 
section 85.23. (DE E:36).   
 
 
On September 23, 2022, Sunil Bansal, M.D., M.P.H. examined the claimant for the 
purposes of an IME. (CE 1:1-9). The IME with Dr. Bansal was arranged at the behest of 
claimant’s counsel. Dr. Bansal is board certified in occupational medicine. (CE 1:1). Dr. 
Bansal interviewed Mr. Gruetzmacher about his version of events surrounding his work 
injury. (CE 1:5). Mr. Gruetzmacher’s description was generally consistent with the 
previous versions noted; however, he told Dr. Bansal that he experienced a burning pain 
in his right shoulder when he pulled the part in addition to the left shoulder issues. (CE 
1:5). Mr. Gruetzmacher claimed to Dr. Bansal that he reported injuries to both shoulders 
to John Deere. (CE 1:5). Mr. Gruetzmacher told Dr. Bansal that his right shoulder and 
arm worsened over time and that he was told by the orthopedic surgeon that his shoulders 
would be addressed one at a time. (CE 1:5).   
 
 
Dr. Bansal observed that Mr. Gruetzmacher could lift his right arm overhead, but 
that he could not lift a gallon of milk with his right arm. (CE 1:5). He also could not reach 
behind him with his right arm. (CE 1:5). Mr. Gruetzmacher complained of pain in his left 
shoulder while sleeping, though he acknowledged that the surgery greatly helped his left 
shoulder. (CE 1:5). Mr. Gruetzmacher told Dr. Bansal that he could still lift with his left 
arm, but that he could not lift for a long time. (CE 1:5).   
 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 11 
 
 
Upon physical examination, Dr. Bansal observed that the claimant had diffuse 
tenderness to palpation in the right shoulder. (CE 1:6). He displayed range of motion as 
follows in the right arm: 
 
Flexion: 
 
168 degrees 
Abduction: 
 
143 degrees 
Adduction:   
46 degrees 
External Rotation: 52 degrees 
Extension: 
 
41 degrees 
Internal Rotation: 
40 degrees 
 
(CE 1:6).  
 
 
His left arm displayed tenderness to palpation, especially at the acromioclavicular 
joint. (CE 1:6). Dr. Bansal observed that the claimant had a full range of motion in his left 
shoulder but had a 10 percent loss of strength with elbow flexion. (CE 1:6). Dr. Bansal 
observed the following ranges of motion in the claimant’s left shoulder: 
 
 
Flexion: 
 
173 degrees 
 
Abduction: 
 
162 degrees 
 
Adduction: 
 
47 degrees 
 
External Rotation: 75 degrees 
 
Extension: 
 
43 degrees 
 
Internal Rotation: 
56 degrees 
 
(CE 1:6-7).   
 
 
Mr. Gruetzmacher also displayed positive impingement tests to the right and left 
shoulders. (CE 1:6-7). Dr. Bansal repeated the diagnoses of Dr. Hoffman with regard to 
the claimant’s left shoulder. (CE 1:7). He then diagnosed the claimant’s right shoulder 
with a right shoulder strain, “with symptoms characteristic of rotator cuff and/or labral 
pathology.” (CE 1:8). Dr. Bansal recommended that the claimant have an MRI of the right 
shoulder for further diagnosis. (CE 1:8). Dr. Bansal opined that the work incident on 
November 29, 2021, caused injuries to both of the claimant’s shoulders. (CE 1:8). Dr. 
Bansal then used Figures 16-40 through 16-46 of the Guides to provide an impairment 
rating based upon the range of motion measurements provided above. (CE 1:8-9). Based 
upon these measurements, Dr. Bansal provided the claimant with a five percent upper 
extremity impairment to the left shoulder. (CE 1:9). According to the doctor, this rating 
amounts to a two percent impairment of the body as a whole. (CE 1:9). Dr. Bansal then 
provided an impairment rating of two percent of the upper extremity or one percent of the 
whole person based upon Table 17-35 of the Guides for the left biceps tendinopathy. (CE 
1:9). For the range of motion issues found in the right shoulder, Dr. Bansal again used 
Figures 16-40 through 16-46 of the Guides to provide an eight percent upper extremity 
impairment for the right shoulder. (CE 1:9). This amounts to a five percent whole body 
impairment according to Dr. Bansal. (CE 1:9).   
 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 12 
 
 
Mr. Gruetzmacher testified that he saw Dr. Hoffman in late April of 2023, and that 
Dr. Hoffman recommended that the claimant have surgery to his right shoulder or arm. 
(Testimony).   
 
 
Mr. Gruetzmacher testified that he told the intake nurse, Clarissa DeMeyer, that 
he had issues with both of his shoulders. (Testimony). Mr. Gruetzmacher stated that the 
nurse indicated that only one shoulder would be treated at a time, and that they would 
begin by concentrating on his left shoulder. (Testimony). Mr. Gruetzmacher testified that 
in subsequent appointments with Ms. DeMeyer, Dr. Hoffman, and Dr. Garrels, he asked 
when treatment for his right shoulder would commence. (Testimony). He testified that 
“[t]hey always kept telling me, let’s [sic] take care of the left first.” (Testimony). Dr. Garrels 
contradicted the claimant’s testimony in noting that he would have recorded any right 
shoulder issues in the medical record, had Mr. Gruetzmacher mentioned them. 
(Testimony). He also testified that he would have provided treatment for the claimant’s 
right shoulder had it been mentioned. (Testimony).   
 
 
Eddie Austin testified on behalf of the defendant. (Testimony). He is a team leader 
at John Deere, which essentially functions as a supervisor. (Testimony). He has been at 
John Deere for just over four years. (Testimony). As a team leader, Mr. Austin was 
available with the reporting requirements for work injuries. (Testimony). Among these 
requirements is to immediately report the injury to their supervisor. (Testimony).   
Following a report of injury, the individual is sent to the on-site medical clinic.  (Testimony).  
Before the end of that day’s shift, the team leader would fill out an “Accident Investigation 
Report,” which is turned into the safety department. (Testimony).   
 
 
Mr. Austin recalled that the claimant told him that he hurt his left shoulder on 
November 29, 2021, after pulling a part. (Testimony). He did not recall any mention of the 
right shoulder. (Testimony). During the hearing, he reviewed the “Accident Investigation 
Report,” and reviewed portions mentioning an acute sprain or strain to the left shoulder. 
(Testimony). In filling out the documentation, Mr. Austin reviewed the report with the 
claimant. (Testimony). Mr. Austin testified that this information was obtained from the 
claimant and from the medical team. (Testimony). He agreed that, had Mr. Gruetzmacher 
mentioned his right shoulder, it would have been included in the report. (Testimony).   
 
 
Dr. Garrels testified that he recalled treating the claimant for a shoulder injury, and 
that “it was a pretty uneventful case.” (Testimony). He noted specifically that the claimant 
only had one shoulder injury. (Testimony). He recalled seeing the claimant and referring 
him to an orthopedic surgeon ahead of a surgery. (Testimony). Dr. Garrels also recounted 
his final visit with Mr. Gruetzmacher in which he cleared the claimant to work following 
the surgery. (Testimony).   
 
 
The claimant testified to pain in his right shoulder when he moved his right arm 
above his head or outward from his body. (Testimony). He also noted an inability to 
support weight for a long period of time on the right side. (Testimony). By way of example, 
he testified to an inability to carry his one-year-old son, who weighed over 30 pounds. 
(Testimony). He also noted that he could not throw a ball with his right hand. (Testimony).   

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 13 
 
 
 
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Gruetzmacher testified to limitation in the range of 
motion in his left shoulder. (Testimony). He noted an inability to do everything he would 
want to do in playing with his children, nor could he play instruments, or play with his 
dogs. (Testimony). Mr. Gruetzmacher enjoyed riding his motorcycle, but could no longer 
do so after the left shoulder injury. (Testimony).   
 
 
With regard to his position at John Deere, the claimant testified that he could no 
longer weld, as he could not control the “30-pound whip” for long enough periods of time. 
(Testimony). Since he was incapable of welding, the claimant was working in fabrication 
and cutting of sheet steel for John Deere. (Testimony). This position paid about two and 
50/100 dollars ($2.50) less per hour than his position as a welder. (Testimony). He also 
testified to an inability to work overtime. (Testimony).   
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
The party who would suffer loss, if an issue were not established, has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
 
Right Shoulder Injury 
 
 
The parties previously agreed that the claimant’s left shoulder injury arose out of, 
and in the course of his employment with John Deere. There is a dispute as to the 
claimant’s alleged right shoulder injury. Before addressing the defendant’s claimed 
affirmative defense, it is appropriate to first determine whether the alleged injury arose 
out of, and in the course of employment on November 29, 2021.  
  
 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that the employee’s injuries arose out of, and in the 
course of the employee’s employment with the employer. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995). The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or source 
of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place and circumstances of 
the injury. Id. An injury arises out of employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the employment and the injury. Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 
1996). The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the 
employment and not merely incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Willis, 608 
N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000). The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an injury occurs “in the 
course of employment” when:  
 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto. An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 14 
 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work. 
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment merely 
because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically prescribed 
task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act which he deems 
necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer.    
 
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979). 
    
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable, 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).    
 
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011). The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure the 
credibility of witnesses.” Id. The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, even 
if uncontroverted, in whole or in part. Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156. When considering the 
weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion. 
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.    
 
 
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920). While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to be 
compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial 
factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa 
workers’ compensation system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 
1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980).  
   
 
The claimant testified that he injured both of his shoulders during the November 
29, 2021, incident. He further testified that he told a number of providers about his right 
shoulder injury, but that he was told that they would treat one shoulder at a time. 
Therefore, he claims that he was told that his right shoulder would be treated after his left 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 15 
 
shoulder. He also points to Dr. Bansal’s report. However, Dr. Bansal relied solely on the 
history provided by the claimant as to his right shoulder issues. While Dr. Bansal’s 
examination showed some limited range of motion issues, his causation analysis and 
history was based entirely upon a subjective report from the claimant.   
 
 
The defendant points to several key pieces of evidence. First, the incident report 
filled out by John Deere and assented to by Mr. Gruetzmacher makes no mention of a 
right shoulder injury as part of the November 29, 2021, work incident. A body diagram on 
the injury report shows only pain to the left shoulder. Mr. Gruetzmacher attempts to 
explain this away by indicating that someone else filled out the form and he only signed 
it. If Mr. Gruetzmacher wanted his right shoulder to be mentioned, it appears that he would 
have been free to correct the report based upon Mr. Austin’s testimony that he reviewed 
the report with the claimant. In fact, the report indicates that Mr. Gruetzmacher had a prior 
right shoulder injury, and that he played football. Additionally, Mr. Austin testified credibly 
that he could recall no mention of an injury to the claimant’s right shoulder.   
 
 
Following his initial appointments, there is no mention of right arm issues 
throughout his treatment for his left shoulder. In fact, Dr. Hoffman, who is a doctor not 
located on-site with John Deere, examined both shoulders and continually found no 
tenderness to the claimant’s right shoulder. Dr. Hoffman’s records are also silent as to 
any history of a right shoulder injury dating to November 29, 2021.   
 
 
It was not until July 22, 2022, that any record notes a right shoulder issue allegedly 
related to the November 29, 2021, work injury. In response to this, Dr. Garrels spoke to 
his staff and reviewed documentation to determine whether a right shoulder injury was 
previously mentioned. He found none. Dr. Garrels concluded that the right shoulder issue 
presented on this date was not the result of a work injury.   
 
 
The claimant’s testimony on this issue is also not entirely credible, when the weight 
of the evidence is overwhelmingly against his testimony. The claimant testifies that he 
told the providers that he was having right shoulder injuries; however, the records are 
silent as to any right shoulder issues related to the November 29, 2021, work incident 
until July 22, 2022, and Dr. Bansal’s examination. There is no credible explanation as to 
why the medical records of multiple medical providers are silent.   
 
 
In their post-hearing brief, the claimant points to potential bias on the part of Dr. 
Garrels by characterizing him as an employee of John Deere. This is patently false. Dr. 
Garrels testified credibly. He testified that he is an employee of UnityPoint Health, and 
that his employer has a relationship with John Deere to provide occupational medicine 
services. Pursuant to this agreement, he worked about 20 hours per week at John Deere. 
There is no evidence that Dr. Garrels has a contractual or employment relationship with 
John Deere.   
 
 
Based upon the foregoing, the claimant failed to show, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that he sustained a right shoulder injury that arose out of, and in the course of 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 16 
 
his employment with John Deere. Considering this determination, there is no need to 
conduct any analysis as to the asserted affirmative defense.   
 
Permanent Disability to the Left Shoulder 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable, 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011). The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure the 
credibility of witnesses.” Id. The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, even 
if uncontroverted, in whole or in part. Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156. When considering the 
weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion. 
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
 
 
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920). While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to be 
compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial 
factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa 
workers’ compensation system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 
1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980).   
 
 
The claimant alleges that he sustained permanent disability to both his left upper 
extremity and left shoulder as a result of the injuries sustained on November 29, 2021. 
The claimant injured his left shoulder. An MRI showed minimal insertional tendinopathy 
of the inserting supraspinatus tendon, and a “[p]rominent superior labral tear extending 
through the superior half of the anterior labral segment and the superior half of the 
posterior labral segment.” Eventually, Dr. Hoffman performed a surgery on the claimant, 
which consisted of a debridement of the left labrum, a biceps tenodesis, and an 
arthroscopic shoulder decompression. Dr. Hoffman’s postoperative diagnoses included a 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 17 
 
left shoulder superior labrum anterior and posterior lesion, a biceps tenodesis, and 
impingement syndrome.   
 
 
Mr. Gruetzmacher had a relatively uncomplicated recovery, according to treating 
physician Dr. Garrels. By June of 2022, the claimant complained of no stiffness, pain, 
numbness, or tingling in his left arm, and Dr. Hoffman noted that he recovered well from 
his surgery. On June 19, 2022, Dr. Hoffman released the claimant to return to work with 
no restrictions. Mr. Matson also allowed the claimant to return to work with no restrictions.  
  
 
On July 5, 2022, Dr. Garrels examined the claimant and noted that he had no 
active complaints to his left shoulder. The doctor also found that the claimant had a full 
range of motion in his left shoulder with no strength issues. Dr. Garrels performed range 
of motion testing on the claimant. He testified that he did not touch or manipulate the 
claimant during this examination. The claimant contradicted this during his rebuttal 
testimony, but his testimony as noted above was less credible than that of Dr. Garrels 
insofar as he claimed to have cried in front of Dr. Garrels during the examination, and 
then after the examination. Dr. Garrels' contemporaneous medical record contradicts this, 
in that it indicates the claimant exhibited no pain behaviors on testing. Dr. Garrels testified 
credibly that he would have recorded an incident where the claimant cried or exhibited 
pain during his examination. Based upon this examination, Dr. Garrels found the claimant 
to have no active pain complaints, and no issues with range of motion. Accordingly, Dr. 
Garrels opined that the claimant suffered no permanent impairment as a result of his 
November 29, 2021, work injury. During a July 19, 2022 visit, Dr. Hoffman found the 
claimant to have normal range of motion in both of his shoulders.   
 
 
The claimant points to the examination of Dr. Bansal in September of 2022, and 
urges the undersigned to adopt the permanent impairment rating(s) provided therein. Dr. 
Bansal performed range of motion testing on the claimant and provided certain 
measurements in his report. It is unclear the method used by Dr. Bansal in arriving at his 
range of motion measurements. Dr. Bansal also relied on faulty history in arriving at some 
of his conclusions. The claimant also relies on his own testimony to bolster the opinions 
of Dr. Bansal. As I ruled previously, I found the claimant to be a less than credible witness 
who appeared to be acting in his own self-interest in contradicting the objective medical 
records and testimony of Dr. Garrels.   
 
 
The claimant argues that Dr. Garrels’ opinions should be questioned and that Dr. 
Garrels was not a treating physician of the claimant. I disagree. Dr. Garrels examined the 
claimant on several occasions. He provided a referral to an orthopedic surgeon, Dr. 
Hoffman. While Dr. Garrels did not perform surgery on the claimant, he is board certified 
in occupational medicine. Dr. Garrels was a treating physician in this case. Dr. Garrels 
opined that the claimant had no permanent impairment based upon his examination and 
the application of the AMA Guides. He found that the claimant had no issues with range 
of motion or strength. Dr. Hoffman, the treating surgeon in this case, indicated that the 
claimant had no pain or issues with range of motion during his final visit in the record. He 
also allowed the claimant to return to work full-duty with no restrictions. Based upon the 
foregoing, I find the opinions of Dr. Garrels and Dr. Hoffman to be more credible. I 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 18 
 
conclude that the claimant has not met his burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that he sustained a permanent disability to his left shoulder.   
 
 
With regard to the left biceps tendinopathy, it was noted in therapy with Ms. 
Whiteside that the claimant indicated pain in the area of the left long head of the biceps 
tendon. I have previously noted that the long head of the biceps tendon originates in the 
shoulder, and therefore, a repair to the same is proximal and intertwined with the 
glenohumeral joint. See Ruff v. Senior Housing Health Care, Inc., File No. 1655383.01 
(Arb. Oct. 19, 2022). Therefore, I do not find Dr. Bansal’s rating to the left upper extremity 
based upon biceps tendinopathy to be credible, and I find that the claimant has not 
proven, by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained a permanent disability to 
his left upper extremity.   
 
Reimbursement for IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
 
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for the IME and subsequent report of Dr. 
Bansal in the amount of one thousand nine hundred eighty and 00/100 dollars 
($1,980.00). The defendant makes no argument in their post-hearing brief as to this issue; 
however, it is still the claimant’s burden to prove entitlement thereto. 
 
 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.     
. . .    
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for the cost of such 
an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined is 
determined not to be a compensable injury. A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.     
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).    
  
 
The defendant is responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination. Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. Economy 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 19 
 
Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). An opinion finding a lack of 
causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & 
Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. 2021).     
 
 
In this case, Dr. Garrels opined in July of 2022, that the claimant had no impairment 
to his left shoulder. Dr. Bansal’s report covers both the left and right shoulders. While I 
previously found the right shoulder injury to not be compensable, it would seem counter 
to the intent of the workers’ compensation system to deny the claimant reimbursement 
for the cost of the report simply based upon this issue alone. I also am unaware of any 
binding precedent that provides guidance as to apportionment of the fee for an IME in a 
case such as this. Based upon my experience, Dr. Bansal’s fee is reasonable for an IME 
in this case. Accordingly, I find that the defendant shall reimburse the claimant one 
thousand nine hundred eighty and 00/100 dollars ($1,980.00) for the IME of Dr. Bansal. 
 
Costs 
 
 
Claimant seeks the award of costs. Specifically, it appears that the claimant hand-
wrote on the hearing report “103” and “filing fee.” Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case. See 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 86.40.  
 
 
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:    
 
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.     
 
 
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6). The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.” Id. (noting additionally 
that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the underlying medical 
treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or deposition”). The 
commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses incurred by vocational 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 20 
 
experts. See Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 5055494 (App. Dec., 
December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 5056857 (App. Dec., 
September 27, 2019).     
 
 
In my discretion I decline to award the claimant costs. 
 
Constitutionality 
 
 
Finally, I would note that the claimant made an argument in their post-hearing brief 
as to the constitutionality of certain changes made to the workers’ compensation statutes 
in 2017. While this issue is not raised in the hearing report or the original notice and 
petition, I feel compelled to address it in this decision.    
 
 
The claimant contends that “treating a shoulder not as a body as a whole is a 
violation of Fourth and Fifteenth Amendment of [sic] due process of the Constitution and 
equal protection.”   
 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has previously ruled that agencies cannot decide issues 
of statutory validity or the constitutional validity of a statute. Salsbury Laboratories v. Iowa 
Dept. of Environmental Quality, 276 N.W.2d 830, 836 (Iowa 1979). Based upon this 
precedent, this agency cannot rule on the claim that certain provisions of Iowa law are 
unconstitutional and/or legally invalid.   
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
That the defendant shall reimburse the claimant one thousand nine hundred eighty 
and 00/100 dollars ($1,980.00) for the IME of Dr. Bansal. 
 
 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
 
 
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 11.7.   
 
Signed and filed this __16th__ day of August, 2023. 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

GRUETZMACHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS  
Page 21 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James P. Hoffman (via WCES) 
Benjamin J. Patterson (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be 
filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
