Case Number: 5063830
Case Title:  RAMSEY, DAVID V. NORTH LIBERTY, CITY OF
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ramsey David-5063830d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DAVID RAMSEY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5063830 
CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EMC INSURANCE COMPANIES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
       Head Note No.:  1403.30, 2402, 
 
Defendants. 
  :                          2501, 2502, 2503, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
David Ramsey, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against the City of North 
Liberty, as the employer and EMC Insurance Companies as the insurance carrier.  This 
case came before Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Michelle A. 
McGovern for an arbitration hearing on May 14, 2019, in Des Moines.  The hearing 
transcript was filed with the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation on May 28, 2019. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through M.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  Defendants called Debra Hilton and Ryan 
Heiar to testify.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary 
hearing on May 14, 2019.   
Post-hearing briefs were filed on July 15, 2019.  The case was deemed fully 
submitted to Deputy McGovern on that date. 
Deputy Commissioner McGovern retired in February 2020.  As a result, former 
Deputy Commissioner McGovern is unavailable to the agency.  Pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 17A.15(2), Commissioner Cortese delegated this file to the undersigned for 
preparation and filing of an arbitration decision.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Apr-09  16:16:25     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 2 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A.15(2), the undersigned inquired of the parties 
whether they believed demeanor of a witness is a substantial factor in the case.  The 
undersigned offered to hear those portions of the testimony again for which demeanor 
was considered a substantial factor.  On March 5, 2020, claimant’s counsel confirmed 
via e-mail to the undersigned that claimant does not believe demeanor is a substantial 
factor in this case and that he has no objection to the undersigned drafting an arbitration 
decision without further evidentiary hearing.  On March 6, 2020, defense counsel 
similarly confirmed via e-mail that defendants do not have an objection to the 
undersigned proceeding to write this arbitration decision without rehearing all or portions 
of the testimony to assess witness demeanor.  Therefore, pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 17A.15(2) and the Commissioner’s Order of Delegation filed on March 2, 2020, 
the undersigned performs a review of the evidentiary record in this case and issues this 
arbitration decision at the direction of the Commissioner. 
ISSUES 
The parties completed a hearing report in which they submitted the following 
disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant’s claim is barred by the statute of limitations, including a 
claim that defendants paid wages in lieu of worker’s compensation weekly 
benefits extending the statute of limitations. 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability, or healing 
period, benefits. 
3. 
Whether the January 15, 2007 injury caused permanent disability and, if 
so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability. 
4. 
The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any. 
5. 
Whether claimant is entitled to payment or reimbursement for past medical 
expenses, including specific medical transportation expenses. 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation charges. 
7. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
David Ramsey, claimant, sustained an admitted work injury on January 15, 2007, 
while in the employment of the City of North Liberty.  On that date, Mr. Ramsey fell on 
ice located on his employer’s premises.  When he fell, Mr. Ramsey struck his head.  He 

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 3 
testified that he was paralyzed for a period of time after he fell.  Once he regained some 
movement, he called his employer and was transported via ambulance to the hospital. 
Mr. Ramsey remained hospitalized until January 18, 2007.  His care was 
subsequently transferred to an occupational medicine physician, Henri Cuddihy, M.D.  
Dr. Cuddihy diagnosed claimant with a mild traumatic brain injury, vertigo and left 
cervical pain.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 159)  However, Dr. Cuddihy permitted claimant to return to 
work part-time on January 26, 2007 and later full-time.  Defendants issued a temporary 
total disability payment to claimant for his lost time through January 26, 2007.  
Defendants also filed a notice of commencement of benefits with the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commission on January 31, 2007. 
Thereafter, Mr. Ramsey continued to receive medical treatment, including 
physical therapy and continued to work under restrictions.  However, he had no 
additional lost time that was documented or paid as temporary disability under Iowa’s 
worker’s compensation statutes.  By July 9, 2007, claimant reported significant 
improvement of his head and neck pain and Dr. Cuddihy released him to full-duty work.  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 168)  Dr. Cuddihy opined that claimant would achieve maximum medical 
improvement by approximately the end of July 2007 or the beginning of August 2007.  
He opined that claimant sustained no permanent impairment as a result of the work 
injury.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 168) 
Unfortunately, Mr. Ramsey’s symptoms and conditions persisted and did not fully 
resolve.  Following medical recommendations, claimant tried various medications, 
sought treatment through occupational medicine physicians, a neurosurgeon, a pain 
clinic, and submitted to neuropsychological evaluations, injections, psychiatric 
evaluations, neurological consultations, chiropractic care, pain clinic consultations, and 
a spinal stimulator trial.  Unfortunately, Mr. Ramsey testified that his symptoms, 
including debilitating headaches, continued to escalate, especially after 2015. 
Mr. Ramsey testified that he became irritable and had difficulties managing his 
subordinates at the City of North Liberty because of his symptoms.  He testified that he 
continues to have daily headaches.  Claimant developed anxiety and required the 
assistance of his wife on weekends to continue to complete his job duties for the City of 
North Liberty.  Ultimately, claimant retired from his job at North Liberty when faced with 
disciplinary action, including probable termination, as a result of his actions toward 
subordinates.   
Since his retirement, claimant has qualified for and receives Social Security 
disability benefits.  However, he has applied for alternate employment.  He testified that 
he interviewed for and received a job offer from the City of Sioux City.  Unfortunately, 
claimant testified that in his initial meeting to understand the job duties, he was unable 
to focus and had to decline the job offer.  Mr. Ramsey obtained part-time employment 
working for a car dealership, but quit after a few weeks because he was unable to 
handle the job pressures due to his symptoms.   

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 4 
Joseph Chen, M.D. provided claimant pain clinic care at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics.  Dr. Chen ultimately recommended ongoing medication 
management for claimant’s condition through a psychiatric medicine specialist.  On 
November 9, 2018, Dr. Chen opined that claimant sustained a 14 percent permanent 
impairment of the whole person as a result of his mental status resulting from the 2007 
work injury.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 147)  Don St. John, PA-C, at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics Adult Psychiatry Clinic diagnosed claimant with major depressive 
disorder and insomnia as a sequela of his 2007 head injury.  (Joint Ex. 1, pp. 141-143) 
Claimant obtained a psychiatric independent medical evaluation performed by 
Kunal Patra, M.D.  Dr. Patra evaluated claimant on January 17, 2019.  Dr. Patra 
diagnosed claimant with significant deficits in memory and attention.  He noted severe 
clinical depression and a severe generalized anxiety disorder.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 
23-24)  Dr. Patra attributed these conditions to claimant’s work injury in 2007 and the 
resulting post-concussive syndrome.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 24-31) 
Dr. Patra opined that claimant sustained a 22 percent permanent impairment of 
the whole person as a result of the 2007 head injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 34-35)  Dr. 
Patra opined that claimant has resulting moderate cognitive limitations that would 
preclude him from the demands of working in a dynamic workplace.  Dr. Patra 
recommended against any return to work unless and until claimant’s depression, 
anxiety, pain, fatigue, and ability to concentrate improved.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 35) 
Claimant testified that he experiences daily headaches with significant and 
debilitating exacerbations occurring several times per week.  He testified that the 
exacerbations come on randomly and are not predictable.  His headaches make it 
difficult for him to drive a vehicle and he limits his driving to local driving.  Mr. Ramsey 
was not working at the time of the hearing.  It is unlikely that he will return to 
employment in the foreseeable future unless his symptoms are further addressed 
medically and significantly improve. 
Defendants assert that claimant’s claim for benefits is barred by the statute of 
limitations.  With respect to this defense, I find that defendants paid claimant temporary 
total disability benefits from the date of injury through January 26, 2007.  (Defendants’ 
Ex. A & C)  Defendants paid no additional weekly worker’s compensation benefits to Mr. 
Ramsey after January 26, 2007.  (Defendants’ Ex. C)  Defendants electronically filed a 
notice of commencement of weekly benefits with the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commission on January 31, 2007 and the report was acknowledged and accepted by 
this administrative agency on February 2, 2007.  (Defendants’ Ex. B) 
Mr. Ramsey asserts that, although defendants did not pay weekly benefits, he 
did miss additional time from work after January 2007.  Mr. Ramsey testified that he 
was told by human resources for the City of North Liberty to simply record regular work 
time for all work time he missed due to treatment or symptoms resulting from his 2007 
work injury.  Claimant asserts that the City of North Liberty paid him regular wages in 
lieu of paying temporary disability, or healing period, benefits for all time he lost after 
January 26, 2007. 

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 5 
However, Mr. Ramsey is not able to identify specific dates he was absent for 
which he was paid normal wages, other than for his attendance at medical 
appointments.  In 2017, claimant was taken off work by Dr. Hartley and received sick 
leave benefits through the employer’s benefit package.  However, with respect to any 
lost time prior to 2017, Mr. Ramsey conceded throughout his testimony that his memory 
is not good.  Mr. Ramsey also conceded at trial that the employer never told him that 
they were paying wages in place of worker’s compensation benefits.  (Tr., p. 92)   
The employer’s human resource director, Debra Hilton, testified that the City had 
no intention to pay wages in lieu of weekly worker’s compensation benefits.  (Tr., p. 
110)  Ms. Hilton further testified that the City of North Liberty does not ever pay worker’s 
compensation benefits directly to employees.  All worker’s compensation weekly 
benefits are paid through its insurance carrier.  (Tr., p. 107)  Ms. Hilton concedes that 
the City does pay lost wages when an employee attends a medical appointment 
because such wages and direct payment are, by her understanding, required by law.  
(Tr., p. 108) 
Ms. Hilton testified that claimant was a manager for the City.  As a manager, Mr. 
Ramsey knew that the City required medical documentation for any lost time from work 
as a result of a work injury.  (Tr., pp. 111-112)  Yet, claimant did not obtain or submit 
medical documentation for any lost time between January 2007 and June 2017.  Most 
damaging for Mr. Ramsey was his admission that he would notify his subordinates if he 
was adjusting work hours due to symptoms but that he never told his superiors he was 
losing time prior to June 2017.  (Tr., p. 55) 
Claimant’s direct supervisor, Ryan Heiar, also testified.  Mr. Heiar testified that 
claimant was paid sick leave after Dr. Hartley removed him from work in June 2017.  
However, Mr. Heiar denied that claimant ever reported he was missing work time as a 
result of the 2007 work injury prior to June 2017.  (Tr., p. 125) 
Ultimately, I find that Mr. Ramsey was paid regular wages for time he missed to 
attend medical appointments after his 2007 work injury.  After June 2017, claimant was 
paid sick leave benefits by the employer pursuant to its sick leave policy.  However, I 
find that prior to June 2017, claimant did not notify his employer that he was losing time 
as a result of symptoms or as a result of the 2007 work injury.  I find that the employer 
did not know it was paying wages for time not worked due to the 2007 work injury and 
that it had no intention of paying wages in lieu of worker’s compensation weekly 
benefits.  I accept the City’s evidence that it did not pay wages to employees; but rather, 
all such payments were made through its worker’s compensation insurance carrier.   
Finally, I find that the payments made to claimant after Dr. Hartley took him off 
work in June 2017 were pursuant to the terms of the City’s sick leave policy and not 
paid as wages in lieu of benefits.  In fact, when claimant inquired in July 2017, the City 
clarified that he was no longer entitled to worker’s compensation weekly benefits.  I find 
that the City did not pay wages in lieu of weekly worker’s compensation benefits.  

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 6 
I find that the last (and only) weekly worker’s compensation benefit payment 
made to claimant was in January 2007.  Claimant did not file his original notice and 
petition in this case until May 7, 2018. 
Mr. Ramsey also asserts a claim for past, unpaid medical mileage and parking 
expenses totaling $211.47.  (Claimant’s Ex. 8, pp. 109-110)  No contrary evidence was 
introduced on this issue.  I accept claimant’s affidavit of mileage and find the amounts 
contained therein are accurate.  I find that claimant incurred medical mileage and 
parking fees.  I find that he has not been reimbursed for $211.47 in medical mileage and 
parking fees for medical treatment causally related to the 2007 work injury. 
Claimant also asserts a claim for reimbursement of his independent psychiatric 
medical evaluation performed by Dr. Patra on January 17, 2019.  Dr. Patra charged 
$4,680.83 for his medical services.  I find those charges are reasonable under the 
circumstances, longevity, and complexity of this case. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute submitted by the parties is whether this claim for benefits is 
barred by the statute of limitations.  The legal standards and statute of limitations for 
weekly benefits and medical benefits differ.  See Iowa Code section 85.26(1)-(2).  
Therefore, claimant’s claim must be considered in two parts.  First, I must determine 
whether his claim for weekly benefits is barred by the statute of limitations.  Next, I must 
determine whether his claim for medical benefits is barred. 
The initial determination is whether the statute of limitations bars claimant’s claim 
for additional weekly benefits.   
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act imposes time limits on injured employees 
both as to when they must notify their employers of injuries and as to when injury claims 
must be filed. 
Iowa Code section 85.26(1) requires an employee to bring an original proceeding 
for benefits within two years from the date of the occurrence of the injury if the employer 
has paid the employee no weekly indemnity benefits for the claimed injury.  If the 
employer has paid the employee weekly benefits on account of the claimed injury, 
however, the employee must bring an original proceeding within three years from the 
date of last payment of weekly compensation benefits.  
That the employee failed to bring a proceeding within the required time period is 
an affirmative defense which the employer must plead and prove by a preponderance of 
the evidence.  See Dart v. Sheller-Globe Corp., II Iowa Industrial Comm’r Rep. 99 (App. 
1982). 
The evidence is not really in dispute about defendants’ payment of weekly 
benefits.  The undisputed evidence demonstrates that defendants paid one week of 
temporary disability benefits more than three years prior to the filing of claimant’s 

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 7 
original notice and petition.  If Iowa Code section 85.26(2) is read literally, any claim for 
weekly benefits is barred by the statute of limitations.   
The last and only payment of weekly benefits to Mr. Ramsey occurred on 
January 26, 2007.  The defendants properly and timely filed a notice of commencement 
of benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13(1) and 876 IAC 3.1(2).  Accordingly, 
the statute of limitations for weekly benefits in this claim expired in January 2010. 
Claimant, however, asserts that defendants paid him salary or wages in lieu of 
weekly worker’s compensation benefits after January 2007 and that those payments 
extend the statute of limitations.  Indeed, wages can be paid directly to an employee in 
lieu of weekly worker’s compensation benefits.  See 876 IAC 8.4.  Given the agency’s 
recognition that wages can be paid in lieu of weekly benefits, I conclude that payment of 
wages in lieu of benefits likely does extend the statute of limitations.   
Claimant testified that the employer instructed him to report regular hours even if 
he missed time due to his work injury.  Presumably, this means that claimant was 
reporting regular wages while missing hours or time due to symptoms.  He also testified 
that he missed time for medical appointments and reported those lost hours as regular 
time. 
Defendants countered with evidence demonstrating that claimant was not 
reporting specific lost time to his superiors to permit a determination by the employer 
about whether to pay worker’s compensation benefits or wages in lieu of benefits.  The 
employer also presented testimony that the City never paid wages in lieu of benefits and 
always paid worker’s compensation weekly benefits through its insurance carrier.  
Claimant’s direct supervisor also testified that claimant never reported missing work due 
to the 2007 injury between January 2007 and June 2017.  Having considered all of the 
relevant evidence and testimony on this issue, I found that claimant failed to prove the 
wages he was paid by the City were paid in lieu of weekly worker’s compensation 
benefits.  Given that a reviewing court has not considered this issue specifically to 
determine whether the employee or employer bear the burden of proof on the issue of 
wages paid in lieu of weekly benefits, I offered a similar but opposite finding that the City 
proved it did not pay wages in lieu of benefits.  Either way, I conclude that the City did 
not pay wages in lieu of benefits and that the statute of limitations for weekly benefits 
was not extended beyond January 2010. 
Mr. Ramsey also alleged that the City paid him lost wages for all medical 
appointments he attended as a result of the 2007 work injury.  The City’s human 
resource director conceded that the City pays wages directly for lost time due to medical 
treatment, as she understood the law requires such payment of wages.  Indeed, under 
circumstances that would apply to Mr. Ramsey in this claim, the employer is required to 
pay wages to an employee for lost time to attend medical appointments related to a 
work injury.  See Iowa Code section 85.27(7).  However, the statute specifically states, 
“Payments under this subsection shall not be construed to be payment of weekly 
benefits.”  Id.   

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 8 
Therefore, any lost time due to medical appointments would be categorized as 
medical benefits paid pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27.  Any payment of wages by 
the employer to compensate claimant for lost time to attend medical appointments 
would not extend the statute of limitations for weekly benefits.   
Claimant failed to prove any specific dates when he lost time due to symptoms.  
Moreover, he failed to prove that his superiors knew he was losing time and that he 
should have been paid weekly worker’s compensation benefits.  Ultimately, I found that 
claimant was paid one week of temporary disability benefits in January 2007.  No 
additional weekly worker’s compensation benefits were paid to claimant.  The employer 
did not intend to and could not have known that it was paying wages in lieu of weekly 
benefits under the facts presented. 
I also found that defendants proved it complied with all necessary statutory 
provisions to ensure the statute of limitations commenced and expired.  Specifically, I 
found that the employer timely filed its notice of commencement of benefits with this 
agency.  Therefore, the statute of limitations commenced as of the filing of that notice of 
commencement and expired in 2010.   
Having reached these findings of fact, I conclude that the employer proved that 
more than three years passed between its last payment of weekly benefits and the filing 
of claimant’s original notice and petition.  I conclude that claimant failed to establish that 
the payment of wages the City made to him constituted payment of wages in lieu of 
benefits.  Stated to the contrary, if the burden is on the City, I find that the City proved it 
did not pay wages in lieu of weekly worker’s compensation benefits.  Therefore, 
although I am sympathetic to Mr. Ramsey given that this work injury has ultimately 
created a great hardship and catastrophic consequences upon him, I conclude that the 
statute of limitations for any weekly benefits expired before he filed his original notice 
and petition.  Ultimately, I conclude that any claim for additional weekly benefits is 
barred pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.26(2). 
Next, I must determine whether claimant has a viable claim for medical benefits, 
or if those have likewise been barred by the statute of limitations.   
Where an award for payments or agreement for settlement for benefits has been 
made, an employee may bring an action seeking a determination and order as to the 
employee’s entitlement to medical treatment pursuant to section 85.27 at any time.  
Likewise, if an employer makes weekly indemnity benefits to the employee and does 
not file a denial of liability with the commissioner and mail notice of that denial to the 
employee, both within six months of the commencement of weekly benefits, then the 
employee may bring an action seeking medical benefits under section 85.27 at any 
time.  Iowa Code section 85.26(2). 
Defendants introduced no evidence that it filed a notice of denial within six 
months of commencing weekly benefits.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant’s claim for 
past medical expenses remains viable and was not extinguished by the statute of 
limitations.  Iowa Code section 85.26(2).  In fact, claimant remains entitled to payment 

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 9 
of any causally related medical expenses for the remainder of his lifetime.  Therefore, 
claimant maintains a viable claim for medical expenses that must be considered. 
Claimant asserts a claim for medical transportation charges.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Pursuant to 876 IAC 8.1(2), claimant is entitled to mileage expenses for use of a 
private vehicle to obtain medical care.  Having found that claimant’s mileage affidavit 
and itemization at Claimant’s Exhibit 8, pages 109-110 are accurate, I conclude that 
claimant has proved entitlement to reimbursement for medical mileage and parking fees 
totaling $211.47.  Iowa Code section 85.27(1). 
Mr. Ramsey also seeks the award of his independent medical evaluation with Dr. 
Patra.   
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
However, Iowa Code section 85.39 establishes pre-requisites that claimant must 
meet before reimbursement of an independent medical evaluation is required of the 
defendants.  First and foremost, an evaluation of permanent disability must be made by 
a physician chosen by the defendants before claimant obtains his independent medical 
evaluation. 
In this case, defendants obtained a permanent impairment rating pertaining to 
claimant’s mental health condition by Dr. Chen on November 9, 2018.  Claimant sought 
an independent medical evaluation with Dr. Patra on January 17, 2019.  Dr. Patra 
rendered a permanent impairment rating as a result of his evaluation.  Therefore, I 

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 10 
conclude that claimant established the pre-requisite of Iowa Code section 85.39 to 
obtain reimbursement of Dr. Patra’s fees under that statute.  Des Moines Area Regional 
Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843-844 (Iowa 2015). 
I found the charges submitted by Dr. Patra were reasonable under the 
circumstances of this case.  Having reached these findings and conclusions, I similarly 
conclude that claimant proved entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Patra’s independent 
medical evaluation charges pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Finally, claimant seeks reimbursement of costs associated with this case.  
Claimant seeks reimbursement of his filing fee, service costs, and the cost of his 
deposition transcript.  Claimant also lists reimbursement for Dr. Patra’s evaluation.  
Having awarded Dr. Patra’s charges pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, I will not 
consider those charges as claimant’s request for costs. 
Defendants prevailed on the largest issue in dispute in this case, namely the 
statute of limitations defense.  That being said, claimant did recover some past medical 
reimbursements, his independent medical evaluation, and established his entitlement to 
ongoing, causally related medical treatment for the injury.  Given those recoveries, it 
was reasonable and necessary for claimant to file the petition with this agency.  I 
conclude it is appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some amount. 
I find it is reasonable to assess claimant’s filing fee ($100.00) pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and 876 IAC 4.33(7).  I assess claimant’s service fees ($13.34) 
pursuant to 876 IC 4.33(3).  Defendants placed claimant’s deposition transcript into 
evidence.  Therefore, it was reasonable for claimant to order a copy of the transcript.  I 
assess the cost of the transcript ($392.50) pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2).  In total, I 
assess claimant’s costs totaling $505.84 against defendants. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for medical mileage and parking fees in the 
amount of two hundred eleven and 47/100 dollars ($211.47). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for his independent medical evaluation 
performed by Dr. Patra in the amount of four thousand six hundred eighty and 83/100 
dollars ($4,680.83). 
Defendants remain responsible for all future, causally related medical treatment 
related to this injury. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of five hundred five 
and 84/100 dollars ($505.84). 
 

RAMSEY V. CITY OF NORTH LIBERTY 
Page 11 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this 9th day of April, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
M. Anne McAtee (via WCES) 
Eric Bigley (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
