Case Number: 19700395.02
Case Title:  KOLASH, DEVIN V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Kolash Devin - 19700395.02d-r.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DEVIN KOLASH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File Nos. 19700395.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
     22701143.01 
 
 
  : 
v. 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DEVIN KOLASH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 23700112.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
v. 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
      ARBITRATION AND REVIEW- 
 
 
  : 
 
REOPENING DECISION 
AIU INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
          Head Note Nos:  1108 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Devin Kolash, filed a petition for review-reopening and two 
petitions for arbitration against John Deere Des Moines Works, and AIU Insurance 
Company, insurance carrier.  The claims were filed at different times and eventually 
consolidated.  The claimant was represented by Saffin Parrish-Sams.  The defendants 
were represented by Coreen Sweeney. 
These matters came on for hearing on March 29, 2024, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The combined 
record in the case is voluminous.  It consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 21 and Defense 
Exhibit A.  The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to Joshua Dunn.  Maria Taylor 
served as the court reporter for the proceedings.  The matter was fully submitted on 
May 2, 2024, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-27  16:01:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 2 
ISSUES & STIPULATIONS 
File No. 19700395.02 
 
This claim is against John Deere Des Moines Works as a self-insured employer.  
The parties stipulate that claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment on July 30, 2019.  This claim was settled on October 12, 
2020, via an Agreement for Settlement (AFS).  The parties agree that the injury resulted 
in some temporary and permanent disability.  Claimant seeks review-reopening on this 
claim and contends that he is entitled to additional permanency benefits.  The employer 
disputes claimant’s condition warrants an increase in permanency benefits.  In addition, 
the nature of disability is disputed as claimant contends the disability now extends into 
his whole body, while the defendants contend it is limited to his shoulder.  In the hearing 
report, the parties have clarified that this claim is essentially an alternative claim to File 
No. 23700112.01, which claims a new injury to the same body parts.  The parties have 
stipulated to the rate of compensation and affirmative defenses have been waived.  The 
claimant is seeking medical expenses set forth in Joint Exhibit 20, and alternate medical 
care. 
File No. 22701143.01 
 
This claim is against John Deere Des Moines Works as a self-insured employer.  
The parties stipulate that claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment on November 30, 2020.  The parties further stipulate that this 
injury was a cause of temporary disability during a period of recovery.  The defendant 
disputes the injury is a cause of any permanent disability.  The claimant is seeking 
permanent partial disability.  The defendant disputes this.  The parties have stipulated 
that the claimant’s disability, if any, is compensated under Section 85.34(2)(v) and the 
commencement date for any such benefits, if appropriate, is January 27, 2021.  The 
parties have stipulated to the rate of compensation and affirmative defenses are waived.  
Medical expenses are not in dispute. 
File No. 23700112.01 
 
This claim is against John Deere Des Moines Works as the employer and AIU 
Insurance Company as the insurance carrier.  Claimant alleges he sustained a new 
injury on either November 15, 2022, or November 17, 2022.  The defendants dispute 
this, and further contend that claimant is unable to prove the alleged injury is a cause of 
any temporary or permanent disability.  This claim is essentially pled in the alternative to 
File No. 19700395.02.  Claimant is not seeking any temporary disability benefits.  He is 
claiming that the injury is a cause of permanent disability to his right shoulder, upper 
back and cervical spine and that he is entitled to permanent partial disability for these 
conditions under Section 85.34(2)(v).  The defendants dispute this.  The parties have 
stipulated that if any PPD benefits are awarded, the appropriate commencement date is 
March 1, 2023.  The parties have stipulated to the rate and affirmative defenses have 
been waived.  Claimant is seeking medical expenses set forth in Joint Exhibit 20 and 
alternate medical care.  Defendants dispute responsibility for any such expenses.  

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 3 
Other Issues and Stipulations for All Files 
 
The parties have stipulated that defendant is entitled to a credit of $307.77 which 
should be applied to one of the three active files. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Devin Kolash was 30 years old as of the date of hearing.  He testified 
live and under oath at the video hearing.  I find his testimony to be highly credible.  His 
testimony is consistent with other credible evidence in the record.  There was nothing 
about his demeanor which caused concern for his truthfulness.   
Mr. Kolash began working at Deere in approximately July 2018.  He had a pre-
employment physical, which he passed and began working as an “assembler.”  (Joint 
Exhibit 5, pages 1-6)  He had no preexisting conditions in his left shoulder, neck or 
upper back.  Mr. Kolash was in very good shape when he began working.  His hobbies 
included weightlifting, bodybuilding, working out, hunting and fishing. 
As an assembler, Mr. Kolash was required to lift 50 pounds or more, stand or 
walk for 8 hours, perform overhead work and operate equipment to assemble 
machinery.  The work is fairly heavy in nature.  On July 30, 2019, Mr. Kolash sustained 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of his employment with Deere.  At that 
time, he was working on the sprayer line.  He was pushing his arms in an overhead 
motion while sliding a boom cart when he felt a pop in his left shoulder.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 7)  
Mr. Kolash reported the injury and underwent authorized medical treatment on his left 
shoulder including surgery for a torn labral tear.  He was treated by Timothy Vinyard, 
M.D. at Iowa Ortho.  He was released from care without restrictions on January 30, 
2020.  Ultimately a 7 percent functional impairment rating was assigned.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 
10)  He had a minor flare-up with accompanying treatment in April 2020 and visited Dr. 
Vinyard a couple more times.  Dr. Vinyard examined Mr. Kolash’s neck, upper back and 
right shoulder as well; however, only documented any permanent condition in the left 
shoulder.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 13-17) 
In August 2020, Mark Kirkland, D.O., examined Mr. Kolash.  Dr. Kirkland opined 
that he had sustained a 14 percent left upper extremity impairment as a result of the 
work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 8-10)  Dr. Kirkland also examined the right shoulder, neck 
and upper back; however, only assigned impairment for the left shoulder condition.  Dr. 
Kirkland did recommend permanent restrictions to limit his continuous work at shoulder 
level. 
On October 12, 2020, this agency approved an Agreement for Settlement (AFS) 
between the self-insured employer and Mr. Kolash.  This AFS is in the record and is a 
definitive snapshot of Mr. Kolash’s disability at the time of settlement.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1-
12)  The parties agreed that Mr. Kolash had sustained a 13.78 percent functional 
disability in his left shoulder.  Permanency benefits were not paid on any other body part 
or basis.  Mr. Kolash continued working at Deere without restrictions on the “grid bar” 
job, which was a regular, full-duty position. 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 4 
On November 28, 2020, a photograph appeared on social media of Mr. Kolash 
holding his fiancé on his right shoulder and another piggyback.  (Jt. Ex. 18)  The actual 
date these photographs were taken is not in evidence, but it is almost certainly not 
November 28, 2020.  Mr. Kolash testified that it was taken some time prior to that by a 
professional photographer. These photographs have very limited probative value in this 
case since it is unknown when they were taken. 
On November 30, 2020, Mr. Kolash sustained his second work injury.  On that 
date, he was straining to line up an axel.  He sustained a hernia injury.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 13)  
This work-related injury is also stipulated.  He underwent a course of treatment which 
culminated in an umbilical hernia repair surgery on December 18, 2020, by Paul A. 
Conte, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 5)  He was provided some temporary restrictions and 
remained off work over the Christmas layoff.  He saw Dr. Conte one additional time 
before being released to work without restrictions and a zero impairment rating on 
January 27, 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 5-6)  It is evident in this record that he had a 
reasonably good recovery from this injury; however, at the time of hearing, Mr. Kolash 
contends the condition was not completely healed. 
On February 22, 2021, Mr. Kolash returned to Deere Medical complaining that he 
was experiencing increased symptoms in his left shoulder which now extended into his 
mid and upper back. The following history is documented. 
Devin is here today with a chief complaint of left shoulder pain.  He also 
notes some pain in the midline of the spine around the T2 area and pain 
that radiates from there around and under the axilla, up around the 
anterior shoulder into up and under the clavicle and some pain down the 
lateral shoulder.  He rates this pain a 4-5/10 with rest, 8-9/10 with activity.  
This pain has been present for about 5 days.  He started in a new 
department/new job about 3-4 weeks ago and this type of pain relates 
back to injury from 2019 of which he had a labral repair and since that 
labral repair, he has had 1 cortisone injection which did help him at that 
time and then physical therapy and a change in his work duties were [sic] 
also helpful.  Here recently, he said they have been on an increased 
volume in production.  He is lifting parts that are not heavy, about 15 
pounds, but is doing repetitively about 100 times per day with each arm.  
He is pulling some parts out of a tub and so reaching down and in with his 
wrist flexed and lifting that weigh [sic].  …  He reports associated tingling 
in the left 4th and 5th digits which he says is constant. He says that these 
symptoms were there prior to his surgery and have just remained.  He is 
noticing new tingling of all 5 digits now.  He is reporting trouble sleeping at 
night.  Other treatments he has tried since this started bothering him last 
week are resuming his home physical therapy exercises, using his 
physical therapy band, icing the shoulder 1 time a day about 3-4 times per 
week. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 19)  Deere Medical allowed Mr. Kolash to continue working full-duty 
through the plant shutdown.  In March 2021, he returned to Dr. Vinyard who had 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 5 
repaired the left shoulder in 2019. 
Dr. Vinyard focused on the left shoulder.  Dr. Vinyard recorded the following 
history: 
He tells me that he experiences setbacks from overdoing it at work.  He 
tells me that he returned from a recent hernia surgery and this setback his 
left shoulder.  He tells me he has significantly decreased range of motion 
and strength.  He is having increasing numbness and tingling that radiates 
down his hand.  A prior injection worked temporarily. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 18)  Dr. Vinyard diagnosed a SLAP tear and recommended further 
diagnostic testing including an MRI arthrogram and EMG.  The MRI arthrogram 
confirmed this.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 2)  When Mr. Kolash returned to Dr. Vinyard in April 2021, 
he opined the following diagnoses:  stiffness of left shoulder joint, numbness and 
tingling of left upper extremity, SLAP tear of left shoulder.  Mr. Kolash expressed his 
desire to avoid surgery.  Dr. Vinyard provided a steroid injection, medications and 
physical therapy.  On April 19, 2021, Dr. Vinyard sent an opinion to Deere confirming 
the causation between the SLAP tear and his job duties at Deere.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 28-30) 
On May 18, 2021, Mr. Kolash returned to Deere Medical and reported significant 
improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 22)  In fact, he had already been placed at MMI by a 
physician’s assistant at Iowa Ortho.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 31)  He continued to follow up with 
Deere Medical through June 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 22-28)  Upon his return from layoff, 
Mr. Kolash was reassigned to Department 40A, where his job included hoisting large 
parts.  He returned to Deere Medical on August 24, 2021.  The medical note documents 
that he reported symptoms similar to what he reported in February 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
35)  At this time he was placed on light duty and he was referred back to Dr. Vinyard.  
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 36)  On August 26, 2021, Dr. Vinyard provided another injection and 
verified the restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 37-38)  Mr. Kolash remained in Department 40A; 
however, did not use his left arm above shoulder height.  Instead, he relied on his right 
arm for this.  Mr. Kolash also underwent physical therapy from August 2021 through 
November 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 39) 
In October 2021, Deere employees went on strike.  Mr. Kolash missed an 
appointment with Dr. Vinyard in November 2021.  He testified credibly that he was 
never notified of the appointment.  (Tr., p. 32)  Dr. Vinyard discharged Mr. Kolash from 
his care.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 42)  When the strike ended, Mr. Kolash returned to Department 
40A.  He returned to Deere Medical and learned that he had been discharged from care 
based upon this communication error.  He continued to follow up with Deere Medical in 
December 2021 and January 2022, and underwent additional physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 
10, pp. 40-50)  On January 26, 2022, Mr. Kolash finally returned to Dr. Vinyard.  Dr. 
Vinyard documented “setbacks from overdoing it at work.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 46)  At this visit, 
Mr. Kolash reported right shoulder symptoms as well.  (Tr., pp. 33-34)  Dr. Vinyard 
assigned a permanent 50 hour per week restriction and released the other restrictions.  
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 44)  He worked under this restriction for a short period of time.  At hearing, 
Mr. Kolash testified that he was compensating for his bad left shoulder with his right, 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 6 
performing the heavier work on that side.  (Tr., pp. 35-36)  On or about February 25, 
2022, Mr. Kolash retained legal counsel who wrote to Deere requesting medical care.  
Deere’s attorney responded stating the matter was under investigation.  (Jt. Ex. 17, p. 6) 
On April 8, 2022, Joseph Chen, M.D., performed an independent medical 
examination (IME) on behalf of Deere, evaluating both of Mr. Kolash’s shoulders.  Mr. 
Kolash filled out paperwork for Dr. Chen.  (Jt. Ex. 13, pp. 27-36)  Dr. Chen examined 
Mr. Kolash, reviewed extensive records and ultimately opined that both shoulders were 
deemed “personal conditions” and non-work related.   
It is my medical opinion in reviewing the entirety of Mr. Kolash’s medical 
records that the left shoulder SLAP tear found on Mr. Kolash’s left 
shoulder MRI Arthrogram on March 24, 2021 is unrelated to his work 
activities of March 2021 and more related to his personal condition of 
extensive recreational weight-lifting leading to posterior shoulder capsule 
tightness and development of a SLAP tear seen on advanced imaging. 
(Jt. Ex. 13, p. 22)  He provided a similar opinion in relation to the right shoulder.  “Mr. 
Kolash has had a diagnosis of right scapular winging with scapular dyskinesis since a 
football injury when he was in high school.”  (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 25)  He also attacked Mr. 
Kolash’s credibility, accusing him of numerous instances of “manipulative behavior” and 
“inconsistent history.”  (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 22) 
On April 25, 2022, counsel for Deere sent Dr. Chen’s report to Dr. Vinyard asking 
him if this report changed his opinion.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 49)  Dr. Vinyard responded the 
following on May 5, 2022: 
Therefore, I believe I have previously given my opinion that the patient’s 
left shoulder and right shoulder symptoms were causally related to his 
work.  I have reviewed Dr. Joseph Chen’s Independent Medical 
Evaluation.  I found the IME to be very thorough and well documented.  It 
is my opinion that Dr. Chen’s reasoning is sound.  If I am interpreting his 
IME correctly, it would appear that he is unable to causally relate the 
patient’s symptoms to his alleged work injury or his work duties.  I would 
say at this time that it is my opinion that I am unable to provide causation 
for this patient.  To clarify, I do not have enough expertise to provide an 
opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty whether the 
patient’s symptoms are or are not directly or causally related to any 
alleged work injuries or his duties at work. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 50) 
I find these opinions unconvincing.  In thirty years of reading and analyzing 
medical reports related to workers’ compensation cases, I have never seen anything 
quite like this.  Dr. Chen performed a thorough record review and evaluation of Mr. 
Kolash; however, after reading his 19-page report, I am entirely unclear what actual 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 7 
facts he considered to base his causation opinion on.1  He referenced weightlifting 
activities and “many different personal etiologies including his prior experiences of pain 
following surgery or repeated injuries, disturbed sleep, personal or work stressors, 
anxiety, depression, fear avoidance or pain catastrophization …”  (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 24)  
While weightlifting certainly seems like the type of activity that could cause or aggravate 
a shoulder condition, I am entirely unclear what information Dr. Chen reviewed about 
his weightlifting to suggest this was the source of his condition.  In reviewing this 
exhaustive record, I find no evidence that he has ever sustained a weightlifting related 
accident.  I am similarly confused by his reference to “different personal etiologies …”  I 
just do not even understand what he is talking about. 
Reading Dr. Chen’s report as a whole and even attempting to give him every 
benefit of the doubt as a legitimate medical expert, it appears that Dr. Chen has deeply 
held dogmatic opinions regarding the nature of pain and, in particular, the psychological 
aspects of pain.  It further appears that his rigid opinions bled over into his causation 
opinion.  It also appears Dr. Chen relied heavily on QuickDASH testing to discredit Mr. 
Kolash.  These test results, however, are not well-explained, in particular to how they 
impact his causation opinions.  I find that the end result is an expert medical report 
containing opinions which are borderline useless in this legal proceeding. 
Dr. Vinyard’s backtracking report is equally unconvincing.  When presented with 
Dr. Chen’s report, Deere’s authorized treating physician responded that he is not an 
expert on medical causation.  Dr. Vinyard actually performed surgery on Mr. Kolash’s 
left shoulder.  Stated another way, Deere’s expert orthopedic shoulder surgeon, when 
confronted with a lengthy, confusing report from a physical medicine physician, 
suddenly professed that he is, in fact, not an expert.  Based upon the record before me, 
I find that Dr. Vinyard most likely believes that Mr. Kolash’s shoulder conditions are, in 
fact, work-connected under the appropriate legal standard; however, he consciously 
chose not to contradict Dr. Chen’s opinion for unknown reasons.  I find both of these 
opinions unconvincing, bordering on nonsensical. 
The net result of these medical opinions is that Deere formally denied Mr. 
Kolash’s claim on August 1, 2022, indicating no further treatment would be provided.  
(Jt. Ex. 17, p. 9)  Later he was told that Dr. Vinyard’s restrictions were lifted.  (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 58-59) 
Mr. Kolash testified credibly that later in August 2022, he sought intermittent 
medical leave under the FMLA so he could get the rest and treatment he needed to 
recover from his conditions and manage his workload.  (Tr., p. 40)  His primary clinic 
provided restrictions and accompanying paperwork to Deere.  After some back-and-
forth, Deere finally accepted his restrictions which limited his work to 8 hours per day, 
40 hours per week.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 57, 60-62) 
Mr. Kolash was evaluated by Brian Crites, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon, on 
                                                                 
1 As a side note, it is evident he did not use the correct legal standard for medical causation when providing his 
expert opinion. 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 8 
August 31, 2022, for both of his shoulders.  Dr. Crites opined the following:   
I have explained to him that I think his R shoulder is just sore from 
overuse as he is limited to what he can do with his L shoulder.  His left 
shoulder has a symptomatic labral tear.  I have explained that this is safe 
to live with, but it will not heal on its own without surgery.  At this time, he 
does not want to have any surgery on it. 
(Jt. Ex. 12, p. 3) 
On November 17, 2022, Mr. Kolash reported to Deere Medical and completed an 
injury report.  The following is documented: 
Patient presents today for cervical neck and shoulder pain.  Patient works 
in department 40A at the “ATV” station and states that symptoms started 
on 11/15/2022 and states, ‘as I am assembling the ATV I have to look 
straight down and almost hung over it.  I felt my neck begin to hurt and 
fingers went numb, it subsided if I looked up but not each movement, 
lifting the ATV from the rack or the fixture my upper back and traps hurt 
immensely, and it gets worse.’  Patient states that his pain is rated at a 
6/10 and is located along the right cervical spine with radiation into the 
right posterior shoulder.  … He believes that his workstation is a 
contributing factor because he has to lean forward out away from his table 
with his neck in a constantly forward flexed position looking down and he 
feels a constant strain and ache in the upper back and neck as described 
above. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 71-72)  At that time, he was diagnosed with right sided cervicalgia and 
trapezius muscle strain.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 71-72)  In response, Deere had an ergonomic 
evaluation which documented Mr. Kolash’s concerns.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 74-76)  Mr. Kolash 
continued to follow up with Deere Medical and began attending physical therapy in late 
November 2022, which continued through January 2023. 
On December 15, 2022, Mr. Kolash was examined by Marcus Rushing, M.D., 
following a cervical MRI.  Dr. Rushing described the MRI as “negative” and diagnosed 
cervicalgia.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 83)  Another Deere Medical provider continued his restrictions 
and authorized medical testing for an EMC/NC and MR Arthrogram.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 87-
88)  Mr. Kolash had his final physical therapy visit on January 3, 2023, and ongoing 
symptoms were documented in significant detail.  (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 75-76)  He continued 
to follow up with Deere Medical although they did not authorized any further physical 
therapy or the diagnostic testing requested. 
On January 12, 2023, Deere suspended Mr. Kolash 10 days for missing work.  
Mr. Kolash claims excused absences were included in the calculations which justified 
the suspension.  On January 31, 2023, Deere suspended Mr. Kolash for 30 days, 
contending he was out of leave time.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 14-15)  Mr. Kolash testified at 
hearing that he had been using his FMLA authorized by his primary care physician.  

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 9 
(Tr., p. 51; see also Jt. Ex. 11, p. 5)  Mr. Kolash returned to his primary clinic and a 
nurse practitioner, clarifying his intermittent leave needs.  (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 12-13)  
Following intervention from his union, Deere eventually removed the 30-day suspension 
and returned Mr. Kolash to work with back pay.  (Jt. Ex. 17, p. 15) 
At the end of January 2023, Mr. Kolash’s attorney wrote to counsel for Deere 
requesting authorization for the treatment recommended by Dr. Rushing.  At this point, 
another IME with Dr. Chen was arranged.  (Jt. Ex. 17, p. 14)  This examination took 
place on March 1, 2023.  After examining Mr. Kolash and reviewing a number of 
records, Dr. Chen offered the following opinion: 
It is my medical opinion that Mr. Kolash has right scapulothoracic pain and 
scapular winging that have progressed since his prior examination in April 
2022.  He now reports more frequent ‘winging’ of his scapula and pain 
with many movements of his right upper extremity.  He has developed 
slight atrophy of his right supraspinatus and overlying trapezius muscles. 
(Jt. Ex. 13, p. 42)  Dr. Chen recommended physical therapy; however, he opined that 
his work activities “were not a substantial factor in causing his condition.”  (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 
42)  He opined, in essence, that if work was causing the symptoms, the symptoms 
would have subsided when he was off work.  Following this examination, Deere Medical 
informed Mr. Kolash that his claim was denied and his restrictions removed.  (Jt. Ex. 5, 
p. 95) 
Mr. Kolash was evaluated for an IME on July 21, 2023, with David Segal, M.D.  
Dr. Segal reviewed and documented the medical file, in addition to examining and 
interviewing Mr. Kolash.  He prepared an extensive and detailed report containing 
expert opinions on August 30, 2023, which includes a highly-detailed medical summary.  
In total, this report took over an hour to read and digest. 
Dr. Segal provided an “Overall Summary” in his report. 
Mr. Kolash is substantially worse today than he was in 2020.  His 
symptoms and impairment have increased and his functional ability has 
declined.  The July 30, 2019, work injury is ONE substantial factor in Mr. 
Kolash’s decline.  The specific details of the increased impairment and 
progression of symptoms since 2019 are detailed above on page 6.  The 
three main reasons for the progression of symptoms as caused by the 
work injury of July 30, 2019 are: 
 Retearing and impingement syndrome of the left shoulder due to 
cumulative damage from Mr. Kolash’s work activity that has 
permanently aggravated his left shoulder symptoms and damage that 
began with the July 30, 2019, work injury 
 Overuse of the right shoulder as a direct result of the July 30, 2019, 
work injury. 
 Compensatory body mechanics that are required because of the left 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 10 
shoulder pain, which caused/permanently aggravated sequelae injuries 
to the right shoulder and cervical spine. 
Mr. Kolash’s work activities have caused permanent aggravation of the 
July 30, 2019, work injury and have also caused Mr. Kolash to overuse his 
right shoulder because of the limitation of his left shoulder from that injury. 
While the cervical and left shoulder conditions could be considered a 
separate cumulative work injury, in my opinion, if Mr. Kolash were not 
injured on July 30, 2019, he would have tolerated these work activities.  
But because of the July 30, 2019, work injury, Mr. Kolash’s work activities 
caused his left shoulder injury to progress.  Because he had to use 
compensatory body mechanics to overcome the limitations of his left 
shoulder, this caused him to have sequelae right shoulder and cervical 
injuries in a cumulatively injurious mechanism of injury.  He also overused 
his right shoulder as he protected his injured left shoulder.  Therefore, it is 
more correct to consider these injuries as sequelae of the July 30, 2019, 
work injury, and they constitute a worsening of his impairment and 
function from that injury compared to his physical state in October 2020. 
(Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 15-16)  Dr. Segal then painstakingly documented numerous 
contemporaneous medical records between 2021 and 2022 that supported this 
proposition.  (Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 17-19) 
After meticulously listing all of Mr. Kolash’s diagnoses, he provided additional, 
even more detailed causation opinions.  (Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 39-41)  He then assigned 
impairment ratings, ultimately assigning a 21 percent whole person impairment for the 
bilateral shoulders and an 8 percent whole person impairment for the cervical diagnosis.  
(Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 45-46)  These ratings are an acceptable use of the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition, and I find they accurately rate his impairment.  The ratings combine for a total of 
a 27 percent whole body impairment.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 46)  Dr. Segal opined that the 
conditions had “plateaued for quite some time” and that he was at maximum medical 
improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 44)  He further recommended severe medical restrictions 
which, if followed, would likely preclude Mr. Kolash from working in heavy or medium 
manufacturing.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 47) 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Kolash testified that he remains significantly 
symptomatic in his bilateral shoulders, neck and upper back.  He described his 
continued, ongoing symptoms in detail.  He continues to work for Deere in Department 
40A, under the hourly restrictions provided by his personal clinic. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question is whether Mr. Kolash sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment on either November 15, 2022, or November 17, 
2022. 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 11 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287-88 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-30 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985). 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 12 
Having reviewed the entire record as a whole, I find that Mr. Kolash has proven 
by a preponderance of evidence that he sustained a cumulative injury to his neck, upper 
back and bilateral shoulders on November 15, 2022, the date he knew or should have 
known that his work activities were damaging those body parts. 
The real issue in this case is medical causation and the applicability of section 
10A.317(2). 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 10A.317, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon.  Iowa Code section 10A.317(2) (2023).  In order to 
demonstrate eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 10A.317(2), the 
claimant must demonstrate what his physical or economic condition was at the time of 
the original award or settlement.  At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant 
has the burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which 
warrants an increase in compensation.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 
(Iowa 2009).  The difference can be economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American 
Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 
(1959).  Essentially, two snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each 
hearing or settlement.  The claimant must prove that there is something substantially 
different between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits.  
Gosek v. Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at 392.  Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to re-litigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.”  The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot.  Id.   
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  When a work-related injury causes another injury to the 
worker, this new injury (sequela) may also be considered as a work-related injury under 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws. 
When an employee suffers from a compensable injury and another condition or 
injury arises that is the consequence or result of the previous injury, the sequelae rule 
applies.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and later suffers further disability, 
which is the proximate result of the original injury, such further disability is 
compensable.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and thereafter returns to 
work and, as a result, the first injury is aggravated and accelerated so that the employee 
is more greatly disabled than they were before returning to work, the entire disability 
may be compensable.  The employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and 
proximately flow from the accident.  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-68, 
266 N.W. 480 (1936).  

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 13 
In order to apply the facts to the law, the two snapshots must be compared. The 
first part of this analysis includes questions of medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1960). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
In this case, it has already been administratively judicially established that Mr. 
Kolash sustained a work injury on July 30, 2019.  This claim was settled on an AFS on 
October 12, 2020.  At that time, his only permanent condition was in his left shoulder.  
His condition was stable.  He had a 14 percent permanent impairment (approximately) 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 14 
to his left shoulder based upon the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  He was working in 
manufacturing with no restrictions.  The evidence reflects this condition is far worse 
now, extending to his other shoulder and across his entire upper back and neck.  He is 
having significant difficulties at work because of his conditions.  He is working under 
limitations on his hours.  His functional limitations are significantly worse at the time of 
hearing than they were at the time of his AFS.  The broad overreaching question is 
whether his condition now is related to: (1) his July 30, 2019, work injury, (2) his more 
recent November 15, 2022, work injury or (3) personal conditions, as opined by Dr. 
Chen, or (4) some combination of the foregoing. 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, the greater weight of evidence 
supports the finding that claimant’s ongoing condition is related to his original July 30, 
2019, work injury.  A greater weight of evidence supports the finding that his right 
shoulder, upper back and neck conditions (including the symptoms in his scapula and 
trapezius) are a sequelae of his July 30, 2019, work injury.  This finding is based upon 
the medical opinions of Dr. Segal, which is supported by numerous treating physicians 
and contemporaneous treatment notes, as well as the highly credible sworn testimony 
of Mr. Kolash himself.  It is possible and even likely that his ongoing work activities 
significantly contributed to his conditions.  All of his conditions, however, are sequelae 
from his original compensable injury in July 2019. 
The next issue is the extent of his permanent partial disability.  Both parties seem 
to agree that Mr. Kolash is at maximum medical improvement.  I am not entirely sure 
this is the case.  Deere’s own physicians recommended physical therapy and further 
diagnostic testing.  Dr. Crites recommended surgery.  Mr. Kolash, however, has stated 
that he simply desires further pain management treatment and has rejected any 
invasive treatments at this time.  Dr. Segal opined that absent further treatment, Mr. 
Kolash is at maximum medical improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 44)  While this is 
undoubtedly true and I accept this medical opinion, in this record it would seem 
advisable to pursue other meaningful treatment options.  Ultimately, I accept Dr. Segal’s 
opinion that Mr. Kolash attained MMI on March 1, 2023. 
This raises the question of how permanency should be assessed.  Defendant 
contends that the disability is scheduled under section 85.34(2)(n), and is limited to the 
left shoulder.  Claimant contends that the condition is industrial under subsection (v).  I 
agree with Dr. Segal that the claimant has permanent conditions in both shoulders and 
upper back or cervical area.  As such, the condition is evaluated under subsection (v).   
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
Thus, while Mr. Kolash’s disability is undoubtedly “unscheduled” and 
appropriately evaluated under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), I find the following 
provision in subsection (v) is also applicable: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 15 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2021).   
Since the parties have stipulated that Mr. Kolash has not suffered an actual loss 
of earnings at the time of hearing, I conclude he is only entitled to the impairment 
ratings for his work-connected conditions. 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2019).   
Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with an injured worker’s actual 
functional loss or disability as determined by the evidence, but rather the impairment 
rating as assigned by the adopted version of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment.  The only function of the agency is to determine which 
impairment rating should be utilized. 
I find that the best medical evidence of Mr. Kolash’s functional impairments is set 
forth by Dr. Segal.  He opined that Mr. Kolash sustained the following permanent 
functional impairments from the work injury: 
Left Shoulder 23 percent of Left Upper Extremity 
Right Shoulder 15 percent of Left Upper Extremity 
Neck/Cervical 8 percent of the Whole Body 
(Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 44-46)  Using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, and applying the 
appropriate whole body conversions, Dr. Segal opined that the final, whole body 
impairment Mr. Kolash sustained was 27 percent.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 46) 
I conclude that this rating entitles Mr. Kolash to 135 weeks of permanent partial 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 16 
disability benefits commencing on March 1, 2023.  Defendant shall pay interest on past 
due benefits.  I accept the stipulation of the parties that defendant is entitled to a credit 
for benefits paid in the AFS, in addition to the overpayment of $307.77 against this 
award. 
The next issue is past and future medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Having reviewed the entire file, I find that claimant is entitled to the medical 
expenses set forth in Joint Exhibit 20.  Since it has been so long since claimant has had 
active treatment for his conditions, I reject his specific requests for alternate medical 
care.  Defendant shall authorize a physician for claimant to see for his ongoing 
symptoms and complaints related to his work-related conditions, including both 
shoulders, his neck and upper and middle back including his scapular winging and 
trapezius complaints. 
The only remaining issue is whether Mr. Kolash sustained any permanent 
impairment related to his umbilical hernia condition.  I find that he has failed to meet his 
burden of proof related to this condition.  While Dr. Segal did opine he sustained a 
permanent impairment from this injury, it is not supported by the remainder of the 
record.  Mr. Kolash never returned to his treating surgeon or Deere Medical following 
his recuperation from this injury.  If he does have any ongoing impairment from this 
injury and surgery, I find it is de minimus. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
File No. 19700395.02 
Defendant shall pay the claimant one hundred thirty-five (135) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred fifty-three and 06/100 
dollars ($553.06) per week commencing March 1, 2023. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid as stipulated as 

KOLASH V. JOHN DEERE DES MOINES WORKS 
Page 17 
well as the overpayment of three hundred seven and 77/100 dollars ($307.77). 
Defendant shall authorize a physician other than Dr. Chen to treat claimant’s 
ongoing work-related conditions consistent with this decision. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendant in the amount of three hundred sixteen and 82/100 
dollars ($316.82). 
File No. 22701143.01 
Claimant shall take nothing further. 
File No. 23700112.01 
Claimant shall take nothing further. 
Signed and filed this __27th ___ day of December, 2024. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Saffin Parrish-Sams  
(via WCES) 
Coreen Sweeney 
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
