Case Number: 21007573.02
Case Title:  SHARP, AUSTIN V. 3M COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Sharp Austin-21007573.02D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
AUSTIN SHARP, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 21007573.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
3M COMPANY, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
    Head Notes: 1402.40, 1802, 1804 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Austin Sharp, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from 3M Company, employer, and Old Republic Insurance 
Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of a stipulated injury 
sustained on June 4, 2021.  This matter came on for hearing before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch, on February 13, 2024, via 
videoconference, using Zoom.  The record in this case consists of joint exhibits 1 
through 7, claimant’s exhibits 1 through 5, defendants’ exhibits A through K, and the 
testimony of the claimant and Laura Cunningham, PA-C. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs, the matter being fully submitted on March 15, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. The nature and extent of claimant’s disability, including whether claimant has 
achieved maximum medical improvement;  
 
2. If claimant has been found to have achieved maximum medical improvement 
and permanency is therefore ripe, determination of the extent of disability and 
the commencement date for permanent disability benefits;  
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination under section 85.39; and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Oct-31  10:44:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 2 
 
 
4. Specific taxation of costs. 
  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record and 
his deposition testimony. Claimant was an excellent witness, who provided clear and 
direct testimony. His demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing gave the undersigned 
no reason to doubt claimant’s veracity.  Claimant is found credible. 
Claimant was 26 years of age at the time of hearing. He grew up and continues 
to reside in Knoxville, Iowa. (Hearing Transcript, p. 12) Claimant was not a good student 
in high school, until he began an alternative high school program wherein he was not 
required to complete work outside of school hours and was able to redo assignments 
until successful. He was able to successfully graduate this high school program. (Hrg. 
Trans. pp. 13-14, 27) Claimant was right-hand dominant. (Hrg. Trans. p. 18) 
Following high school graduation, claimant worked as a dishwasher, fast food 
worker, and restaurant cook. He left this employment for the opportunity to earn greater 
wages through a temporary staffing agency. The staffing agency placed claimant at 
defendant-employer and defendant-employer ultimately hired claimant on as a full-time 
employee in 2018. Claimant began as an assistant operator, requiring him to pack 
individual units of tape into boxes for shipping. He then worked as an operator, running 
a machine that cut large rolls of tape into smaller units. Thereafter, he worked as a 
coater operator, running a machine which coated a liner with adhesive. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 
14-17; Defendants’ Exhibit J, pp. 132-133) 
On June 4, 2021, claimant suffered a significant injury when his right arm 
became caught in the machine he was operating and torn from his body. Claimant 
suffered a traumatic amputation just distal to the right shoulder, including two-thirds of 
the right humerus. The severed limb was retrieved from the machine and wrapped, in 
hopes of reattachment. A tourniquet was applied, and claimant was transported via air 
to a hospital in Des Moines. Following triage and consultation with the University of 
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC), claimant and the limb were packed and transferred 
via air to Iowa City. (Joint Exhibit 1, pages 2, 5, 18) The limb was ultimately found 
unsalvageable, and surgery was performed to complete the amputation. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1, page 4; JE6, p. 141) In addition to the traumatic amputation, claimant also 
sustained a large degloving injury to his right upper back over the scapula. (CE1, p. 3) 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 3 
 
Claimant underwent surgical reconstruction of the right humerus and shoulder with 
composite radial and ulnar artery perforator flaps using a skin graft from his right thigh. 
(CE1, pp. 4, 12) While hospitalized claimant underwent wound debridement on June 8, 
2021. (JE6, p. 141; CE1, p. 12) Claimant remained hospitalized until June 13, 2021. 
(JE2, p. 49; CE1, p. 4) 
On June 21, 2021, claimant presented to Laura Cunningham, PA-C, for an initial 
psychiatric evaluation. Claimant expressed experiencing uncontrolled pain, as well as 
poor sleep, vivid memories of the accident, frequent flashbacks, anxiety around others, 
and the feeling of wishing the accident had not occurred. Claimant informed PA 
Cunningham of past illicit drug use, including prior use of opioids and two overdoses on 
fentanyl. He reported being sober for 5 years, after undergoing inpatient rehabilitation 
and detox. His history of drug use and addictive personality caused concern with PA 
Cunningham regarding long-term opioid use for pain management. PA Cunningham 
opined claimant had a lot of things to process mentally in addition to his physical 
healing. She recommended the shortest possible course of opioid therapy and ongoing 
monitoring for signs of dependence or addiction given claimant’s history. Following 
evaluation and a session of psychotherapy, PA Cunningham diagnosed posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD), insomnia disorder, and early onset dysthymia. She cautioned 
claimant was likely to see symptoms of insomnia, depression, PTSD, and anxiety 
develop into the future. (JE3, pp. 52-54) 
On July 7, 2021, claimant presented to Kurt Smith, D.O., to establish a pain 
management regimen. Claimant reported experiencing both phantom pain and pain of 
the right residual arm. Dr. Smith noted claimant continued to complain of significant pain 
and was utilizing high levels of opioids and gabapentin. He noted claimant’s history of 
substance abuse as a potential concern. Following examination, Dr. Smith assessed 
acute pain of the right shoulder and neuralgia. He prescribed pregabalin, cut claimant’s 
gabapentin, and continued existing opioid levels. He also ordered a right shoulder MRI 
to evaluate for potential rotator cuff injury.  (JE4, pp. 93, 95)  
On July 13, 2021, claimant requested a refill of his oxycodone. During a 
conversation with Dr. Smith’s office, claimant relayed he was taking his medication 
more frequently than prescribed by Dr. Smith. (JE4, p. 96) The following day, claimant 
returned to Dr. Smith for evaluation. Dr. Smith prescribed extended release Nucynta 
and oxycodone. He noted claimant would be seeing interventional pain management, 
with a planned stellate ganglion block. Dr. Smith also noted pending appointments with 
physical therapy, prosthetics, and at the University of Iowa for possible nerve 
procedures. (JE4, p. 98) 
Claimant returned to PA Cunningham on July 20, 2021. Following a session of 
therapy, she assessed primary insomnia and PTSD. Due to continued pain with 
depression and difficulty sleeping, PA Cunningham began a medication regimen 
including Seroquel and Cymbalta. She also recommended therapy visits every 2 to 4 
weeks to continue building the treatment relationship. (JE3, pp. 55-56) 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 4 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Smith on August 3, 2021 for review of his right shoulder 
MRI. Dr. Smith opined the MRI revealed an intact rotator cuff tendon. He recommended 
continued pain medication usage, with an attempt to decrease opioid use. (JE4, pp. 
105-106) 
On September 7, 2021, claimant presented to Dr. Smith in follow up of pain 
management. Dr. Smith noted claimant continued to experience pain and neuralgia. Dr. 
Smith increased claimant’s pregabalin dosage and left oxycodone and Nucynta levels 
intact. He recommended a second opinion with Dr. Moyse for possible ketamine 
infusion. (JE4, p. 110) 
At a visit with PA Cunningham on September 7, 2021, claimant reported 
improvement in his sleep. Claimant continued to complain of pain, which PA 
Cunningham noted was managed by Dr. Smith. She noted claimant had experienced 
some medication withdrawals due to delay in approval of medications; she indicated 
she would discuss this matter with claimant’s nurse case manager. PA Cunningham 
noted that repeat withdrawals were causing additional psychological distress. She 
informed claimant they needed to work toward pain management options other than 
opioid use. PA Cunningham recommended referral to Dr. Moyse for consideration of 
interventional pain management options, including ketamine infusion. Claimant reported 
some benefit with use of THC/CBD products obtained from an approved Iowa 
dispensary. Claimant reported he had appointments with orthopedics and prosthetics 
scheduled and was looking forward to obtaining a prosthetic, as he was experiencing 
self-consciousness due his lack of an arm. (JE3, pp. 57-59) 
On September 20, 2021, claimant underwent laser surgery for vascular lesions, 
performed by Andrel Odobescu, M.D. (JE6, p. 141) 
On November 17, 2021, claimant attempted to refill his pain medication prior to 
the stated refill date. Claimant spoke with Dr. Smith’s office and was advised Dr. Smith 
had written the refill with a specific date on purpose. Claimant was frustrated, stating he 
was less than two days from the refill date. Claimant stated he was not abusing the 
medication and felt he was viewed as a “junky” from years past. He stated he would be 
contacting his lawyer and obtaining a new doctor. Dr. Smith reviewed the message and 
indicated claimant was to be tapering off medication and an earlier refill would not be 
given. (JE4, p. 115) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Smith on November 30, 2021. He reported receiving six 
hours of relief following ketamine infusion. Claimant indicated he had not been using his 
prosthetic and had a nerve procedure scheduled in two weeks. (JE4, p. 116) Claimant 
reported ongoing pain issues. Dr. Smith opined long-term opioid use was not indicated 
and recommended continued tapering. Claimant stated Dr. Smith viewed him as a 
“druggie” and left the room. Dr. Smith noted claimant’s opioid prescription would be 
refilled on December 4, 2021 and then decreased dosages on December 19, 2021. The 
pregabalin levels were increased. (JE4, p. 117) 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 5 
 
On December 14, 2021, claimant underwent regenerative peripheral nerve 
interface (RPNI) surgery with Dr. Odobescu. The procedure included right stump 
neurolysis, neuroma excisions at the medial and lateral cords of the brachial plexus, 
implantations of nerves into muscles and fascicles of the lateral and medial cords, and 
CO2 laser of the right shoulder. (JE6, p. 141; CE1, p. 12) 
On January 2, 2022, claimant presented to the emergency room with complaints 
of right arm pain. (JE5, p. 119) Claimant reported he underwent a nerve procedure and 
grafting two weeks prior. While the surgery resolved his axilla pain, he now suffered with 
phantom pain. The provider noted claimant was working with a pain specialist to 
decrease his oxycodone dosage, but his pain had been uncontrolled for the last two 
days. He called his surgeon and was advised to present to the emergency room. (JE5, 
p. 126) The provider noted claimant appeared extremely uncomfortable and prescribed 
a small number of oxycodone; he was advised to return to his established providers for 
further care. (JE5, p. 128) 
At the referral of his counsel, on June 10, 2022, claimant presented to board 
certified psychiatrist, Kunal Patra, M.D., for an independent psychiatric evaluation. 
(CE2, p. 15) Dr. Patra did not issue his resulting report until January 9, 2024. (CE2, p. 
46) Dr. Patra opined the fees for his evaluation and report were fair, reasonable, and 
customary for similar services in Des Moines, Iowa. (CE2, pp. 45; CE5, p. 54) 
Dr. Patra performed a medical and psychological records review and 
administered psychological tests. (CE2, pp. 16-25, 29-34) Dr. Patra interviewed 
claimant during the June 10, 2022 evaluation. In discussion of his physical symptoms, 
claimant indicated he was not optimistic about resolution of his ongoing pain. Claimant 
indicated he had not returned to work because he had lost his dominant right arm and 
he had daily thoughts of the work accident and had heightened anxiety and fear of 
returning to defendant-employer. Claimant also indicated that despite success with PA 
Cunningham’s care, he continued to struggle with motivation and apathy. Claimant 
expressed concern regarding his potential for employment and the impact of his lack of 
a right arm in the future. (CE2, pp. 25-26) Claimant reported that since his injury, he felt 
more anxious and nervous, worried excessively, experienced difficulty controlling his 
anxiety, and felt more restless, with difficulty relaxing. (CE2, p. 27)  
Following records review, examination, and testing, Dr. Patra opined claimant 
suffered with PTSD and major depressive disorder, recurrent and moderate. (CE2, p. 
34) Dr. Patra opined claimant continued to suffer with symptoms related to each 
diagnosis, but noted the depressive symptoms appeared to have lessened with time 
and medication use. Given claimant’s limb loss and ongoing pain, Dr. Patra opined 
claimant’s prognosis with respect to both diagnoses was poor. (CE2, p. 40) He opined 
claimant would require future care, including both psychotherapy, medications, and non-
medication treatment, such as ketamine infusions. (CE2, p. 44) Dr. Patra opined it was 
unlikely claimant’s psychiatric conditions would resolve in the future. (CE2, p. 45) 
Dr. Patra opined claimant had suffered a ratable permanent impairment as a 
result of the work-related PTSD and major depressive disorder. With respect to 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 6 
 
claimant’s PTSD, Dr. Patra categorized: class 2 (mild impairment) in activities of daily 
living; class 3 (moderate impairment) in concentration, persistence, and pace; and class 
4 (marked impairment) on adaption to competitive and dynamic work environment. With 
respect to claimant’s major depressive disorder, moderate intensity, Dr. Patra assigned: 
class 2 (mild impairment) in activities of daily living; class 3 (moderate impairment) on 
social functioning; class 3 (moderate impairment) in concentration, persistence, and 
pace; and class 4 (marked impairment) on adaption to competitive and dynamic work 
environment. (CE2, p. 42) Overall, Dr. Patra opined claimant’s impairment level fell 
between moderate impairment and marked impairment. As the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, did not provide numerical 
impairment ratings, Dr. Patra consulted the Second Edition of the Guides. Thereafter, 
Dr. Patra opined claimant sustained a 55 percent whole person impairment as a result 
of these conditions. (CE2, p. 43) 
With respect to claimant’s need for permanent restrictions, Dr. Patra 
recommended claimant not return to his prior employment at defendant-employer due to 
risk of further aggravation of his mental health conditions. Dr. Patra opined claimant 
should not work in a similar industrial setting where he would encounter industrial 
machinery which could result in loss of life or limb, such as warehouses, heavy 
industrial plants, or construction sites. Due to his persistent pain levels, Dr. Patra opined 
claimant should not work in an industry requiring repetitive motion, such as meat 
packing plants. Dr. Patra opined claimant’s mental symptomatology impacted claimant’s 
employability. (CE2, p. 43) 
In August 2022, claimant was arrested after an incident wherein he attempted to 
procure marijuana products through the mail. Claimant testified he ordered the products 
from another state in order to save money, but doing so was illegal. (DEJ, p. 139) 
Claimant returned to PA Cunningham on August 29, 2022 with reports of 
increased anxiety and difficulty sleeping. During therapy, claimant informed PA 
Cunningham he had been arrested after purchasing THC products from a different state 
and having them shipped to Iowa. Claimant indicated he had done so for financial 
reasons, despite having a medical cannabidiol card in Iowa. Claimant’s medication 
regimen was altered to better control his anxiety and depression. (JE3, pp. 60-62) 
On January 3, 2023, claimant returned to Timothy Fowler, M.D., 6 weeks post-
excision of a posttraumatic neuroma of the right limb stump. Claimant reported 
improved pain of the anterior aspect of the stump, but continued axilla pain. (JE6, pp. 
141, 143) On examination, Dr. Fowler noted a well-healed wound, with mild tenderness 
to palpation of the axilla. Dr. Fowler opined no further surgery was warranted. He 
opined claimant’s pain was likely neuropathic and noted that a high percentage of 
amputees have some residual neuropathic pain, beyond that which can be resolved 
with surgery. He opined claimant might need lifelong pain management for this 
neuropathic pain. (JE6, pp. 143-144) Dr. Fowler placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI). (JE6, p. 140) Dr. Fowler opined claimant sustained permanent 
impairment of 100 percent of the right upper extremity, which equates to a 60 percent 
whole person rating, attributable to the high humeral amputation. He cleared claimant to 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 7 
 
participate in a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) in order to determine appropriate 
permanent restrictions. (JE6, pp. 143-144) 
Claimant underwent the ordered FCE on February 3, 2023 with John Kruzich, 
OTR/L. The examination was found to be valid. Mr. Kruzich opined claimant was 
functionally employable, with demonstrated capabilities and functional tolerances within 
the medium physical demand category. (JE7, p. 147) 
Dr. Fowler reviewed claimant’s FCE results and imposed the following 
permanent work restrictions:  
Unilateral floor to waist lift, left, up to 46 pounds, occasionally. 
Unilateral waist to shoulder lift, left, up to 22 pounds, occasionally. 
Unilateral overhead lift, left, up to 19 pounds, occasionally. 
Unilateral carry, left, up to 33 pounds/50 feet. 
Unilateral forward reach, left, no functional limitations. 
Unilateral left grip, pinch, dexterity, no functional limitations. 
(JE6, p. 146) 
Claimant returned to PA Cunningham on May 16, 2023 for therapy. Following the 
session, PA Cunningham diagnosed moderate recurrent major depression. She opined 
claimant continued to mask some emotions, which she indicated was most likely a 
coping mechanism. After discussing with claimant some of his moods and behaviors, 
she recommended increasing the frequency of his therapy appointments. (JE3, pp. 64-
65) 
On May 23, 2023, claimant returned to PA Cunningham for another session. At 
that time, the two focused upon acceptance of physical limitations and appearance. 
Claimant reported difficulty wearing this prosthetic due to pain and frustration with lack 
of functionality. She noted claimant wished to be more physically active and opined 
engagement would be more realistic with a more functioning prosthetic. PA 
Cunningham encouraged claimant to provide feedback about his prosthetic to his 
provider. Claimant’s diagnoses were identified as controlled moderate recurrent major 
depression and controlled PTSD; medications were continued. (JE3, pp. 68-69)  
Claimant returned to PA Cunningham on June 20, 2023. At that time, claimant 
reported increased pain and frustration with his prosthetic after attempting more 
frequent use over the prior month. Claimant denied phantom limb pain, but reported 
continued constant nerve pain of the right upper extremity. PA Cunningham noted 
claimant continued to self-medicate using kratom. PA Cunningham opined claimant 
continued to struggle with acceptance of the loss of his arm. She advised claimant to 
begin using his prosthetic daily, even if only for a matter of minutes, and then follow up 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 8 
 
with prosthetics. She opined that claimant would have improved self-esteem and 
independence, as well as reduced frustration, if he was able to obtain a well-fitting and 
functional prosthetic. Accordingly, she recommended reevaluation by prosthetics. (JE3, 
pp. 72-73) 
On June 30, 2023, claimant returned to PA Cunningham and reported he had 
worn his prosthetic on several occasions since the last visit. Claimant reported the use 
resulted in a significant increase in pain of the right upper extremity and increased 
frustration, agitation, and irritability. Claimant reported the portion of the prosthetic which 
contacted his remaining arm was loose, resulting in increased discomfort and it 
becoming more difficult to control and function. Claimant indicated he wished for a 
better fitting prosthetic that did not require abduction movement of the remainder of the 
humerus in order to function, as this movement caused increased pain. He expressed 
the need for a more functional prosthetic to assist with activities of daily living and the 
ability to perform more fine motor skills. Claimant indicated he struggled with certain 
activities of daily living; PA Cunningham indicated occupational therapy would be helpful 
in identifying assistive devices he could use in daily life. Claimant indicated he 
continued to use kratom due to ongoing pain. PA Cunningham opined claimant should 
not use kratom to manage his pain and required effective pain management. PA 
Cunningham recommended repeat evaluation by prosthetics and occupational therapy. 
(JE3, pp. 76-77) 
At the referral of defendants, on July 5, 2023, claimant presented to board 
certified physical medicine and rehabilitation physician, Joseph Chen, M.D., for an 
independent medical examination (IME). Dr. Chen authored a report containing his 
findings and opinions dated July 11, 2023. As elements of his examination, Dr. Chen 
performed a records review. (DEG, pp. 84-93) During interview, claimant reported a 
primary physical complaint of residual phantom pain in the right arm. Claimant denied 
relief with gabapentin or pregabalin, but reported kratom usage reduced his pain levels. 
Claimant also reported ongoing symptoms of PTSD, as well as anxiety, anger, sadness, 
embarrassment, and shame. Dr. Chen noted claimant was treated with therapy and 
medications by PA Cunningham. (DEG, p. 94) Dr. Chen also performed a physical 
examination. (DEG, pp. 94-95) 
Following records review, interview, and examination, Dr. Chen opined claimant 
suffered a traumatic, catastrophic right trans-humeral amputation, with a short residual 
limb, for which claimant had undergone multiple surgeries. Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. 
Fowler’s assigned MMI date of January 3, 2023. (DEG, pp. 95-96) He also opined 
claimant sustained permanent impairment as a result of the injury: 
Although an extremity amputation would typically be considered to be 
contained within the involved extremity, it is my medical opinion that 
[claimant’s] complete trans-humeral amputation which required a large 
free flap graft to cover the extensive soft-tissue defect in the proximal 
torso should be considered as extending to the body. 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 9 
 
[Claimant] has a very short residual limb and has undergone attempted 
targeted muscle reinnervation surgery with relocation of any viable nerves 
to the chest wall. I have included digital photographs of the proximal arm 
which shows his skin grafting extends more proximal than his shoulder 
with ongoing sequela of wound healing, paresthesias, and nerve grafting 
to the pectoral muscle in the chest. 
(DEG, p. 96) 
 
Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Fowler’s impairment rating of 60 percent whole person. 
(DEG, p. 96) He opined claimant could return to work within the parameters set forth in 
the FCE. In terms of future treatment, Dr. Chen opined claimant might benefit from 
further occupational therapy, for consideration of adaptive modifications to assist with 
driving and hobbies. Dr. Chen also opined claimant might benefits from a potential 
myoelectric prosthesis. Despite these recommendations for care, Dr. Chen opined 
neither would change claimant’s date of MMI. Finally, Dr. Chen expressed belief 
claimant held misunderstandings regarding pain. He reviewed with claimant a booklet 
he used to teach patients in his pain-related clinical practice. Dr. Chen offered claimant 
the booklet for his use, but claimant indicated he was not interested and left the booklet 
behind after the evaluation. Dr. Chen expressed belief this action demonstrated 
claimant’s “significant disinterest in reading,” even on such a relevant topic. (DEG, p. 
97) Ultimately, Dr. Chen opined, “It is my medical opinion that [claimant’s] overall 
outcome will depend on his pre-existing polysubstance and psychological conditions, 
and the personal choices he had made, and continues to make after his work injury.” 
(DEG, p. 97) 
At the referral of his counsel, on July 10, 2023, claimant presented to board 
certified occupational medicine physician, Sunil Bansal, M.D., for an independent 
medical examination (IME). Dr. Bansal finalized his report on January 15, 2024. (CE1, 
pp. 1, 14) At the time of examination, claimant continued to complain of pain at the 
amputation site and in his right shoulder, with the stump and nerves being the biggest 
concern. He denied phantom pain. Claimant also reported continued nightmares, 
flashbacks, desire to avoid the accident location, and depressive symptoms. On 
examination of the right upper extremity, Dr. Bansal noted tenderness over the stump, 
with a loss of two-point sensory discrimination and dysesthesias, as well as 
hypersensitivity in several areas. (CE1, p. 11) 
Following records review, interview, and examination, Dr. Bansal assessed 
traumatic amputation of the right upper extremity at the shoulder joint, status post 
multiple complex surgical procedures. Dr. Bansal opined pain management was a 
significant challenge in claimant’s care, involving use of oxycodone, ketamine infusions, 
and nerve blocks. He further opined the severity and persistence of claimant’s pain was 
complicated by signs of opioid tolerance and dependence. Additionally, he opined 
claimant exhibits symptoms of PTSD. (CE1, pp. 12-13)  
Dr. Bansal addressed only claimant’s physical injuries in consideration of 
permanent impairment, restrictions, and need for further care. He assigned a permanent 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 10 
 
impairment of 100 percent upper extremity or 60 percent whole person as a result of 
amputation. Secondary to continued stump pain, Dr. Bansal also assigned a 3 percent 
whole person impairment due to pain. Dr. Bansal opined claimant was at considerable 
risk for left arm pathology due to overuse. In order to minimize such risk, Dr. Bansal 
recommended the following restrictions: left arm lifting up to 20 pounds occasionally or 
10 pounds frequently; no frequent overhead work; limit overhead lifting to 5 pounds; and 
no forceful turning or twisting with the left arm. Dr. Bansal also recommended avoidance 
of high impact or jarring motions, as such can aggravate pain and interfere with healing. 
With respect to future medical treatment, Dr. Bansal opined care should focus on 
management of claimant’s chronic pain. He also recommended continued physical 
therapy to maintain existing mobility, as well as adaption to potential future prosthetics. 
Similarly, he opined that regular care of the scar and grafting areas was crucial in 
preventing complications. In the event of development of neuromas at the amputation 
site, Dr. Bansal opined claimant may require surgical intervention. While he did not 
otherwise address claimant’s mental health symptoms, Dr. Bansal opined claimant 
would require ongoing psychiatric or psychological care. (CE1, pp. 13-14)  
Also on July 10, 2023, claimant participated in his deposition. (DEJ, p. 130) At 
that time, claimant admitted he possessed a prosthetic, but found it non-functional and 
ill-fitting. Claimant testified he did not use the prosthetic as a result. (DEJ, p. 136) 
Claimant testified he would devote the time necessary to learn to use a more advanced, 
“bionic arm,” if he were given the opportunity. (DEJ, p. 142) Claimant testified he 
believed he was still technically an employee of defendant-employer. (DEJ, p. 139) He 
testified he would be unable to return to his prior position due to his lack of an arm; 
however, expressed belief defendant-employer likely had a job he would be able to do. 
Claimant testified he believed it would be good for him to get back into a routine. 
Claimant testified he would be interested in returning to work and had been discussing 
future options with PA Cunningham. Claimant testified he had applied for Social 
Security disability benefits, but had not completed the process. (DEJ, p. 140) 
On July 13, 2023, claimant reported difficulty sleeping at night and increased 
daytime napping to PA Cunningham. Otherwise, claimant described well-managed 
depressive symptoms and stable mood. He expressed a desire to improve his physical 
fitness level and to discontinue kratom use. (JE3, p. 79) 
On September 6, 2023, claimant presented to PA Cunningham for therapy. 
Claimant reported he had not yet been seen by occupational therapy, nor reevaluated 
by prosthetics. (JE3, p. 82) 
On November 14, 2023, claimant returned to PA Cunningham. Claimant reported 
stability on his medications, but difficulty discontinuing kratom due to withdrawal effects. 
He reported developing concerns regarding his ability to defend himself without his right 
arm. The two discussed the importance of having purpose. Claimant indicated he had 
not yet found a place to volunteer. PA Cunningham noted claimant maintained the belief 
he would be able to return to his previous job. PA Cunningham informed claimant that 
returning to work was the goal, but he needed to be able to do so safely. (JE3, p. 86) 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 11 
 
Defendants retained certified rehabilitation counselor, Jessica Miller, to perform 
an employability assessment regarding claimant. (DEH, p. 125) Ms. Miller interviewed 
claimant via telephone on December 7, 2023 and issued her report on January 4, 2024. 
(DEG, p. 119) During the interview, claimant reported he possessed a prosthetic, but 
described it as “junk,” with “little to no function,” and as a result, he did not use it. 
Claimant indicated he and his counsel had requested assessments for home 
modifications and potentially a more realistic prosthetic. Claimant indicated he had not 
sought work, explaining he had not been provided a timeframe to be able to return to 
work. Claimant indicated he was unsure what a return to work would look like but 
expressed interest in construction and computer programming. He also indicated 
interest in skill-building courses and science courses but admitted to disliking 
homework. (DEH, p. 120) 
In performing the employability assessment, Ms. Miller considered the permanent 
restrictions imposed by Dr. Fowler. (DEH, p. 119) She noted claimant’s identified 
physical demand level as medium. (DEH, p. 123) Thereupon, Ms. Miller sampled 
employment opportunities within 50 miles of claimant’s residence in Knoxville, Iowa. 
She identified several job titles she anticipated claimant would be able to perform 
immediately or with brief training, such as office clerk, sales attendant, driver, inspector, 
and customer service representative. She further identified 11 examples of such 
positions, carrying wages of $18.26 to $43.08 per hour. (DEH, pp. 120-121, 123) 
Ultimately, Ms. Miller opined claimant was employable within Dr. Fowler’s restrictions, 
as he was capable of working from the sedentary to medium physical demand 
categories, with occasional lifting and carrying. (DEH, p. 123)  
On January 4, 2024, claimant presented to board certified clinical neurologist, 
Bruce Jasper, PhD, at the referral of defendants. Dr. Jasper was requested to perform a 
repeat neuropsychological evaluation. Dr. Jasper authored a resulting report dated 
January 10, 2024. In this report, Dr. Jasper noted he previously evaluated claimant on 
March 3, 2023 and he had diagnosed PTSD. (CE3, p. 47) 
At the time of the repeat evaluation, claimant reported persistent right upper 
extremity pain, for which claimant was self-medicating with kratom. Claimant also 
reported experiencing emotional symptoms, including persistent amotivation, persistent 
insomnia, and persistent daytime fatigue. Claimant indicated he chose not to renew his 
Iowa medical cannabis registration card due to concern it would interfere with his ability 
to obtain a concealed weapons permit. However, he admitted to continued daily use of 
marijuana. Claimant admitting to smoking marijuana prior to the evaluation with Dr. 
Jasper, as well as again during a break in the evaluation. (CE3, p. 47) Dr. Jasper 
indicated claimant was quieter and more withdrawn following the break, with claimant 
admitting he used marijuana during the break in evaluation. (CE3, p. 48) 
Claimant indicated he had begun a volunteer assignment with an animal shelter 
but had not engaged in paid employment. Claimant reported he was able to drive, lift 
50-pound bags of dog food for his pets, and camp in his 25-foot trailer. (CE3, pp. 47-48) 
In discussion of claimant’s future employment intentions, Dr. Jasper wrote: 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 12 
 
Regarding future employment, [claimant] no longer reports thoughts of 
furthering his education or returning to work with his former employment in 
Iowa. Instead, he reportedly is hoping to quickly leave Iowa as soon as 
things work out with his workers [sic] compensation case. He reportedly is 
open to finding some type of employment that would allow him to travel 
since the idea of staying in one place is unappealing to him. He reportedly 
would like to travel and reside in a state that permits him to legally smoke 
marijuana and perhaps use other substances that he is interested in (e.g., 
psilocybin). 
(CE3, p. 48) 
Dr. Jasper performed a series of neuropsychological tests. (CE3, pp. 49-50) 
Thereafter, Dr. Jasper opined claimant no longer met the diagnostic criteria of PTSD. 
Rather, he opined a new diagnosis of Other Specific Trauma – and Stressor – Related 
Disorder best reflected claimant’s subthreshold PTSD symptomatology with clinically 
significant emotional distress and functional impairment, specifically social difficulties. 
Dr. Jasper also diagnosed Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorder, Moderate, 
based upon claimant’s continued use of kratom in contravention of medical advice, 
coupled with documented withdrawal symptoms and failed attempts to discontinue. 
(CE3, p. 50) Dr. Jasper opined claimant had achieved MMI as of the date of the 
evaluation and these diagnoses were permanent in nature. Dr. Jasper opined claimant 
had suffered permanent impairments, including emotional, social, and occupational 
deficits, such as difficulty regulating emotions, trusting others, and viewing himself 
positively, and deficits in refraining from substance abuse. Dr. Jasper opined claimant 
required continued psychiatric/psychological care. (CE3, p. 51) Dr. Jasper opined 
claimant required activity restrictions. In addition to the FCE restrictions reflective of 
claimant’s physical condition, Dr. Jasper opined claimant was “limited from engaging in 
full-time competitive employment of any type due to symptoms and impairments” 
associated with his diagnoses. In response to inquiry as to whether claimant was 
capable of full-time employment within restrictions and if doing so would be beneficial, 
Dr. Jasper relied, “No, I do not think he is capable of full-time employment within any 
restrictions.” (CE3, p. 52) 
Claimant returned to PA Cunningham on January 16, 2024. Claimant reported he 
was not exercising or volunteering. Despite an upcoming appointment with prosthetics, 
claimant expressed hopelessness regarding his success in future relationships due to 
his missing arm. PA Cunningham opined claimant continued to minimize the impact of 
the accident upon him. (JE3, p. 89) Following therapy, PA Cunningham noted 
diagnoses of controlled moderate recurrent major depression and controlled PTSD; 
medications were continued. (JE3, p. 91)         
Thereafter, PA Cunningham was provided with Dr. Jasper’s January 10, 2024 
report for review. By a letter dated February 1, 2024, PA Cunningham opined claimant 
was capable of full-time employment within the FCE restrictions. PA Cunningham noted 
she had experience with other patients using kratom and believed claimant was capable 
of full-time employment even with kratom and medication use. PA Cunningham opined 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 13 
 
claimant’s mental health would not only permit claimant to work, but returning to work 
would be beneficial for claimant and “help him move forward with his life.” She indicated 
claimant was in agreement with pursuing such options. (DEK, p. 150) Similarly, PA 
Cunningham opined a change in prosthetics, “would be beneficial and improve 
[claimant’s] mental health.” (DEK, p. 151) 
PA Cunningham testified at evidentiary hearing. She previously practiced as a 
psychiatric nurse for six years, then completed additional schooling and obtained her 
physician assistant license in 2015. She has professional experience treating primary 
care, internal medicine, and mental health concerns. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 45-46) PA 
Cunningham testified she began seeing claimant 18 days following his injury and 
continues to provide him care. Over the course of her treatment, the two have engaged 
in 29 sessions of care. (Hrg. Trans. p. 47)   
PA Cunningham testified claimant has made significant progress through their 
course of treatment. (Hrg. Trans. p. 50) However, she believes claimant suffers with 
chronic PTSD that is not likely to spontaneously resolve. (Hrg. Trans. p. 72) She opined 
claimant has sustained a permanent psychological injury and has suffered permanent 
impairment. (Hrg. Trans. p. 63) She agreed with Dr. Patra’s opinions that claimant 
should not work at defendant-employer, around large machinery, or in industrial-type 
jobs. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 64-65) 
She testified she has not placed claimant at MMI because before she did so, she 
would like claimant to obtain a functional prosthetic and return to a work environment. 
(Hrg. Trans. p. 51)  PA Cunningham testified a functional prosthetic would help claimant 
physically and mentally. She believes it inappropriate to place claimant at MMI before 
he has had the opportunity to work through obtaining and accepting the prosthetic. (Hrg. 
Trans. pp. 72-73)    
PA Cunningham described claimant as a very motivated individual, charismatic, 
smart, determined, and a problem solver, who has consistently indicated he wishes to 
return to work. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 48-49, 53) She believes claimant does have good and 
bad days; she believes claimant is concerned about his ability to maintain a set 
schedule. She testified structure and purpose would be beneficial to claimant in his 
recovery. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 50-51, 60-62)     
PA Cunningham expressly disagreed with Dr. Jasper’s contention that claimant 
was unable to work full-time. Rather, she believes claimant is capable of working and 
thinks working would be beneficial to claimant. PA Cunningham believes Dr. Jasper’s 
opinions regarding claimant’s employability are more related to claimant’s marijuana 
and kratom use than to claimant’s own abilities. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 48-49) She explained 
that kratom is an herbal supplement derived from a tree in South Asia, which in high 
doses acts similarly to an opioid. As a result, reducing usage can result in withdrawal 
and often has to be treated similarly to weaning from opioids. She testified claimant had 
experienced such withdrawal. Kratom is banned in 36 countries. She does not 
encourage use of kratom. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 49-50)   

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 14 
 
PA Cunningham’s testimony at evidentiary hearing was clear, direct, and 
consistent with the record. Her demeanor was excellent and gave the undersigned no 
reason to doubt her veracity. PA Cunningham is found credible. 
At evidentiary hearing, claimant testified he continues to experience constant, 
daily nerve pain of the remainder of his right arm. Claimant testified that he had to 
adjust all his activities of daily living as a result of the loss of his dominant right arm. 
Claimant testified he does not sleep longer than four hours at a time and, as a result, 
has difficultly waking up. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 22-23) He has also been confronted with 
mental health symptoms. Claimant testified he has some good days and some not so 
good days. He is unsure whether a day will be good or bad until he wakes in the 
morning. Claimant believes the mental health care he has been provided has been 
beneficial and he believes he will improve more with time. Claimant continues to use the 
medications prescribed to him for mental health and sleep. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 26, 28) He 
also continues to use marijuana and kratom. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 29, 30-31) 
Claimant had an appointment scheduled for the day after hearing in order to be 
evaluated for a new prosthetic. The appointment included specialist evaluation and 
nerve testing. Claimant explained the new prosthetic is designed to function off his 
nerves and operate more similarly to an intact arm. Claimant testified if he obtains this 
prosthetic, he believes it will help him both mentally and physically. Claimant hopes if he 
is able to be more physically active and rebuild his strength, his mental health will 
improve as well. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 36-37, 41)    
Claimant has not worked since sustaining his work injury. Claimant testified he 
does not have an employee badge from defendant-employer, but he continues to get 
employer-provided benefits. (Hrg. Trans. p. 27) He testified defendant-employer had not 
offered him a job assignment. He testified he is willing to attempt jobs which would be 
safe for him; however, he believes a flexible schedule would be important due to his 
varying symptoms. Claimant testified he and PA Cunningham have discussed future 
employment options. Claimant testified many of the options required additional 
education, which claimant testified he was unable to afford. Claimant testified he would 
be willing to pursue further education if it were affordable. He expressed specific interest 
in the cybersecurity field and indicated there were relevant educational programs in Des 
Moines, Iowa. (Hrg. Trans. pp. 23-26) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is the nature and extent of claimant’s disability, 
including whether claimant has achieved maximum medical improvement.  
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 15 
 
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are: (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined. The healing period can be considered 
the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of improvement of the 
disabling condition. Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 
(Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an employee's continuing to have 
pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing period. 
The weight to be given to an expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact 
and may be affected by the accuracy of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other 
surrounding circumstances. The expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole 
or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 
(Iowa 1995). 
Defendants have admitted claimant sustained physical and mental injuries as a 
result of the work injury of June 4, 2021. Claimant has not returned to work and no 
argument has been raised that claimant is capable of returning to employment 
substantially similar to that which he held at the time of his injury. There is no dispute 
that claimant’s injury is serious enough that permanent disability benefits will eventually 
be owed. However, the parties dispute whether claimant has achieved maximum 
medical improvement (MMI), thus triggering claimant’s entitlement to permanent 
disability benefits. Claimant argues his healing period has ended and he is entitled to 
permanent disability benefits. Defendants argue claimant has not yet achieved MMI and 
that ongoing indemnity benefits are properly considered healing period benefits. 
Defendants argue the question of permanency is not yet ripe and that claimant should 
continue to receive healing period benefits until such a future date that MMI has been 
achieved.  
The parties do not dispute that claimant has achieved MMI with respect to his 
physical injuries. Dr. Fowler, Dr. Chen, and Dr. Bansal each opined that claimant 
sustained permanent impairment as a result of the physical injury he sustained. Both 
Drs. Fowler and Chen opined claimant achieved MMI for his physical injury as of 
January 3, 2023. There is no evidence to the contrary. The dispute in this matter 
centers on whether or not claimant has achieved MMI for his mental injuries sustained 
as a result of the June 4, 2021 work injury.  
Following a session in January 2024, PA Cunningham assessed claimant with 
controlled moderate recurrent major depression and controlled PTSD. At evidentiary 
hearing, PA Cunningham opined claimant had not achieved MMI. Specifically, she 
declined to place claimant at MMI as she believed an attempt to return to a work setting 
and obtaining a new, more functional prosthetic were necessary. She explained that 
MMI could not be met until such time as claimant had worked through the process of 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 16 
 
obtaining and accepting the more functional prosthetic. PA Cunningham opined that 
returning to some form of employment and obtaining a more functioning prosthetic 
would be beneficial to claimant’s mental health. Claimant testified he, too, believed that 
obtaining a new, more functional prosthetic and the increased abilities it provided would 
help him mentally.  
In January 2024, Dr. Jasper specifically opined that claimant achieved MMI for 
diagnoses of Other Specified Trauma – and Stressor – Related Disorder and Other (or 
Unknown) Substance Use Disorder, Moderate. Dr. Jasper opined the diagnoses were 
permanent in nature and claimant was unable to work as a result. Dr. Patra evaluated 
claimant in June 2022 and issued his report in January 2024. He diagnosed PTSD and 
major depressive disorder. He opined claimant’s prognosis was poor due to limb loss 
and ongoing pain. He opined the conditions were unlikely to resolve. Dr. Patra assigned 
a permanent impairment rating attributable to claimant’s conditions. 
Following review of the entirety of the evidentiary record, I award greatest weight 
on the question of claimant’s achievement of MMI relative to his mental injury to the 
opinions of PA Cunningham. Dr. Patra’s evaluation was completed over 1-1/2 years 
prior to hearing; I cannot find his opinions reflective of claimant’s current capacity. Dr. 
Jasper evaluated claimant on multiple occasions; however, I do not find convincing his 
opinion that claimant is unable to work. Dr. Jasper’s opinion is conclusory in nature and 
lacking in explanation that would explain such a significant determination. Like PA 
Cunningham, I believe Dr. Jasper’s opinion is driven in significant part by claimant’s use 
of non-prescribed substances. Claimant’s use of such substances should end, as the 
usage is in contravention of medical advice.  
PA Cunningham has served as claimant’s treating mental health provider since 
approximately three weeks following his work injury. The care has continued, 
successfully and beneficially, through the present, a period of over 2-1/2 years. PA 
Cunningham testified knowledgably regarding the totality of claimant’s condition, his 
progression since the injury, and his likelihood of improvement with further treatment. I 
find PA Cunningham is in the best position to know claimant’s condition and the 
likelihood of improvement in his mental health following obtaining a functional 
prosthetic. PA Cunningham’s expressed opinions that obtaining a prosthetic that allows 
increased functionality will improve claimant’s mental health is not only consistent with 
claimant’s own expressed beliefs, but is also extremely logical. It is entirely reasonable 
to presume that claimant’s mental health will improve if able to successfully engage in 
activities of daily living and potentially employment. Claimant is a young individual and 
should be granted the opportunity to fully heal, both mentally and physically, before an 
adjudication is made that finds him permanently and totally disabled.   
As I provide greatest weight to the opinions of PA Cunningham, I find claimant 
has not yet achieved MMI relative to his mental health injuries.    
Claimant has not returned to work and there is no argument that claimant can 
return to employment substantially similar to that which he held at the time of his work 
injury on June 4, 2021. Therefore, the issue of whether claimant’s healing period has 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 17 
 
terminated rests in whether claimant has achieved MMI. Following review of the entirety 
of the record, I find that while claimant’s physical injury has reached MMI, his mental 
injury has not yet reached this milestone. Having found claimant has not met any of the 
elements of section 85.34(1), as he has not returned to work, is not capable of returning 
to substantially similar employment, and has not achieved maximum medical 
improvement, claimant thus remains in his healing period. Accordingly, he remains 
entitled to healing period benefits until such date as one of the elements of section 
85.34(1) is met. The parties stipulated claimant’s gross average weekly wage was 
$1,541.00 and claimant was single and entitled to 1 exemption at the time of the work 
injury.  The proper rate of compensation is, therefore, $900.03. 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
for an independent medical examination under section 85.39; specifically, claimant 
requests Dr. Patra’s examination and report be reimbursed as an independent medical 
examination. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
In Mid Am. Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 851–52 (Iowa 2024), the 
Supreme Court stated:  
We construe section 85.39(2) as amended in 2017 to require the employer 
to reimburse the reasonable cost of the examination that is conducted by 
a physician of the employee's own choosing. The reasonableness of the 
fees will be analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically 
charge to perform the impairment rating examination—which may include 
“the costs of reviewing medical records, conducting a physical 
examination, opining on causation, assessing permanent impairment, 
assigning restrictions, and addressing further treatment 
recommendations.” Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm'n No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022). The 
court of appeals erred by basing the award on the impairment rating 
alone, without including the accompanying examination. 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 18 
 
(Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 851–52.) 
Claimant argues he is entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Patra’s independent 
medical examination under section 85.39. In his statement of costs, which defendants 
stipulated were paid by claimant, claimant stated the cost of Dr. Patra’s examination 
and report was $2,195.00 and $3,080.00, respectively. While both of these expenses 
can be assessed to defendants under section 85.39, certain prerequisites must first be 
met. Specifically, section 85.39 requires an evaluation of permanent disability by an 
employer-retained physician prior to claimant obtaining a reimbursable IME. It is true 
that Dr. Patra did not issue his report until January 9, 2024, and by that time multiple 
physicians had offered opinions regarding claimant’s permanent disability. However, Dr. 
Patra evaluated claimant on June 10, 2022. By review of the evidentiary record, I find 
no physician had offered an opinion as to claimant’s permanent impairment prior to that 
evaluation. The benefit of a reimbursable IME under section 85.39 is reactionary in 
nature, it must be triggered by an evaluation to which claimant disagreed. Quite simply, 
at the time of Dr. Patra’s evaluation, there was not an opinion to which claimant 
disagreed and which triggered the right to a reimbursable IME. While IMEs are often 
sought as a matter of course in workers’ compensation actions, in order for the 
undersigned to order reimbursement, the procedure outlined in section 85.39 must be 
followed. I cannot find claimant followed that procedure in this matter and accordingly, 
claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Patra’s IME under section 85.39.      
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 10A.328 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of the costs 
of: filing fee and convenience charge ($103.00); service fee ($13.92); cost of Dr. Patra’s 
IME report ($3,080.00); cost of Dr. Patra’s IME examination ($2,195.00); and cost of Dr. 
Bansal’s IME ($3,726.00). (CE4, p. 53)  
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states (emphasis added): 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any 

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 19 
 
cost shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner 
before it is taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be 
reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it 
shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of 
civil procedure governing discovery.   
 
The costs of filing fee and convenience charge, service fees, and the reasonable 
costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports are allowable costs 
that may be subject to taxation. The plain language of rule 4.33 requires proof of 
payment of a cost to be filed before it can be taxed. In this matter, claimant has not filed 
proof of payment of any of the costs sought at Claimant’s Exhibit 4, page 53. By the 
hearing report, however, the parties stipulated that payment had been made for the 
requested expenses. 
 
The costs of filing fee with convenience charge ($103.00) and service fees 
($13.92) are costs regularly seen in workers’ compensation proceedings, with the costs 
sought by claimant being representative of typical costs. The parties stipulated payment 
had been made for these expenses. Accordingly, I tax the costs of filing fee with 
convenience charge and service fees to defendants.  
Claimant also seeks taxation of costs associated with the evaluations and reports 
completed by Drs. Patra and Bansal. The undersigned may only tax the reasonable 
costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports pursuant to rule 
4.33. Without invoices identifying the costs charged by these practitioners alone and the 
allocation of such costs between evaluation, records review, research, and/or report 
drafting, I am unable to find that the costs purportedly charged were reasonable. 
Accordingly, I am unable to tax the costs associated with either Dr. Patra or Dr. Bansal’s 
opinions to defendants at this juncture. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall continue to pay unto claimant a running award of healing period 
benefits from the date of injury, June 4, 2021, until such time as benefits may be 
appropriately terminated pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(1), at the weekly rate of 
nine hundred and 03/100 dollars ($900.03). 
Upon the conclusion of claimant’s healing period, either party may file a new 
petition in review-reopening for the purpose of assessing permanent disability, including 
whether claimant is permanently and totally disabled.  

SHARP V. 3M COMPANY 
Page 20 
 
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid.    
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33, as set forth supra.   
Signed and filed this __31st ___ day of October, 2024. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
John Lawyer (via WCES) 
 
Stephen Brown (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
