Case Number: 5062758
Case Title:  BENNING V. CLIMATE ENGINEERS
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Benning, Luke-5062758.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT IN AND FOR LINN COUNTY 
Luke Benning, 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
Petitioner, 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
No. CVCV093906 
vs. 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
RULING ON JUDICIAL REVIEW 
Climate Engineers, Inc. and Climate 
) 
River Valley, Inc., 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
Respondents.  
) 
 
 
On this date, the above-captioned matter came before the undersigned for review of 
Petitioner’s Petition for Judicial Review.  The Court finds a hearing on the Petition is 
unnecessary.  Having considered the file, relevant case law, and written arguments of counsel, 
the Court hereby enters the following ruling: 
 
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 
 
 
Petitioner Luke Benning filed a petition in arbitration with the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, and a hearing took place before Deputy Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner Erin Q. Pals on October 11, 2017.  References to “Claimant” in the procedural 
history of this Ruling are to Petitioner, as the agency referred to Petitioner as Claimant in the 
underlying proceedings.  References to “Defendants” in the procedural history of this Ruling are 
to Respondents, as the agency referred to Respondents as Defendants in the underlying 
proceedings. 
 
Petitioner sought workers’ compensation benefits from the Respondents and Twin City 
Fire Insurance Company, the insurance carrier.  Petitioner, Bill Holst, Erik Lewis, and Pete 
Watson testified at the hearing, and Joint Exhibits JE1-JE5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-F were admitted at hearing.  In an Arbitration Decision issued February 
16, 2018, Deputy Commissioner Pals noted that the following issues had been submitted for 
resolution: 
 
1. 
Whether Petitioner sustained an injury on January 5, 2015, which arose out of and 
in the course of employment? 
 
2. 
Whether Petitioner’s claim is barred by operation of Iowa Code § 85.23 for failure 
to provide timely notice of his injury? 
 
3. 
The nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, Petitioner sustained as a 
result of the January 5, 2015 work injury? 
 
4. 
Whether Petitioner is entitled to past medical benefits? 
 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
5. 
Whether Petitioner is entitled to an independent medical evaluation under Iowa 
Code § 85.39? 
 
6. 
Assessment of costs. 
 
 
Deputy Commissioner Pals made the following factual findings and conclusions 
(citations to the agency exhibits are omitted): 
 
Mr. Benning testified that his back began to bother him in August and September of 
2014.  He noticed the pain was worse with extended forklift operation, bending, twisting, 
and lifting heavier items.  Mr. Benning sought treatment with Gordon B. Urbi, M.D. on 
September 23, 2014.  Mr. Benning reported a 6 day history of back pain which was 
getting worse.  He had pain in his legs when he twists around.  He reported he did a lot of 
twisting and lifting at work and that he drove a forklift.  The doctor’s assessment was 
back pain, most likely muscular strain.  He was given muscle relaxers, anti-
inflammatories, and allowed to return to work on September 25, 2014. 
 
Mr. Benning testified that he mentioned his back pain to his supervisor, Bill Holst, in 
September of 2014.  At hearing, Mr. Benning said that he told his supervisor he thought 
his back pain was probably from bouncing around on the forklift.  According to Mr. 
Benning, Mr. Holst told him something to the effect that the pain would go away or deal 
with it.  Mr. Benning testified that his pain progressed and became more continuous and 
sharp and eventually went down his leg. 
 
Mr. Benning went to see his primary care physician, Savita V. Hegde, M.D. on January 5, 
2015.  By this point, his pain was affecting his activity level and made it hard for him to 
get out of bed.  Dr. Hegde informed Mr. Benning that he was probably going to require 
surgery.  He was eventually referred to Kevin Eck, M.D. 
 
Dr. Eck performed a left micro-hemilaminectomy with discectomy at L4-L5 on April 22, 
2015.  Mr. Benning continued to follow-up with Dr. Eck and recovered well.  Dr. Eck 
placed Mr. Benning at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of June 30, 2016. 
 
On October 4, 2016, Mr. Benning was riding a motorcycle when he was involved in a 
motor vehicle accident.  He was treated at UnityPoint where they noted pain and swelling 
in his low back. 
 
The first issue to be determined is whether claimant sustained an injury which arose out 
of and in the course of employment.  There are several physicians in this case who have 
rendered their opinions regarding causation.  The surgeon, Dr. Eck, stated: 
 
The pain form lumbar spondylosis and the paracentral disc herniation at 
L4-5 that resulted in left lower extremity radiculopathy necessitating surgery was 
more likely than not exacerbated by his manual work duties including driving a 
forklift.  It is possible the herniation necessitating surgery was directly related to 
an injury he sustained at work. 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
 
Defendants argue Dr. Eck’s opinion should be rejected because they believe he provided 
a contradictory opinion.  I do not find Defendants’ argument to be persuasive. 
 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Benning underwent an independent medical 
examination (IME) with Robin Sassman, M.D. on April 17, 2017.  Dr. Sassman opined 
that the work activities were a substantial factor in the development of his low back pain, 
radicular symptoms, his need for surgery, and his ongoing symptoms.  Defendants argue 
that her opinion must be rejected because it is based on an incomplete history.  However, 
I do not find this argument to be persuasive.  A review of the entire IME report reveals 
that she did have and considered a complete history including the prior accidents and the 
subsequent motorcycle accident. 
 
At the defendants’ request claimant underwent an IME with Chad Abernathey, M.D. on 
September 8, 2017.  Dr. Abernathey stated that the patient did not have a singular event 
which would have caused a small disc protrusion.  He opined that the chronic low back 
pain was related to multiple injuries and degenerative changes of his lumbar spine.  He 
felt there was no objective evidence to support a specific work accident.  I do not find the 
opinions of Dr. Abernathey to be persuasive.  His report is not well-reasoned.  
Furthermore, his report fails to take an exacerbation or aggravation into account. 
 
I find the opinions of Dr. Eck and Dr. Sassman to carry greater weight in this case.  I 
further find that Mr. Benning has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that he 
sustained an injury to his back which arose out of and in the course of his employment 
with the defendant employer. 
 
The next issue to address is whether Mr. Benning gave timely notice of his injury to the 
defendants. 
 
Claimant contends that he told Bill Holst and others at work, at least in passing, that his 
back pain was related to bouncing around on the forklift.  Mr. Benning testified that when 
he told Mr. Holst about the forklift causing pain, Mr. Holst told him to just deal with it.  
In later testimony, Mr. Benning stated that when he told Mr. Holst about the forklift 
causing back pain, Mr. Holst said he did not have to complete an injury report because 
there was no specific date of injury.  Mr. Holst denies that Mr. Benning ever told him that 
the forklift was causing him pain.  Mr. Holst also testified that if Mr. Benning had said 
the back pain was related to the job, then he would have sent him to the safety director, 
Erik Lewis, to have him complete an injury report. 
 
After the January 5, 2015, medical appointment, Mr. Benning met with Peter Watson, the 
President of Climate Engineers.  Mr. Benning testified that he told Mr. Watson he was 
going to have back surgery.  According to Mr. Benning, Mr. Watson was not interested in 
the cause of his back pain.  Mr. Watson decided to lay off Mr. Benning so Mr. Benning 
could collect unemployment benefits.  Mr. Benning understood that once he was cleared 
to return to work after the surgery, then the defendant employer would have a position for 
him.  Mr. Benning testified that it was only he and Mr. Watson at that meeting.  Mr. 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
Benning admitted that he never directly told Mr. Watson that his back pain was from 
operating the forklift.  Mr. Benning said that he told Mr. Holst and Mr. Watson, so he 
figured the chain of communications gave the information to Mr. Watson.  After the 
January 5, 2015 meeting, the only Climate employees that Mr. Benning spoke with were 
Pete or an office lady transferring him to talk to Pete. 
 
However, during a later part of his testimony under direct examination, Mr. Benning 
testified that Mr. Watson asked him if the back pain happened at home and Mr. Benning 
said no.  Mr. Benning testified that he might have also told Mr. Watson that bouncing 
around on the forklift caused his back pain.  Mr. Watson admitted that Mr. Benning never 
told him that his back pain was work-related. 
 
Mr. Benning also testified that he did not complete an injury report for his January 5, 
2015 back injury.  From prior experience, he knew it was Climate’s policy that when you 
were hurt at work you were to report the injury to your immediate supervisor and then 
complete an accident or near-miss accident report.  Mr. Benning had completed accident 
reports on two prior occasions due to other work-related injuries.  However, Mr. Benning 
did not complete a report for his back injury because Mr. Holst told him he did not need 
to complete a report because there was not a specific incident or specific date of an 
accident.  Mr. Benning testified that after he was laid off he probably told Mr. Holst, Mr. 
Watson, and Mr. Lewis in one of the messages he sent them, that his back pain was 
probably from bouncing around on the forklift. 
 
The undersigned notes that there is conflicting evidence and testimony from both sides.  
Because of the conflicting evidence, the issue of notice is a close call.  However, I find 
that defendants have demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that claimant 
failed to provide timely notice.  All three of defendants’ witnesses testified that they did 
not receive notice from the claimant.  Further, Mr. Benning testified that in the fall of 
2014, he told Mr. Holst and others at work that his pain was related to driving the forklift; 
however, this testimony conflicts with his own testimony.  On March 3, 2015, Mr. 
Benning completed a patient questionnaire.  On that form he indicated that his back pain 
was not a workers’ compensation claim.  When asked about this at the hearing, Mr. 
Benning said that he checked no “[b]ecause at that time workmen’s (sic) comp was not 
discussed, it was not offered, it wasn’t even on my radar.  It wasn’t until later on that it 
became on my radar.”  I find that this action is not consistent with the actions of an 
employee who had reported a work injury to his employer.  There are simply too many 
inconsistencies in Mr. Benning’s account of how and when he provided notice to the 
defendants.  Thus, I find that claimant failed to provide notice of his work injury to the 
defendants within 90 days of the injury.  As such, claimant’s claim is barred by operation 
of Iowa Code section 85.23. 
 
Because claimant was not successful in his claim I exercise my discretion and do not 
assess costs in this matter.  Each party shall bear their own costs. 
 
All other issues are rendered moot. 
 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
See Arbitration Decision, pp. 2-5.   
 
 
Deputy Commissioner Pals then cited to the applicable legal authorities, and entered the 
following additional conclusions: 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant did sustain an injury to his 
back that arose out of and in the course of his employment with the defendant employer. 
 
However, I find that claimant’s claim is barred by operation of Iowa Code section 85.23.  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act imposes time limits on injured employees both as 
to when they must notify their employers of injuries and as to when injury claims must be 
filed.  Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence of 
an injury to the employer within 90 days of the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
 
 
… 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that the defendants have shown by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the claimant failed to provide timely notice of his 
work injury. 
 
… 
 
All other issues are rendered moot because claimant’s claim is barred by operation of 
Iowa Code section 85.23. 
 
See Arbitration Decision, p. 6. 
 
 
Petitioner appealed to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Joseph S. 
Cortese II, who entered his Appeal Decision on August 30, 2019.  Commissioner Cortese 
adopted the findings, conclusions, and analysis of Deputy Commissioner Pals.  See Appeal 
Decision, pp. 1-3. 
 
 
The pending Petition for Judicial Review followed.  In support of his brief on appeal, 
Petitioner has filed a transcript of the proceedings before Deputy Commissioner Pals.  See 
Exhibit 1.  By way of background facts, and relying on the transcript of proceedings before 
Deputy Commissioner Pals, Petitioner states that Climate Engineers, Inc. is a company involved 
in the installation and demolishing of HVAC systems and ductwork and the manufacture of sheet 
metal.  Petitioner states he was hired on May 5, 2013 as a pre-apprentice, earning $10/hour, and 
he understood that he eventually would take on the role of apprentice.  Petitioner further states he 
received regular raises over the course of his employment, and when his employment was 
terminated, he was nearly thirty years old. 
 
Petitioner claims his work at Climate involves driving and operating a forklift on a daily 
basis; frequently lifting and moving up to fifty pounds; and occasionally lifting up to seventy 
pounds.  Petitioner also claims he spent most of his day on a forklift, which lacked suspension, 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
moving heavy items around the warehouse and across rocky terrain in all types of weather 
conditions, including rain and snow.  Petitioner asserts that starting in the summer of 2014, he 
began experiencing back pain arising out of his job duties, and the injury eventually worsened to 
the point of requiring surgery.  Petitioner further asserts that on January 5, 2015, his pain 
increased in severity and he sought further medical treatment on that date.  Petitioner states he 
was informed by his physician that he might need surgery, and he claims he relayed that 
information to Climate on January 5, 2015.  Petitioner also claims that, upon learning of 
Petitioner’s need for surgery, Climate immediately terminated Petitioner’s employment. 
 
Petitioner first argues that Commissioner Cortese erred in affirming the arbitration 
decision that concluded Petitioner did not give timely notice of his injury.  Petitioner claims is it 
undisputed that from September 18, 2014 through January 5, 2015, Climate had actual 
knowledge that Petitioner had a back injury, which provided the basis for his termination.  
Petitioner points to his employment file, which contains a document citing “back troubles” as the 
reason for termination.  Petitioner contends he reported his back injury to the employer on 
several occasions, and the knowledge the employer had was sufficient to alert Climate of a 
potential claim, and that the injury may have been work related.  Petitioner relies on his 
conversations with Mr. Holst and Mr. Lewis, the meeting he had with Mr. Watson, and his 
medical records as bases for establishing that the employer had timely notice of Petitioner’s 
injury. 
 
With respect to Respondents’ statement that Petitioner did not complete a written 
accident report for the back injury, as he had with other unrelated work injuries, Petitioner 
asserts that Mr. Holst told him not to complete an accident report because he could not pinpoint 
the specific incident or date for the injury.  Petitioner argues his testimony on this issue is 
consistent with the accident report form, which calls for the location, date, and time of the 
incident, and is consistent with Petitioner describing his injury as progressive and cumulative.  
Petitioner further argues any inconsistencies in his testimony are irrelevant to the analysis of 
whether Climate was on notice of the potential for a workers’ compensation claim.  Petitioner 
claims that Commissioner Cortese’s statement that Deputy Commissioner Pals expressly found 
Climate representatives to be more credible that Petitioner is incorrect, and neither the 
Commissioner nor the Deputy Commissioner addressed the inconsistences in the testimony of 
Climate’s representatives.  Petitioner contends the inconsistences in Respondents’ 
representatives’ testimony reflect a lack of credibility. 
 
Petitioner asserts that the Court should modify and reverse the agency decision because it 
was based on an erroneous interpretation of the law and improper decision-making; lacks 
substantial evidentiary support; is inconsistent with agency rules, practices, and precedent; and is 
the product of a decision-making process that improperly applied law to fact.  Petitioner further 
asserts Respondents’ actions violate concepts of fundamental fairness. 
 
Petitioner’s next argument is that the Commissioner erred in failing to award disability 
benefits.  Petitioner contends that, as a direct result of his work-related injury, Petitioner became 
unable to carry on the type of work he has performed his whole adult life, or to earn anywhere 
near the amount he has earned in the past.  Petitioner states he has ongoing back pain and 
numbness, and significant work restrictions.  Petitioner claims he has attempted other 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
employment but has struggled to perform his work-related duties, and he can no longer compete 
for the jobs his experience, training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit 
him to perform.  Petitioner also claims his physical activity in his personal life has been affected 
by his injury.   
 
Petitioner acknowledges that he is attending college courses, but argues that the course 
work is necessary because he receives lower pay and is no longer able to perform the only type 
of employment he has ever had, and he has established evidence of industrial disability.  
Petitioner asserts it is unclear whether his efforts in education will continue successfully or yield 
employment, particularly given the physical nature of some jobs.  Petitioner contends he 
sustained a substantial industrial disability because of his inability to perform physical job duties, 
combined with his level of education, and an award for body as a whole industrial disability of 
not less than 50% under § 85.34(2) should be made on that basis and based upon the greater 
weight of the evidence.  Petitioner also seeks permanent partial disability benefits of at least 
75%. 
 
Petitioner requests the following relief on judicial review: 
 
1. 
A finding that Respondents failed to meet their burden of proof in establishing 
that Petitioner failed to timely report his work-related injury and that he is entitled to 
disability benefits as a result; 
 
2. 
Petitioner is entitled to temporary total disability benefits from the date of his 
injury through at least October 1, 2015; 
 
3. 
Because of ongoing permanence, Petitioner is entitled to permanent partial 
disability benefits from the date he reached MMI, on June 30, 2016; and 
 
4. 
Petitioner is entitled to recovery of the expenses identified in the Parties’ Hearing 
Report. 
 
 
Respondents resist the relief sought by Petitioner on judicial review.  Respondents’ first 
argument is that the Commissioner did not err in affirming the Arbitration Decision that 
concluded Petitioner did not give timely notice of his injury.  Respondents contend they were 
unaware of a work-related, low back injury; Petitioner’s medical records do not support his claim 
of timely notice; Petitioner failed to file an incident report as per employer policy; and deference 
should be provided to Deputy Commissioner’s Pals’ determination of credibility.   
 
 
Respondents also argue that the Commissioner did not err in failing to award disability 
benefits.  Respondents contend that an industrial disability analysis was not required as both 
Deputy Commissioner Pals and Commissioner Cortese found Petitioner failed to provide notice 
of his injury to his employer.  Respondents argue that if the Court finds otherwise, the industrial 
disability determination should be remanded to the Commissioner. 
 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
 
Respondents contend Petitioner has not suffered any industrial disability, and he is well-
educated and holds numerous qualifications.  Respondents also contend Petitioner has been 
released to work with no restrictions. 
 
 
Petitioner has not filed a reply to Respondents’ resistance. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Petitioner is entitled to judicial review of this action pursuant to Iowa Code § 17A.19 
(2019).  “A person or party who has exhausted all adequate administrative remedies and who is 
aggrieved or adversely affected by any final agency action is entitled to judicial review thereof 
under this chapter.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(1) (2019).  “Iowa Code section 17A.19(8)(g) 
authorizes relief from agency action that is ‘unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious or 
characterized by an abuse of discretion or a clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.’”  Dico, 
Inc. v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 576 N.W.2d 352, 355 (Iowa 1998).  “These terms have established 
meanings:  ‘An agency’s action is “arbitrary” or “capricious” when it is taken without regard to 
the law or facts of the case…Agency action is “unreasonable” when it is “clearly against reason 
and evidence.”’”  Id. (citing Soo Line R.R. v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 521 N.W.2d 685, 688-89 
(Iowa 1994)).  “An abuse of discretion occurs when the agency action ‘rests on grounds or 
reasons clearly untenable or unreasonable.’”  Id. (citing Schoenfeld v. FDL Foods, Inc., 560 
N.W.2d 595, 598 (Iowa 1997)).  The Iowa Supreme Court has stated that an “abuse of discretion 
is synonymous with unreasonableness, and involves a lack of rationality, focusing on whether 
the agency has made a decision clearly against reason and evidence.”  Id. (citing Schoenfeld, 560 
N.W.2d at 598).   
“Section 17A.19[10] provides that a party may successfully challenge an agency decision 
when the party’s substantial rights have been prejudiced because the agency action ‘is 
unsupported by substantial evidence’ or ‘is affected by other error of law.’”  Titan Tire Corp. v. 
Emp. Appeal Bd., 641 N.W.2d 752, 754 (Iowa 2003).  Factual findings are reversed “only if they 
are unsupported by substantial evidence in the record made before the agency when the record is 
viewed as a whole.”  Loeb v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 530 N.W.2d 450, 451 (Iowa 1995).  “Evidence is 
substantial if a reasonable mind would find it adequate to reach the same conclusion.  Id. (citing 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 849 (Iowa 1995)).  “The agency’s 
decision does not lack substantial evidence because inconsistent conclusions may be drawn from 
the same evidence.”  Id. (citing Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 849). 
“Substantial evidence is ‘the quantity and quality of evidence that would be deemed 
sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the 
consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of 
great importance.’”  University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics v. Waters, 674 N.W.2d 92, 95 
(Iowa 2004).  “‘While “courts must not simply rubber stamp the agency fact finding without 
engaging in a fairly intensive review of the record to ensure that the fact finding is itself 
reasonable ··· evidence is not insubstantial merely because it would have supported contrary 
inferences.’”  Id.  “‘The substantial evidence rule requires to review the record as a whole to 
determine whether there is sufficient evidence to support the decision the commission made.’”  
Stark Const. v. Lauterwasser, No. 13-0609, 2014 WL 1495479, *8 (Iowa Ct. App. 2014) (citing 
Woodbury Cnty. v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 335 N.W.2d 161, 164 (Iowa 1983)).   
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
 
“[T]he agency is not required to mention each item of evidence in its decision and 
explain why it found the evidence persuasive or not persuasive.”  Keystone Nursing Care Center 
v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 305 (Iowa 2005).  “While it is true that the commissioner’s 
decision must be ‘sufficiently detailed to show the path he has taken through conflicting 
evidence,’…the law does not require the commissioner to discuss each and every fact in the 
record and explain why or why not he has rejected it.”  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 
N.W.2d 267, 274 (Iowa 1995).  “Such a requirement would be unnecessary and burdensome.”  
Id. 
 
 
If a “claim of error lies with the agency’s interpretation of the law, the question on review 
is whether the agency’s interpretation was erroneous, and we may substitute our interpretation 
for the agency’s.”  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  “Still, if there is no 
challenge to the agency’s findings of fact or interpretation of the law, but the claim of error lies 
with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge is to the agency’s application of the law 
to the facts, and the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion by, for 
example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.”  
Id.  “In sum, when an agency decision on appeal involves mixed questions of law and fact, care 
must be taken to articulate the proper inquiry for review instead of lumping the fact, law, and 
application questions together within the umbrella of a substantial-evidence issue.”  Id. 
 
 
Iowa Code § 85.23 provides: 
 
Unless the employer or the employer's representative shall have actual knowledge of the 
occurrence of an injury received within ninety days from the date of the occurrence of the 
injury, or unless the employee or someone on the employee's behalf or a dependent or 
someone on the dependent's behalf shall give notice thereof to the employer within ninety 
days from the date of the occurrence of the injury, no compensation shall be allowed. For 
the purposes of this section, “date of the occurrence of the injury” means the date that the 
employee knew or should have known that the injury was work-related. 
 
Iowa Code § 85.23 (2019).  “No particular form of notice shall be required….”  Iowa Code § 
85.24(1) (2019).   
 
 
“The workers’ compensation law should be liberally construed to accomplish the object 
and purpose of the legislation:  to benefit the worker and his dependents.”  Dillinger v. City of 
Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176, 180 (Iowa 1985).  The Iowa Supreme Court has applied the 
discovery rule to the notice provision of § 85.23.  Id.  “While the discovery rule aids the 
employee by preventing the limitation period from commencing until the claimant knows of his 
injury and its probable compensable nature…the notice requirement of section 85.23 protects the 
employer by insuring he is alerted ‘to the possibility of a claim so that an investigation can be 
made while the information is fresh.’”  Id. (citing Robinson v. Dept. of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 
809, 811 (Iowa 1980)).  “[W]here the employer or the employer’s representative has actual 
knowledge of the occurrence, notice from the employee to the employer is not required.”  
Johnson v. International Paper Co., 530 N.W.2d 475, 477 (Iowa Ct. App. 1995).  “Actual 
knowledge must include information that the injury might be work-connected.”  Id.  “It requires 
more than the fact that the employer was aware of any employee’s illness.”  Id.  “A statement to 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
an employer that an employee is ill, without more, does not satisfy the actual knowledge 
requirement of Iowa Code section 85.23.”  Id.  In Johnson, the Court of Appeals held that where 
the deputy made a finding of fact that the employee failed to give the required statutory notice of 
a work-connected injury, the Court of Appeals was bound by the finding because it was 
supported by substantial evidence.  Id.   
 
 
The Court concludes it was proper for the agency to deny workers’ compensation 
benefits to Petitioner, due to his failure to provide notice to the employer of the work-related 
injury pursuant to § 85.23.  The Court agrees with Deputy Commissioner Pals’ assessment that 
the notice issue is a close call.  However, there is substantial evidence to support the finding that 
Petitioner failed to give the required statutory notice of the work-connected injury.  Further, the 
Court is not persuaded that the agency committed an error of law in so finding, applied wholly 
irrational reasoning, or ignored important and relevant evidence. 
 
 
Mr. Holst, Mr. Lewis, and Mr. Watson (the Court will refer to these individuals 
collectively as Petitioner’s supervisors) all testified that Petitioner never reported a work-related 
injury to them, and Petitioner has testified that he did not file an incident report for the alleged 
low back injury.  Mr. Holst testified that while he had a conversation with Petitioner in 
September, 2014, he did not remember specifics about the conversation, and recalled that 
Petitioner told him the back injury was personal and not related to work.  There are also records 
in Petitioner’s personnel files stating that Petitioner had a personal back injury that was not 
work-related, and that he was being treated by a chiropractor.  Petitioner also offered testimony 
that in September, 2014, he was unaware of the cause of his injury.  While at times Petitioner’s 
supervisors may have confused dates as to when certain conversations with Petitioner occurred, 
it is clear that the general timeframe for the discussions that the supervisors had with Petitioner 
was from September 18, 2014 through September 22, 2014.  Thus, the Court does not find any 
credibility problems with any of the supervisors having testified about a date a conversation took 
place that later was shown to be off by a day or two. 
 
Further, Petitioner’s own testimony providing conflicting information as to when he 
allegedly provided notice to the employer, including that he did not provide details about a back-
related injury, or say anything about the forklift.  Much of Petitioner’s testimony regarding his 
conversations with his supervisors was that he “probably,” “may have,” or was “pretty sure” that 
he provided the necessary information to the employer about his injury in order to comply with § 
85.32.  Petitioner’s medical records also include inconsistent dates pertaining to the injury.  
Petitioner’s supervisors were specific in their testimony that Petitioner failed to report a work-
related injury to them, and it was not inappropriate for the agency to rely on the testimony of the 
supervisors as being more reliable and credible than that offered by Petitioner.  The agency did 
not commit an error of law in its application of § 85.23, did not apply wholly irrational reasoning 
on the issue of notice, and did not ignore important and relevant evidence on the issue of the 
notice allegedly provided by Petitioner. 
 
 
With respect to Petitioner’s first argument on judicial review, the Court concludes that 
the Commissioner did not err in affirming the arbitration decision that concluded Petitioner did 
not give timely notice of his injury. 
 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
 
Petitioner’s second argument is that the Commissioner erred in failing to award disability 
benefits.  Because the Court has concluded that the Commissioner properly found that Petitioner 
did not give timely notice of his injury, the Commissioner did not err in failing to award 
disability benefits.  If the Court were to have found that Petitioner gave timely notice of his 
injury, the Court would have remanded the case to the agency for further fact-finding and 
conclusions on the question of disability benefits; the Court would not have engaged in making 
the initial fact-finding and conclusions on the disability benefits issue.  However, based on the 
Court’s conclusion that the agency did not err in finding that Petitioner did not give timely notice 
of his injury, the Court concludes the agency also did not err in failing to award disability 
benefits. 
 
 
The agency’s decision should be affirmed on judicial review, and Petitioner’s request for 
relief on judicial review should be denied. 
 
RULING 
 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that Petitioner’s request for relief on judicial review is 
DENIED.  The agency’s decision is affirmed.  If there are costs to be assessed, they are assessed 
to Petitioner. 
 
Clerk to notify. 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV093906
LUKE BENNING VS CLIMATE ENGINEERS INC ETAL
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-02-23 11:28:33     page 12 of 12
E-FILED  2020 FEB 23 11:28 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
