Case Number: 1588289.01
Case Title:  STEPHEN III, FRANCIS V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stephen Francis-1588289.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
FRANCIS J. STEPHEN III, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No.  1588289.01  
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
  :  
vs. 
 
  :  
 
 
  :  
A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET  
  : 
         ARBITRATION  DECISION 
& CONVENTION CENTRE, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :  
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY OF AMERICA, 
  :  
Head Note Nos.:   1402.40, 1801, 1803, 
 
 
  :  
 
                   2501, 2502, 2907,   
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :  
 
 
         3001, 4000.1, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Francis Stephen III, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against A Touch of 
Class Banquet & Convention Centre (hereinafter referred to as “A Touch of Class”) and 
its workers’ compensation insurance carrier, Accident Fund Insurance Company of 
America.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on May 19, 
2021.  Due to the ongoing pandemic in the state of Iowa and pursuant to an order of the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case was tried using the CourtCall 
videoconference platform. 
The parties filed a hearing report before the scheduled hearing.  On the hearing 
report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 16, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at trial.  
Pursuant to an evidentiary ruling entered at the time of hearing, claimant introduced 
Claimant’s Exhibit 8 after the hearing.  That exhibit was received pursuant to the ruling 
and the evidentiary record closed upon receipt of Claimant’s Exhibit 8.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Nov-04  09:18:17     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 2 
Counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  This 
request was granted.  Both parties filed briefs simultaneously on June 30, 2021.  The 
case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether the March 24, 2014 work injury caused temporary disability and, 
if so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary total disability, 
temporary partial disability, or healing period benefits. 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
3. 
Claimant’s average gross weekly earnings immediately prior to the injury 
and the applicable weekly worker’s compensation rate at which benefits 
should be paid. 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.39 for an independent medical evaluation. 
5. 
Whether claimant is entitled to medical mileage reimbursement. 
6. 
Whether penalty benefits should be assessed against defendants for an 
allegedly unreasonable delay, denial, and/or termination of weekly 
benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13(4). 
7. 
Whether sanctions in the form of an assessment of costs related to 
vocational reports should be assessed against defendants for their denial 
of a request for admission during discovery. 
8. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Francis Stephen III, claimant, is a 43-year-old, right-hand dominant gentleman.  
He resides in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.  Mr. Stephen has a bachelor’s degree from the 
University of Iowa in business administration. 
Upon graduating from college in 2001, claimant purchased a 2.5-acre banquet 
venue and began operating A Touch of Class Banquet & Convention Centre, the 
employer in this case.  A Touch of Class was a multi-room, full-service event location.  It 
hosted weddings, banquets and live entertainment.  Mr. Stephen operated A Touch of 
Class from 2001 through 2018.  He served as the operations manager for the facility, 
but also performed numerous physical tasks to operate the business, including kitchen 
work, maintenance, landscaping, banquet set-up and teardown, scheduling duties, 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 3 
marketing, and general supervision of employees.  In addition to A Touch of Class, 
claimant also owns, or shares ownership in, several other businesses, including real 
estate. 
Defendants accurately point out that prior to the alleged injury date, claimant 
experienced significant low back symptoms.  The medical evidence demonstrates that 
he obtained treatment for his low back prior to the injury date.  In fact, claimant was 
diagnosed with a disk bulge at the L4-5 level and required an epidural steroid injection 
approximately seven years before the injury date.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1)  Claimant also 
obtained some chiropractic care for his low back prior to the work injury.  (Joint Ex. 9, p. 
61)  In fact, claimant obtained some chiropractic treatments in February and March 
2014.  That care focused on both claimant’s neck and low back.  (Joint Ex. 10, pp. 62-
63)  
The chiropractic care provided to claimant shortly before his work injury does not 
appear to be extensive.  No referrals were made for further medical care.  Yet, as 
defendants point out in their brief, it does not appear that claimant’s independent 
medical evaluator, Mark Taylor, M.D., was aware of the low back treatments obtained 
shortly before the work injury.  There is no evidence documenting prior right shoulder 
injuries or treatment. 
On March 24, 2014, Mr. Stephen was working at A Touch of Class.  He carried 
garbage out to a dumpster.  Unfortunately, there was a puddle of water that froze 
overnight and claimant was standing on that ice patch when he attempted to swing the 
trash bag into the dumpster.  He slipped on the ice and fell hard onto his low back and 
right shoulder areas.  Although Mr. Stephen had prior work-related injuries to his left 
shoulder and left ankle, he denied any prior injuries to his low back or right shoulder. 
The employer and insurance carrier accepted the low back and right shoulder 
injuries as compensable and provided claimant medical care.  He was referred to a 
neurosurgeon, Chad Abernathey, M.D., for treatment of his low back.  Dr. Abernathey 
diagnosed claimant with “left S1 radiculopathy secondary to left L5-S1 disc extrusion.”  
(Joint Ex. 3, p. 16)  He recommended and performed low back surgery on claimant on 
October 30, 2014.  Dr. Abernathey performed a left L5-S1 partial hemilaminectomy and 
discectomy.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 55) 
Following the low back surgery, Dr. Abernathey offered claimant physical 
therapy.  Claimant declined therapy.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 17)  Dr. Abernathey documented 
that claimant was recovering well and that he was working without difficulty in a light 
duty capacity by November 7, 2014.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 17) 
Dr. Abernathey released claimant to return to work without restrictions as a result 
of the low back injury on December 17, 2014.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 17)  On April 20, 2015, Dr. 
Abernathey declared claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) for his low 
back.  (Joint Ex. 3, pp. 17-18)  Dr. Abernathey opined that claimant sustained a 7 
percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of his low back injury.  
(Joint Ex. 3, pp. 17-18)   

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 4 
Mr. Stephen testified that he continues to have low back symptoms after the work 
injury.  Specifically, claimant testified that he continues to have acute pain in the center 
of his low back.  He testified that he has difficulties and it is painful to bend forward and 
that walking is painful for his low back.  Mr. Stephen indicated that he moves a lot in his 
chair when seated.  He testified that he experiences pain into his left buttocks and down 
to the left knee as a result of his low back injury.  Mr. Stephen also explained that he 
has a constant level of pain, but that his pain level will significantly increase with 
movement or in certain positions.  He testified that he has to change positions from 
sitting, standing, and walking frequently due to low back symptoms. 
Claimant also submitted to an independent medical evaluation performed by 
Mark C. Taylor, M.D., on May 2, 2016.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 4-14)  It is unclear who 
requested this evaluation or selected Dr. Taylor to perform the evaluation.  (Claimant’s 
Ex. 1, pp. 1-3)  Dr. Taylor opined that claimant sustained a 12 percent permanent 
impairment of the whole person as a result of his low back injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 
13)  Dr. Taylor also offered a tentative opinion after his initial evaluation that 
recommended work restrictions for claimant.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 12) 
In addition to the low back injury, claimant also sustained an injury to his right 
shoulder as a result of his fall at work on March 24, 2014.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1)  Initial 
conservative care did not resolve claimant’s right shoulder symptoms.  An MRI was 
obtained on April 28, 2016.  It demonstrated a partial thickness tear in two of the rotator 
cuff tendons but no full-thickness tears.  (Joint Ex. 11) 
Physical therapy for the shoulder continued but did not ultimately resolve 
claimant’s right shoulder symptoms.  Claimant ultimately sought care with an 
orthopaedic surgeon, Gregory R. Hill, M.D.  Dr. Hill obtained a repeat MRI of the right 
shoulder, which he reported showed a 90 percent tear of the supraspinatus and a partial 
tear of the biceps tendon.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 19)  However, Dr. Hill issued a causation 
opinion concluding that claimant’s condition by March 2017 was not related to the initial 
work injury because a change in findings within the shoulder.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 22)  
However, Dr. Hill later opined that the change in findings within the right shoulder could 
be the result of physical therapy efforts.  (Joint Ex. 4, pp. 25-26) 
Ultimately, defendants appear to have admitted ongoing liability for the right 
shoulder condition and authorized medical care.  Unfortunately, in spite of operative 
intervention by Dr. Hill on August 4, 2016 and again on August 29, 2018, claimant’s 
right shoulder symptoms did not completely resolve.  (Joint Ex. 7, pp. 56-59; Joint Ex. 8)  
With ongoing low back and right shoulder symptoms, claimant testified it was difficult to 
perform all of the job demands of operating A Touch of Class.  Therefore, in March 
2018, claimant sold the business.  He has continued to manage real estate properties in 
which he has financial interest.  However, claimant has not worked anywhere or even 
applied for a job since selling his business in March 2018.  
Claimant was referred to Matthew Bollier, M.D., at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics for further orthopaedic evaluation and care of his right shoulder.  
(Joint Ex. 5)  Dr. Bollier evaluated claimant’s right shoulder on April 26, 2019.  Dr. 
Bollier recommended a repeat MRI of the right shoulder and suggested there may be 
pathology within the long head biceps tendon.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 35)  Ultimately, Dr. Bollier 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 5 
recommended further surgical inspection and repair.  He took claimant to surgery on 
July 9, 2019 and performed a right shoulder distal clavicle resection, subacromial 
decompression, biceps tendon repair, and a right rotator cuff repair.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 36) 
Dr. Bollier’s surgery provided claimant some symptomatic relief.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 
40)  However, claimant continued to report sharp pain in his right shoulder with certain 
movements and concerns about lifting heavy things months after Dr. Bollier’s surgical 
intervention.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 43)  Although Dr. Bollier did not believe claimant would 
experience a 100 percent recovery of his right shoulder, he concluded that claimant was 
at MMI and capable of working without restrictions related to his right shoulder as of 
December 18, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 5, pp. 45, 50)  Dr. Bollier assigned a permanent 
impairment rating equivalent to two percent of the whole person as a result of claimant’s 
right shoulder work injury.  (Joint Ex. 5, pp. 46, 50) 
Claimant obtained a repeat independent medical evaluation performed by Dr. 
Taylor on March 23, 2021.  Dr. Taylor evaluated claimant’s low back again, as well as 
his right shoulder.  Claimant complained of ongoing symptoms in the right shoulder, 
including sharp pains he rated as high as 9 out of 10 on the typical pain scale with 
aggravating movements.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 24)  Claimant also complained of 
ongoing low back pains that could increase up to as high as an 8 on the 10-point pain 
scale.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 24) 
At this second evaluation, it does appear that Dr. Taylor was made aware of the 
prior epidural steroid injections and was able to take those into account, though he may 
not have been aware of the chiropractic care for claimant’s low back within 1-2 months 
of the work injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 25)  Following his evaluation, Dr. Taylor 
confirmed his prior 12 percent permanent impairment rating for the claimant’s low back 
injury.  He opined that claimant also sustained an 11 percent permanent impairment of 
the whole person related to the right shoulder injury.  Combining these impairment 
ratings, Dr. Taylor opined that claimant sustained a 22 percent whole person 
impairment as a result of the combined effects of his low back and right shoulder 
injuries.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 27-28) 
Dr. Taylor acknowledged that claimant was able to lift up to 50 pounds during 
some work conditioning.  However, Dr. Taylor recommended limiting lifting 50 pounds to 
an occasional basis and only between knee and waist level.  He recommended other 
significant restrictions, including lifting 35-40 pounds below knee level only with his right 
arm close to the body.  Dr. Taylor recommended limiting lifting overhead to no more 
than 30 pounds.  He also recommended claimant be able to sit, stand, and walk as 
needed, limit squatting, bending, and kneeling to an occasional basis.  Dr. Taylor opined 
claimant should not stoop, bend, or squat with any weight, and that claimant avoid 
anything more than occasional overhead reaching with the right arm.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, 
p. 28) 
Dr. Taylor also recommended further evaluation for claimant’s low back for 
potential treatment options to alleviate claimant’s symptoms, which might include 
medication management, physical therapy, or injections.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 29)  At 
the time of hearing, claimant took no prescription medications for either the low back or 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 6 
right shoulder.  Dr. Taylor recommended no additional treatment for claimant’s right 
shoulder. 
As I consider the respective permanent impairment ratings of Dr. Taylor and 
those of Dr. Abernathey and Dr. Bollier, I find that Dr. Taylor’s impairment ratings are 
more specific and thorough.  He acknowledges surgical intervention and uses the 
appropriate section of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, for the low back injury and resulting surgery.  I find claimant has proven he 
sustained a 12 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the low 
back injury. 
With respect to the right shoulder injury, Dr. Bollier’s impairment rating carries 
some weight because he evaluated claimant several times and performed surgery on 
the shoulder.  However, I note that Dr. Taylor acknowledges and rates the distal clavicle 
resection performed on claimant’s right shoulder.  Dr. Taylor’s ranges of motion were 
evaluated with the use of a goniometer.  Ultimately, I find the impairment rating offered 
by Dr. Taylor for the right shoulder is more complete and convincing than the rating 
offered by Dr. Bollier.  I find that claimant has proven he sustained an 11 percent 
impairment of the whole person as a result of the right shoulder injury.  I accept Dr. 
Taylor’s analysis and opinion that these are combined under the AMA Guides to 
represent a 22 percent permanent impairment of the whole person. 
Claimant was able to continue managing and operating A Touch of Class 
between his injury in 2014 and March 2018.  He clearly has supervisory skills, 
scheduling skills, and other managerial and business skills that are transferrable if he 
elects to seek alternate employment or open a new business.  Dr. Taylor’s restrictions 
seem somewhat restrictive considering claimant’s ability to continue operating his 
business for nearly four years after his injury.   
On the other hand, the objective functional impairment related to the low back 
and right shoulder, as well as claimant’s reported ongoing symptoms in both the low 
back and right shoulder, suggest that the full releases to return to work without 
restrictions offered by Drs. Abernathey and Bollier are probably too lenient and 
optimistic.  I find that Mr. Stephen is physically capable of more than Dr. Taylor’s 
restrictions.  However, I also find that full work releases are not reasonable and 
appropriate given the ongoing symptoms.  I find claimant’s decision to sell his business 
was a reasonable business option given his ongoing symptoms. 
Claimant had an extensive healing period and continued to work after his injury.  
This would suggest he is a motivated worker.  On the other hand, he has made no 
attempts to apply for or return to work since selling A Touch of Class in 2018.  He does 
not appear motivated to return to similar employment, though he does continue to 
manage real estate in which he has a financial interest. 
Claimant’s age and educational background suggest he is capable of retraining 
and finding alternate employment.  His restrictions or limitations preclude heavier work, 
but claimant should be qualified for and capable of pursuing many types of employment 
with a college business degree. 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 7 
Both parties submitted vocational expert opinions.  Claimant introduced the 
opinions of Barbara Laughlin.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2)  Ms. Laughlin provides an analysis of 
claimant’s occupational loss and opines that claimant has sustained an injury that is 
“significantly limiting.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 52)  She notes the sit, stand, and walk 
limitations imposed by Dr. Taylor and concludes that claimant would require 
accommodation to return to work in any position identified by the defense vocational 
expert.   
After providing a strong critique of the defense vocational expert, Ms. Laughlin 
does acknowledge that claimant sustained no vocational impact if the full duty release 
by Dr. Bollier is accepted as accurate.  She also performed some labor market research 
and identifies potential job openings available to claimant in clerical and administrative 
work pertaining to health related claims, work as a gate guard at a local Fleet Farm, as 
well as a potential hotel clerk position.  She identifies wage ranges for these jobs from 
$10.93 to $18.31 per hour.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, pp. 42-43)  Ms. Laughlin also provided 
supplemental opinions in response to those offered by defendants’ vocational expert, 
but she ultimately did not change her opinions. 
Defendants offered a vocational expert opinion authored by Tom Karrow.  Mr. 
Karrow interviewed claimant via Zoom and offered him several job leads.  (Defendants’ 
Ex. G, pp. 1-3)  Claimant did not follow-up or apply for any of the jobs identified by Mr. 
Karrow.  Claimant utilized none of Mr. Karrow’s placement services. 
Therefore, defendants asked Mr. Karrow to offer a vocational opinion and 
analysis.  Mr. Karrow opined that claimant has numerous transferrable skills and that 
claimant’s residual abilities would permit him to work in several positions, including 
customer service, sales, assistant manager, management, and similar retail positions.  
Mr. Karrow noted that there is a low unemployment rate (5.2%) in claimant’s area of 
residence and opined that claimant “is employable in his current labor market.”  
(Defendants’ Ex. G, p. 13) 
Both vocational experts offer important and credible information.  However, I find 
neither of the vocational opinions is entirely accurate or enlightening in this situation.  
Both vocational experts appear to believe claimant remains employable.  I concur with 
these findings and opinions.   
The vocational effect of claimant’s injuries are subject to differing opinions of 
these experts.  Realistically, claimant has sustained at least moderate loss of future 
earning capacity.  He underwent surgery on his low back and three surgeries on his 
right shoulder.  He carries permanent impairment for both injuries, as discussed above.   
I did not find the full duty releases of Drs. Abernathey or Bollier to be realistic.  
However, I also found the restrictions imposed by Dr. Taylor to likely be too severe.  
Ultimately, claimant’s loss of earning capacity is moderate. 
Considering claimant’s age, his employment history, educational qualifications, 
permanent restrictions, the length of his healing period, his permanent functional 
impairment, his lack of current motivation to return to similar employment, and all other 
factors of industrial disability identified by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that Mr. 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 8 
Stephen proved he sustained a 50 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of 
the March 24, 2014 work injury. 
Mr. Stephen also asserts a claim for healing period benefits.  Specifically, 
claimant claimed temporary partial disability benefits from September 23, 2014 through 
January 15, 2015, from June 1, 2016 through September 15, 2016, and from October 1, 
2016 through February 28, 2018.  Claimant seeks healing period benefits from the date 
of the sale of his business, March 1, 2018 through December 17, 2019, when declared 
to be at MMI by Dr. Bollier. 
No detailed wage information was produced for claimant’s earnings after his 
injury date.  At page 9 of his post-hearing brief, claimant concedes that claimant 
“received temporary partial disability benefits from September 23, 2014 through January 
15, 2015, June 1, 2016, through September 15, 2016, and October 1, 2016, through 
February 28, 2018.”  He cites defendants’ payment records for this concession and 
statement.  I have no additional information available to enter findings about lost wages 
or potential temporary partial disability entitlement and claimant does not specifically 
assert entitlement to any additional benefits for these periods of time. 
Instead, claimant’s healing period claim appears to focus on the period from 
March 1, 2018 through December 17, 2019.  I find that claimant sold his business and 
was no longer working for or receiving wages from A Touch of Class as of March 1, 
2018.  Claimant had not achieved MMI by this date.  Obviously, he had returned to work 
but the employer could not offer additional work as of March 1, 2018.  Arguably, 
claimant was capable of substantially similar employment, having continued to manage 
the business between the 2014 injury date and the sale of the business almost four 
years later.  As of March 1, 2018, however, claimant remained under active care for his 
right shoulder.  He had not even yet been referred to Dr. Bollier or submitted to his third 
right shoulder surgery.  Claimant’s right shoulder clearly was not capable of the full 
scope of job duties claimant previously performed at A Touch of Class as of March 1, 
2018. 
Mr. Stephen did not achieve MMI for the right shoulder until Dr. Bollier declared it 
on December 17, 2019.  I find that claimant was not at MMI, was not working between 
March 1, 2018 and December 17, 2019, and that he was not capable of substantially 
similar employment during those respective dates.   
The parties submitted a dispute regarding claimant’s gross weekly earnings prior 
to the date of injury. Claimant contends that all wages, tips, and commissions for a one-
year period prior to his injury date should be considered, included, and that the average 
weekly wage should be determined by dividing those earnings by 52 weeks.  
Defendants contend that only claimant’s base salary or wage, plus tips, should be 
included in the gross weekly wage calculations. 
I find that claimant was paid $27,000.00 per year and was paid on a semi-
monthly basis.  I find that claimant received tips and commissions as part of his regular 
and continuing compensation through A Touch of Class.  Although claimant was paid 
semi-monthly, the wage data introduced into evidence documents payment of tips and 
commissions on a monthly basis.  I find that the most accurate way to determine 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 9 
claimant’s average gross weekly wage is to use annualized earnings and divide that by 
52.  Claimant’s Exhibit 4, page 72 provides a chart of claimant’s annualized earnings for 
the 12 months immediately preceding the injury date. 
During the 12 months immediately preceding his injury he earned $38,074.90.  
When those annualized earnings are divided by 52, I find that claimant’s average gross 
weekly earnings at the time of his work injury were $732.21.  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 72)  
Claimant was single and entitled to two exemptions on the date of injury.  (Hearing 
Report) 
Mr. Stephen asserted a claim for medical mileage.  It appears that defendants 
paid for the medical charges for the various mileage claims asserted by claimant.  
However, there are no mileage entries in defendants’ payment records.  I find that 
claimant incurred the mileage amounts listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, pages 77-78 and 
that he proved he incurred $852.85 in mileage expenses related to his medical care for 
the work injuries. 
Finally, the parties submitted a disputed penalty benefit claim.  I find that claimant 
proved a delay in payment of healing period benefits owed from March 1, 2018 through 
December 17, 2019.  Claimant contends that the defendants’ contention that claimant 
voluntarily quit and forfeited future entitlement to healing period benefits is 
unreasonable.  However, I find no specific case law on point and claimant cites no prior 
precedent that necessarily renders defendants’ contention unreasonable.  I find that 
defendants asserted a potentially viable legal position, or a reasonable argument for 
extension of existing law. 
However, regardless of whether defendants’ argument for denial of healing 
period benefits is ultimately determined to be reasonable, I find that defendants did not 
contemporaneously convey their basis for delay or denial of those benefits.  In fact, the 
only evidence of a notice of the basis for denial of benefits from March 1, 2018 through 
December 17, 2019, is Claimant’s Exhibit 3, page 65, which is a response to request for 
admission that was served November 16, 2020.  Providing an explanation more than 
two years after a denial of benefits starts is not a contemporary conveyance of the basis 
for denial. 
Claimant also contends that defendants failed to give a proper notice of their 
intention to terminate benefits.  Defendants contend their notice of payment of 
permanent disability and subsequent termination of benefits satisfies the requirements 
of Iowa Code section 86.13(4).  Defendants did not establish that they provided notice 
for termination of any healing period benefits when claimant sold his business.  
Therefore, I find that defendants terminated weekly benefits without appropriate notice 
and that defendants did not advise claimant of his right to file a claim with this agency, 
as required by statute. 
Finally, claimant contends that defendants did not reasonably estimate and pay 
industrial disability benefits.  I disagree with claimant’s assertion on this issue.  
Defendants obtained permanent impairment ratings from the treating physicians.  They 
received full duty releases from both Dr. Abernathey and Dr. Bollier.  If claimant had 
minimal permanent impairment, no restrictions, a college education, continued 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 10 
operating his business for four years after the work injury, and is relatively young, 
defendants had multiple facts, if accepted, that would arguably result in a minimal award 
of industrial disability.  I find that defendants had reasonable bases upon which to 
terminate permanent disability benefits and challenge entitlement to any additional 
industrial disability benefits. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Mr. Stephen asserts a claim for temporary partial disability benefits from 
September 23, 2014 through January 15, 2015, June 1, 2016, through September 15, 
2016, and October 1, 2016, through February 28, 2018.  I made findings, noting that the 
defendants paid these various claims and benefits.  However, claimant has not 
otherwise proven entitlement to these benefits. 
Realistically, the disputed healing period claim is from the date of the sale of 
claimant’s business on March 1, 2018 through the date that Dr. Bollier declared 
claimant to be at MMI for the right shoulder, or December 18, 2019.  Claimant contends 
that he was not at MMI until December 17, 2019, that he was not working during this 
period of time, and that he was not capable of substantially similar work between March 
1, 2018 and December 17, 2019.  Accordingly, claimant contends he qualifies for 
healing period benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(1). 
Defendants dispute liability for healing period benefits during this period of time.  
Instead, defendants contend that the sale of claimant’s business is akin to a voluntary 
quit.  Defendants contend that claimant’s sale of A Touch of Class results in a forfeiture 
of any entitlement to healing period benefits pursuant to Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care 
Center, 780 N.W.2d 549 (Iowa 2010). 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 11 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
312N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Claimant has demonstrated entitlement to healing period benefits pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1).  He proved he was not at MMI until December 18, 2019, 
that he was not working between March 1, 2018 and December 17, 2019.  Although he 
had returned to work and continued to manage A Touch of Class, he established that he 
was not performing the full spectrum of his work duties and that he was not capable of 
substantially similar work to that being performed immediately prior to this work injury.   
The question then becomes whether claimant forfeited any entitlement to healing 
period benefits pursuant to Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Center, 780 N.W.2d 549 
(Iowa 2010).  Again, defendants contend that claimant’s sale of his business is akin to a 
voluntary quit and forfeits claimant’s right to future healing period benefits.  Iowa Code 
section 85.33(3) (2013) provides: 
If an employee is temporarily, partially disabled and the employer for 
whom the employee was working at the time of injury offers to the 
employee suitable work consistent with the employee's disability the 
employee shall accept the suitable work, and be compensated with 
temporary partial benefits. If the employee refuses to accept the suitable 
work with the same employer, the employee shall not be compensated 
with temporary partial, temporary total, or healing period benefits during 
the period of the refusal. 
The proper test to determine whether healing period benefits are owed is: “(1) 
whether the employee was offered suitable work, (2) which the employee refused.”  
Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 559.  Approaching this case in that analytical framework and in 
the order required by the statutory test, the initial question is whether the employee was 
offered suitable work.  Once A Touch of Class was sold on March 1, 2018, the employer 
did not offer suitable work to claimant. 
Defendants’ argument appears to require that claimant’s business decision, as 
the owner of A Touch of Class, to sell his business should be treated as a personal 
decision as an employee to constitute a “refusal of work.”  Of course, this approach 
skips the first portion of the test established by the Supreme Court to determine whether 
the employer is offering claimant suitable work.  If the employer was not owned by 
claimant and sold its business, it would be obvious that the employer was no longer 
offering suitable work to claimant.  In essence, defendants’ argument seeks to convert 
the employer’s business decisions into personal employment decisions of the claimant 
and essentially eliminate the first portion of the applicable test established in Iowa Code 
section 85.33 and Schutjer.   

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 12 
I found that the sale of the business was a reasonable business decision given 
claimant’s condition and inability to perform all aspects of his position that he performed 
prior to the injury.  Rather than perceiving the sale of the business as a refusal of 
suitable work, as urged by defendants, I work through the applicable test in the order of 
the factors set forth in Schutjer.  In this case, the sale of the business resulted in a 
withdraw of any offer of suitable work by the employer to Mr. Stephen.  Once sold, 
claimant was no longer offered light duty work by the employer and the second portion 
of the test is not applicable.  Therefore, I conclude claimant has proven entitlement to 
healing period benefits from March 1, 2018 through the date he reached MMI.  Given 
the parties’ stipulation about the commencement of permanent disability, I specifically 
conclude claimant proved entitlement to healing period benefits through December 17, 
2019. 
In this case, I made findings pertaining to claimant’s age, educational and 
employment backgrounds, his motivation, permanent impairment, permanent 
restrictions, and other relevant factors pertaining to industrial disability.  I note the 
parties’ stipulation that the injury should be compensated with industrial disability as an 
unscheduled injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (2014); Hearing Report.  
Accordingly, I must determine claimant’s entitlement to industrial disability and 
corresponding permanent partial disability benefits. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co., 
219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
I considered all of the relevant, available factors outlined by the Iowa Supreme 
Court to assess industrial disability.  I found that Mr. Stephen proved a 50 percent loss 
of future earning capacity as a result of the March 24, 2014 work injury.  This is 
equivalent to a 50 percent industrial disability and entitles claimant to an award of 250 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (2014).  
Pursuant to the stipulation of the parties, these permanent partial disability benefits 
should commence on December 18, 2019.  (Hearing Report) 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 13 
I must also determine the rate at which weekly benefits should be paid.  Iowa 
Code section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
Mr. Stephen was paid on a semi-monthly basis.  However, the wage information 
introduced documents his earnings in a monthly format.  Using a yearly basis, semi-
monthly basis or a monthly basis would result in the same average gross weekly 
earnings and weekly rate.  Iowa Code section 85.36(3)-(5).  Both parties appear to use 
an average of annualized earnings to determine claimant’s proper weekly rate. I 
conclude the proper and most accurate method to calculate claimant’s gross weekly 
earnings is to annualize the earnings and divide by 52 pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.36(5). 
The real debate between the parties is whether commissions should be included 
within the calculation of the gross weekly earnings.  Claimant includes his annual salary, 
tips, and commissions to calculate the gross weekly earnings.  Defendants include 
claimant’s annual salary, plus the tips he earned during the year prior to his injury to 
calculate gross weekly earnings.  Defendants do not include claimant’s commissions 
within their calculation of claimant’s gross weekly earnings. 
Iowa Code section 85.36 defines “weekly earnings” as “gross salary, wages, or 
earnings of an employee.”  Claimant’s typical earnings included his salary, tips, and 
commissions.  I perceive no legal basis why commissions should not be included within 
claimant’s weekly earnings.  Defendants offer no precedent or legal analysis of why 
commissions should not be included within gross weekly earnings.  Accordingly, I found 
that the most accurate way to reflect claimant’s gross earnings were to include his 
salary, tips and commissions for the 12 months immediately preceding his injury.   
Claimant’s Exhibit 4, page 72 accurately details claimant’s earnings during the 12 
months immediately preceding the injury.  Accordingly, I found that claimant’s average 
gross weekly earnings on the date of injury were $732.21.  The parties stipulated that 
claimant was single and entitled to two exemptions.  (Hearing Report) 
The weekly benefit amount payable to an employee shall be based upon 80 
percent of the employee’s weekly spendable earnings, but shall not exceed an amount, 
rounded to the nearest dollar, equal to 66-2/3 percent of the statewide average weekly 
wage paid employees as determined by the Department of Workforce 
Development.  Iowa Code section 85.37.  
The weekly benefit amount is determined under the above Code section by 
referring to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Manual in effect on the applicable injury 
date.  Having found that claimant’s gross average weekly wage was $732.21, that he 
was single, and claimant was entitled to two exemptions on the March 24, 2014 injury 
date, I used the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Manual with effective dates of July 1, 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 14 
2013 through June 30, 2014, to determine that the applicable rate for permanent partial 
disability benefits is $460.17 per week.  
In addition to weekly benefits, claimant asserted a right to reimbursement for his 
independent medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. Section 85.39 
permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.  
The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the 
subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
If the evaluation by the physician retained by the employer includes a 
permanent disability rating and “the employee believes this evaluation to 
be too low,” the employee may obtain a subsequent examination by a 
physician of the employee's choice and be reimbursed by the employer for 
the reasonable fee of the examination, plus transportation expenses.  
Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 841-842 (Iowa 2015). 
Defendants assert in their post-hearing brief that claimant was reimbursed for the 
initial independent medical evaluation performed by Dr. Taylor.  However, no such 
reimbursement is identified in the defendants’ payment records submitted as an exhibit.  
Moreover, it is not clear from the evidentiary record whether defendants or claimant 
selected Dr. Taylor for the initial evaluation. 
By contrast, it is quite apparent that claimant selected Dr. Taylor to perform the 
March 23, 2021 independent medical evaluation.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 20)  Claimant’s 
counsel wrote correspondence to the physician, outlining claimant’s request that he 
perform the evaluation.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 15-17)  By the time this evaluation had 
occurred, Dr. Abernathey had offered an opinion pertaining to permanent impairment of 
claimant’s low back.  Additionally, by the time Dr. Taylor performed his second 
evaluation, Dr. Bollier had also offered an opinion pertaining to permanent impairment 
concerning claimant’s right shoulder injury. 
Claimant has established that he selected Dr. Taylor for the March 23, 2021 
evaluation.  He has also established that, by the time Dr. Taylor performed that 
evaluation, defendants selected Dr. Abernathey and Dr. Bollier as authorized treating 
physicians, and that Drs. Abernathey and Bollier had offered permanent impairment 
opinions.  I conclude claimant has established the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 
85.39 and is entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Taylor’s evaluation fees. 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 15 
There does not appear to be a dispute about the reasonableness of Dr. Taylor’s 
IME fees.  Dr. Taylor charged $1,805.00 for his evaluation on March 23, 2021.  I 
conclude that is a reasonable charge for the evaluation and conclude that defendants 
should reimburse claimant in this amount pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Mr. Stephen also asserted a claim for medical mileage reimbursement.  His claim 
is summarized at Claimant’s Exhibit 5.  I reviewed that exhibit and noted that the 
defendants paid for medical charges and treatment on those listed dates.  Pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.27(1) and agency rule 876 IAC 8.1(2), mileage incidental to the 
use of a private automobile is reimbursable as a medical expense.  The mileage 
reimbursement amounts utilized by claimant in his calculations are accurate as well.  
Claimant has established entitlement to the medical mileage itemized in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 5, totaling $852.85. 
Mr. Stephen asserts a claim for penalty benefits, alleging that defendants 
unreasonably delayed or denied benefits and that they unreasonably terminated healing 
period benefits.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that 
were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse. 
b. 
The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award 
benefits under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the 
following facts: 
(1) 
The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) 
The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 16 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 
1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 17 
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c) provides the relevant statutory standard to 
determine if a basis for denial or delay of benefits is reasonable.  It provides: 
In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse under 
paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits 
were owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
In this case, I found that defendants did not offer a reasonable excuse for the 
delay in payment of benefits.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b)(2).  Specifically, I found 
that defendants did not contemporaneously convey their bases for delay of benefits.  
Therefore, by statutory definition, defendants did not offer a reasonable excuse for the 
denial, delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c)(3).  Defendants 
bore the burden to establish a reasonable basis, or excuse, and to prove the 
contemporaneous conveyance of those bases to the claimant.  Defendants failed to 
carry their burden of proof on the penalty issues, and a penalty award is appropriate.  
Iowa Code section 86.13. 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 18 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases.  Id. at 237.  In this regard, the Commission 
is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed with a maximum 
penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits.  Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).  Claimant urges that the 
defendants’ actions were egregious, that they have a history of penalty benefits being 
awarded, and that a 50 percent, maximum penalty is warranted in these circumstances. 
In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 
the employee’s injury and wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  In this situation, 
defendants did not contemporaneously convey the basis for their denial of benefits or 
there termination of healing period benefits.  Nor did defendants offer an explanation, as 
required, that claimant could contest the decision before the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner.  The defendants’ denial of and termination of healing 
period benefits was unreasonable and justifies a penalty award. 
Claimant also asserts that a penalty should be assessed for defendants’ decision 
not to volunteer additional permanent disability benefits.  However, I found that the 
defendants’ decision was reasonable in this respect.  Defendants possessed medical 
opinions from the treating surgeons, suggesting that claimant was capable of returning 
to work without medical restrictions.  Even claimant’s vocational expert conceded that a 
full medical release would result in no loss of future earnings.  Defendants possessed 
legitimate evidence and basis to challenge payment of additional permanent disability 
and their termination of and denial of additional permanent disability benefits does not 
warrant imposition of penalty benefits. 
Therefore, I consider only the extent of a penalty on the healing period benefits 
denied.  In total, defendants denied healing period benefits from March 1, 2018 through 
December 14, 2019.  This is a period of 93.429 weeks of healing period.  At the weekly 
rate of $460.17, this is a total of $42,993.22 in benefits denied.  Defendants raised a 
novel issue of first-impression pertaining to their basis for denial.  Although they failed to 
contemporaneously convey that basis to claimant and ultimately lost on the issue, I 
believe the amount of the penalty can be tempered somewhat and still achieve the 
goals and purposes of the penalty benefit statute. 
Therefore, having considered the relevant factors and the purposes of the 
penalty statute, I conclude that a section 86.13 penalty in the 10-15 percent range is 
appropriate under these circumstances.  Specifically, I conclude that a penalty benefit 
award of $5,000.00 is appropriate in this case.  Such an amount is appropriate to punish 
the employer for delays in payment of benefits under these facts, its failure to provide 
contemporaneous notice of the basis for denial, and should serve as a deterrent against 
future conduct.  However, the facts of this case are not of such an egregious nature that 
an additional penalty is warranted.  
Mr. Stephen also asks the undersigned to impose a discovery sanction for 
defendants’ denial of a request for admission.  Specifically, claimant asserts that 
defendants’ response to Request for Admission No. 15 should be subject to sanctions.  

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 19 
(Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 65)  Request for Admission No. 15 requests that defendants admit 
healing period benefits are owed for the period of March 1, 2018 through December 18, 
2019.   
First, the parties stipulated that permanent partial disability benefits should 
commence on December 18, 2019.  Accordingly, healing period benefits are only 
awarded through December 17, 2019 in this case.  Accordingly, claimant has not 
proven the underlying facts and claim asserted in Request for Admission No. 15.  
Specifically, claimant did not assert a claim for healing period benefits on December 18, 
2019 at the time of trial.  Accordingly, I conclude it would be and was appropriate to 
deny the request for admission because the inclusive dates of healing period 
entitlement were erroneous based on the parties’ stipulation as to the commencement 
date for permanent disability.  Nevertheless, I will address the reasonableness of the 
defendants’ response notwithstanding this issue. 
Defendants denied the request for admission and asserted, “The Claimant 
voluntarily resigned, which constitutes a refusal of light duty work at the time of the 
resignation and at all times in the future pursuant to Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care 
Center, 780 N.W.2d 549, 559 (Iowa 2010).”  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 65)  Claimant asserts 
this response violates the discovery rule and that defendants should be sanctioned 
pursuant to Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 37(c)(2).  Of course, there is not a rule of civil 
procedure 37(c)(2) in Iowa at this time or at the time of the 2014 work injury.1 
Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.510 provides for requests for admissions.  Rule 
1.510(3) permits a party that has served a request for admission the option of filing a 
discovery motion to determine the sufficiency of the defendants’ answer or response to 
a request for admission.  Claimant did not exercise that right in this case.  Nor has 
claimant certified that there was a good faith attempt made to resolve this dispute via 
personal communication with defense counsel prior to asserting a claim for discovery 
sanctions.  See Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.517(5). 
Even if the requirements of personal communication are not considered or 
required, sanctions are not imposed if “[t]he party failing to admit had reasonable 
grounds to believe that the party might prevail on the matter,” or “[t]here was other good 
reason for the failure to admit.”  Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.517(3)(c)-(d).  In this 
instance, defendants cited a potentially applicable Iowa Supreme Court precedent that 
they sought to extend to apply in this factual situation.  Neither party cited precedent 
that specifically addressed this factual situation.  I conclude that defendants raised an 
issue of first impression and it was reasonable for them to deny the request for 
admission based on their legal argument, as well as the fact that the request was 
factually inaccurate by containing the date of December 18, 2019.  Accordingly, I 
conclude that the claimant’s request for discovery sanctions should be denied. 
                                                 
1 Perhaps this is an unintentional citation to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 37.  However, there 
is no such numbered rule of civil procedure in Iowa, and a federal rule of civil procedure may be 
persuasive but certainly is not binding in an Iowa administrative proceeding. 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 20 
Finally, claimant requests that his costs be taxed against defendants.  Costs are 
taxed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  However, costs 
statutes are construed strictly.  Coker v. Abell-Howe Co., 491 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 
1992).  Claimant has prevailed in the case and received an award of benefits.  
Therefore, I conclude it is reasonable to assess his costs in some amount. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 7 includes a request for assessments of claimant’s filing fee 
($100.00) and service fees ($14.10).  Both are reasonable and assessed pursuant to 
876 IAC 4.33(3), (7). 
Claimant also seeks assessment of Dr. Taylor’s independent medical evaluation.  
Having concluded that the IME fee should be assessed pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39, I decline to also assess it as a cost.   
Mr. Stephen’s final request for costs includes Barbara Laughlin’s vocational 
charges.  At the time of hearing, the undersigned assessed defendants up to $500.00 
for a rebuttal report to be prepared after hearing by Ms. Laughlin as part of an 
evidentiary ruling on a late submitted report.  Claimant obtained a rebuttal report from 
Ms. Laughlin.  If they have not already done so, defendants should reimburse claimant 
the amount of Ms. Laughlin’s rebuttal report dated June 14, 2021.  Pursuant to the oral 
order at the time of trial, defendants shall reimburse claimant a total of $500.00 for the 
cost of Ms. Laughlin’s June 14, 2021 rebuttal report.  (Claimant’s Ex. 8, p. 103; 
Transcript, p. 15) 
Claimant also seeks the cost of Ms. Laughlin’s initial vocational opinion and 
report ($1,504.00), as well as her initial rebuttal report ($480.00).  I did not find either 
vocational expert’s opinions to be terribly helpful or enlightening.  Ultimately, I found that 
claimant’s restrictions were likely somewhere between those offered by Dr. Taylor and 
the full-duty releases offered by the treating physicians.  While the vocational reports 
offered some information about potential jobs available to claimant, about his 
motivation, and which critiqued each other, I did not specifically accept or rely upon 
either vocational opinion in reaching my industrial disability analysis and award.  
Therefore, I decline to assess any additional charges related to Ms. Laughlin’s 
vocational opinions. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits from March 1, 2018 
through December 17, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay claimant two hundred fifty (250) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on December 18, 2019. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the weekly rate of four hundred sixty and 
17/100 dollars ($460.17) per week. 

STEPHEN V. A TOUCH OF CLASS BANQUET & CONVENTION CTR., INC. 
Page 21 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity 
published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of 
injury, plus two percent, as required by Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s medical mileage in the amount of eight 
hundred fifty-two and 85/100 dollars ($852.85). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation in the 
amount of one thousand eight hundred five and 00/100 dollars ($1,805.00). 
Defendants shall pay claimant penalty benefits in the amount of five thousand 
dollars ($5,000.00). 
Pursuant to the undersigned’s evidentiary ruling at the time of the arbitration 
hearing, defendants shall reimburse claimant, if they have not already done so, in the 
amount of five hundred and 00/100 dollars ($500.00) for Barbara Laughlin’s rebuttal 
report dated June 14, 2021. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of six hundred 
fourteen and 10/100 dollars ($614.10). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __4th ___ day of November, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Thomas Wertz (via WCES) 
Laura Ostrander (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
