Case Number: 5068856
Case Title:  HEILMAN, AUSTIN V. LANDUS COOPERATIVE
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Heilman, Austin-5068856.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
LANDUS COOPERATIVE 
and 
Nationwide Agribusiness INS., 
Petitioners, 
v. 
 
AUSTIN HEILMAN 
Respondent. 
 
 
Case No. CVCV058918 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
This is a petition for judicial review from a final decision of an Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Deputy Commissioner. The Court heard this matter on January 24, 2020. Petitioners appeared through 
attorney Jeffrey Lanz. Respondent appeared through attorney Janece Valentine. After considering the 
arguments of the parties and having reviewed the file and the applicable case law, the Court now enters 
the following ruling. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Factual Background  
Petitioners seek review of an alternate medical care decision of Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Deputy Commissioner Toby Gordon. Respondent Austin Heilman worked for Landus Cooperative. On 
June 1, 2018, he sustained a workplace injury to his back. Heilman initially saw physician Dr. Vitritto-
Khan on June 5, 2018 for low back pain from the injury. She recommended physical therapy and work 
restrictions. Heilman went to a number of physical therapy appointments and had an MRI taken.    
Petitioners later authorized Heilman to receive treatment from Dr. Steven Meyer. Dr. Meyer 
referred Heilman to E-3 Work Therapy Services for a functional capacity evaluation (FCE), which was 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
conducted on December 5, 2018. Pet’r’s Ex. A. The results of the evaluation indicated that Heilman met 
“the material handling demands for a Heavy demand vocation….” Id.  
On December 6, 2018, Heilman slipped on ice at work, twisted and almost fell, apparently 
reaggravating his previous back injury. On December 8, 2018, Heilman again slipped on ice and fell, this 
time at his home. This fall also apparently negatively impacted his back.     
On December 19, 2018, Heilman saw Dr. Meyer again. In Dr. Meyer’s office notes, he noted that 
since Heilman’s FCE, Heilman had the above near and complete falls, and that he subsequently has had 
severe back pain. Pet’r’s Ex. B. Dr. Meyer physically examined Heilman and found that he continued to 
have “significant tenderness to palpation of lower lumbar spine in the midline and paraspinal lumbar 
musculature.” Id. Based on a review of Heilman’s MRI, Dr. Meyer concluded that Heilman had “profound 
L4-L5 and L5-S1 [lumbar] facet arthropathy.”Id. In the Plan section of his notes, Dr. Meyer opined that 
they would “proceed with bilateral L4-5 and L5-S1 facet injections” for Heilman’s condition and he 
recommended that Heilman “continue to work on his core strengthening, aerobic exercise program” and 
return in three to four weeks. Id. Dr. Meyer acknowledged that Heilman had a valid FCE but noted that 
following the evaluation Heilman stated he had profound back pain for several days following the exam. 
Id. 
In a January 7, 2019 letter in response to questions submitted to him by Petitioner Nationwide, Dr. 
Meyer explained that when he examined Heilman on December 19, 2018 “it appeared to me that [Heilman] 
had an exacerbation of his previous condition consistent with significant lumbar facet arthropathy and 
degenerative disk disease.” Pet’r’s Ex. C. He further explained that Heilman’s current work restrictions 
“are based upon a re-aggravation of his previous condition but are related to the injury earlier in the month 
of December.” Id. Dr. Meyer noted that Heilman’s permanent work restrictions are based on his December 
2015 FCE. Id. Finally, Dr. Meyer opined that he thought Heilman had reached MMI, with the understanding 
that he might require a spinal fusion in the future. Id. 
On February 6, 2019, Heilman saw Dr. Meyer for his followup appointment. Dr. Meyer observed 
that Heilman did not undergo the facet injections he ordered because “[Heilman’s] workplace has now 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
decided to deny any further treatment of his work related injury.” Resp’t’s Ex. 2. In the Plan section of his 
notes, Dr. Meyer “highly recommend[ed] that [Heilman] undergo the facet injections that were previously 
ordered [and] [c]ontinue with his core strengthening and flexibility program.” Id. Dr. Meyer expressed 
confidence that, after the injections, Heilman would be able to return to work within the parameters set by 
his December 2015 FCE. Id.      
On May 1, 2019, Heilman saw Dr. Meyer again. Per Dr. Meyer’s notes, Heilman was back because 
of “his unremitting, excruciating midline back pain. [Heilman] states that while he was able to do a day of 
work within the confines of his functional capacity, ever since he took the near fall at work in December, 
after a day of work that has any type of manual component, he is basically bedridden for the next 2 days. 
He is quite concerned about his ability to fulfill his employment obligations.” Pet’r’s Ex. D. Dr. Meyer 
stated Heilman had “profound tenderness to palpation of the midline and paraspinal lumbar musculature.” 
His assessment was “[o]going repetitive exacerbation of lumbar back pain.” And in the Plan section of Dr. 
Meyer’s notes he opined: 
I do not think that [Heilman] is able to function under his current functional capacity, 
especially since his second injury, so I would recommend that he undergo a repeat FCE to 
see if things have changed since his injury in December [2018], and then we will make 
further decision. Once again, I admonished him to try to avoid surgical intervention at all 
cost, because I do not think he would be a good candidate on the basis of his age and his 
work requirements. 
Id. 
Petitioners declined to authorize the second FCE recommended by Dr. Meyer and on June 10, 2019, 
they sent Heilman to Dr. William Boulden for an Independent Medical Examination (IME). Dr. Boulden 
reviewed Heilman’s medical records, including his MRI. Pet’r’s Ex. E. Dr. Boulden’s diagnosis was low 
back pain secondary to degenerative disc disease. Id. He opined that the pathological processes [i.e. the 
degenerative changes] were present before Heilman’s June 1, 2018 workplace injury. Id. He did not think 
the work injury caused any material aggravation to Heilman’s underlying pathology, concluding that 
Heilman’s work injuries were strictly subjective, because there was nothing objective. Id. 
Dr. Boulden contended, with respect to Heilman’s June 1, 2018 injury, that he reached MMI on 
December 5, 2018. Id. Dr. Boulden had similar thoughts concerning Heilman’s December 6, 2018 injury, 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
and opined that Heilman’s MMI date was six to eight weeks following the injury. Pet’r’s Ex. E. With respect 
to workplace restrictions, Dr. Boulden noted that Heilman’s December 5, 2018 FCE “showed him to be 
functioning quite well” and recommended the work restrictions therein. Id. In his view, the December, 2018 
FCE was adequate and Heilman did not need another one. Id. Dr. Boulden further opined that he did not 
think Heilman had adequate physical therapy core strengthening exercises, and recommended that any 
future treatment should strictly be a core exercise program, of which he “highly recommended the German 
ball stabilization program.” Id.  
B. Procedural History 
On July 1, 2019, Heilman filed an Application for Alternate Medical Care pursuant to Iowa Code 
Section 85.27. In his application, Heilman requested an order compelling Petitioners to cover the FCE 
recommended by Dr. Meyer, his authorized treating physician. Deputy Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner Toby Gordon held a hearing on the matter on July 12, 2019. Petitioners accepted liability 
for Heilman’s June 1, 2018 and December 6, 2018 work injuries and Heilman’s condition that was the 
subject of the alternate care proceeding. Per their hearing testimony, Petitioners explained they denied 
authorization for the FCE because “[they did not] feel that FCE is medical treatment. It's nothing that's 
going to help claimant improve his condition at all. It's just a test, so we don't believe that fits under 85.27 
as medical treatment.” Additionally, they noted that they believed the German stabilization exercise 
program that Dr. Boulden recommended was not unreasonable. On the other hand, Heilman contended that 
an FCE fits under Section 85.27 and that it was not appropriate for Petitioners to cut off the treatment 
recommended by his authorized treating physician with an IME recommendation that suggested an FCE 
was not needed.  
Per his July 15, 2019 decision, the Deputy Commissioner ordered Petitioners to authorize and pay 
for the FCE recommended by Dr. Meyer. The Deputy Commissioner found Petitioners’ argument that tests 
such as an FCE are not appropriate for an alternate care application unpersuasive.  
The Deputy Commissioner then proceeded to the second question presented: whether or not the 
care authorized by Petitioners was unreasonable. He noted that, to be successful in his application for 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
alternate care, Heilman bore the burden of establishing the authorized care was unreasonable and identified 
several rule statements relevant to the issue, stating: 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant 
is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical 
care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather the 
claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably suited to 
treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. Long v. Roberts 
Dairy Co., 528 N.W.3d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
 
In his rule statement, the Deputy Commissioner went on to cite a declaratory ruling and review-reopening 
decision of the agency, noting: 
An employer’s right to select the provider of medical treatment to an injured worker does 
not include the right to determine how an injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, 
treated, or other matters of professional medical judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, 
File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 19, 1988).  
 
And that: 
Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, and defendants are not 
entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating physician. Pote v. 
Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (review-reopening decision, June 17, 1986). 
 
The Deputy Commissioner then proceeded to his analysis of the issue, stating 
In this case, the authorized treating physician recommended an FCE, which [Petitioners] 
have not authorized. The purpose of the recommended FCE is to ‘see if things have 
changed since his injury in December [2018].’ This recommendation is based on the 
concern [that] Dr. Meyer does ‘not think that [Heilman] is able to function under his current 
functional capacity,’ which is based on an earlier FCE. In other words the presently 
recommended FCE is to determine [Heilman’s] condition to ensure the present restrictions 
are appropriate or adjust them according to the new FCE.  
... 
I conclude based on the above stated law that failure to authorize the FCE as recommended 
by the authorized treating physician, which will assist with the establishment of current 
and safe restrictions, is unreasonable.  
 
On September 13, 2019 Petitioners filed for judicial review of the Deputy Commissioner’s 
decision.  
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 
Chapter 17A of the Iowa Code governs judicial review of Iowa Workers’ Compensation cases. Bell 
Bros. Heating v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 199 (Iowa 2010).  Pursuant to a  February 16, 2015 standing 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
order of  the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners are delegated authority 
to issue final agency decisions in alternate medical care proceedings. As such, the Deputy Commissioner’s 
decision constitutes a final agency action for the purposes of judicial review.  
The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law by the agency. Meyer v. IBP, 
Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006). The Court “may grant relief if the agency action has prejudiced 
the substantial rights of the petitioner, and the agency action meets one of the enumerated criteria contained 
in section 17A.19 (10) (a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care Cntr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) 
(quoting Evercom Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 N.W.2d 758, 762 (Iowa 2011)).  
Where an agency has been “clearly vested” with fact-finding authority, the appropriate “standard 
of review [on appeal] depends on the aspect of the agency’s decision that form the basis of the petition for 
judicial review.”. Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256. The standard of review varies depending on whether the 
alleged error involves an issue of (1) findings of fact, (2) interpretation of law, or (3) an application of the 
law to facts. 
The Court must also grant appropriate relief from agency action if such action was “[b]ased upon 
an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation has not clearly been vested by a 
provision of law in the discretion of the agency.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c). With respect to such 
provisions of law, the Court is not required to defer to the agency’s interpretation. Iowa Code § 
17A.19(11)(b). Additionally, the Court must grant relief from agency action that is “[b]ased upon an 
irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable interpretation of a provision of law,” based upon a 
misapplication of law to the facts, or “[o]therwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of 
discretion.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(1)(l–n). 
If “the claim of error lies with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge is to the agency’s 
application of the law to the facts, and the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion 
by, for example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.” 
Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. In other words, the Court will only reverse the Commissioner’s application of 
law to the facts if “it is ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’” Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518 (quoting 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007); see also Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (“When 
application of law to fact has been clearly vested in the discretion of an agency, a reviewing court may only 
disturb the agency’s application of the law to the facts of a particular case if that application is ‘irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’”). 
If the alleged error is one of fact, the standard of review is whether the findings are supported by 
substantial evidence. Harris, 778 N.W.2d at 196; Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 
557 (Iowa 2010). “[A] reviewing court can only disturb those factual findings if they are ‘not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is reviewed as a whole.’” Burton, 813 
N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)). The Court “is limited to the findings that were actually 
made by the agency and not other findings the agency could have made.” Id. "The commissioner, not the 
court, weighs the evidence." Ward v. Iowa Dep't of Transp., 304 N.W.2d 236, 237 (Iowa 1981). “[C]ourts 
must not simply rubber stamp the agency fact finding without engaging in a fairly intensive review of the 
record to ensure that the fact finding is itself reasonable.” Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 
493, 499 (Iowa 2003) (internal quotations and citation omitted). 
“Evidence is substantial if a reasonable person would find the evidence adequate to reach the same 
conclusion.” Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002) (citing Ehteshamfar v. 
UTA Engineered Sys. Div., 555 N.W.2d 450, 452 (Iowa 1996)).  
ANALYSIS 
In this appeal, Petitioners ask the Court to review the Deputy Commissioner’s alternate care 
decision. On appeal, Petitioners make two arguments for error on the part of the Deputy Commissioner. 
Each will be addressed in turn. 
Petitioners first contend the Deputy Commissioner erred in determining that the FCE Heilman 
sought in his alternate care application was an appropriate subject for an alternate care proceeding under 
Iowa Code Section 85.27. Petitioners contend the Deputy Commissioner’s decision was not supported by 
substantial evidence and was not consistent with agency precedent.  
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
Numerous deputy commissioner decisions have considered this question over the years. Petitioners 
highlight Heitman where a deputy workers’ compensation commissioner faced a similar issue and reviewed 
past deputy commissioners’ decisions. See Heitman v. Seaton Corp., File No. 506002 (Alternate Medical 
Care, Sept. 2015). The Heitman deputy commissioner concluded that whether an FCE is properly 
considered medical treatment under Iowa Code section 85.27 is a fact-specific determination. The deputy 
commissioner then outlined the agency’s precedent on the matter, explaining: 
If the [FCE] is conducted for purposes of determining ranges of motions and other factors 
necessary for rendering a permanent impairment rating or establishing (or defending) a 
claim for permanent disability, the functional capacity evaluation is not likely to be 
considered medical treatment pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. Crawford v. Maytag 
Co., File No. 5022533 (Alternate Medical Care February 2008).  
 
On the other hand, if the purposes of the [FCE] is to help the treating physician to diagnose, 
or quantify, claimant’s residual functional abilities for purposes of assisting the physician 
to outline permanent work restrictions, then the [FCE] is more like treatment and is 
compensable pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. Sears v. Midwest Continental, Inc., File 
No. 5029555 (Alternate Medical Care July 2009).  
 
In Heitman, the deputy commissioner found that the purpose of the FCE at issue was to assess the claimant's 
residual physical and functional capabilities to outline medical restrictions for employment activities, or in 
other words “to assist in establishing [the] claimant’s work restrictions,” and concluded the FCE was 
treatment or diagnosis under Iowa Code section 85.27.  
While the Deputy Commissioner did not cite to previous agency precedent on the FCE issue here, 
he found the FCE in this case similar to an x-ray, in that it is used to assess the patient’s existing condition 
and may or may not lead to any additional treatment or change in treatment. Additionally, the Deputy 
Commissioner identified Dr. Meyer’s basis for recommending the FCE to support his determination. To 
reiterate the facts section above, Dr. Meyer explained he recommended the FCE because: 
I do not think that [Heilman] is able to function under his current functional capacity, 
especially since his second injury, so I would recommend that he undergo a repeat FCE to 
see if things have changed since his injury in December [2018], and then we will make 
further decision. 
 
Petitioners suggest the clear purpose of the FCE Dr. Meyer recommended was to determine the 
permanent disability level that Heilman will contend he is entitled to from his second work injury, and 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
concluded this case was more similar to Crawford where the deputy commissioner determined that the FCE 
was not medical care under section 85.27. Petitioners posit that “[t]here is no mention in Dr. Meyer’s notes 
indicating the FCE is for another purpose, and he makes no mention of any additional treatment.” The Court 
does not find this argument or the facts cited to support it persuasive. Dr. Meyer’s notes from Heilman’s 
May 1, 2019 appointment make no suggestion that the FCE was to determine Heilman’s permanent 
disability level.  
Petitioners also point out that the Deputy Commissioner stated the purpose of the FCE was to 
determine Heilman’s present capabilities, and to see if things have changed since his December injury, 
based on Dr. Meyer’s concern that Heilman might not be able to function under his current functional 
capacity. Immediately after this, the Deputy Commissioner also stated that “[i]n other words the presently 
recommended FCE is to determine [Heilman’s] condition to ensure the present restrictions are appropriate 
or adjust them according to the new FCE.” Rather than supporting the Petitioners’ argument, the Court 
finds these facts support the Deputy Commissioner’s finding that the FCE recommended by Dr. Meyer was 
appropriately categorized as medical treatment under Section 85.27.  This is because the Court finds the 
basis for the FCE at issue in this case, to assess Heilman’s then-current condition to better inform his work 
restrictions, to be similar to the bases in the agency decisions in Heitman and Sears, where the agency found 
the FCE’s to be medical treatment under Iowa Code section 85.27. As such, the Court concludes that the 
Deputy Commissioner’s decision is supported by substantial evidence and  is consistent with the agency’s 
prior practices and precedent.1 
                                                          
1 As noted in Cannon v. Whited, 810 N.W.2d 532 n.2 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012), this Court also recognizes  that the 
“‘controlling legal standards are those set out in the workers' compensation statutes and in this court's opinions, not 
in prior agency decisions.’ Finch v. Schneider Specialized Carriers, Inc., 700 N.W.2d 328, 332 (Iowa 2005); accord 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 304 n.2 (Iowa 2005) (‘[T]he commissioner's final 
decision is judged against the backdrop of the workers' compensation statute and the Iowa appellate cases 
interpreting it, not previous agency decisions.’). But see Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(h) (authorizing reversal on 
‘[a]ction other than a rule that is inconsistent with the agency's prior practice or precedents, unless the agency has 
justified that inconsistency by stating credible reasons sufficient to indicate a fair and rational basis for the 
inconsistency’).” 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
Next, Petitioners assert that, in finding that Heilman was entitled to alternate medical care, the 
Deputy Commissioner’s decision was erroneous as a matter of law and his application of law to facts was 
irrational, illogical, and wholly unjustifiable. Petitioners also take issue with the Deputy Commissioner’s 
apparent reliance on Pote, an agency-review reopening decision.  
Petitioners first contend the Deputy Commissioner erred as a matter of law by not applying the 
proper legal test in granting Heilman’s alternate care application. The Court first notes the controlling case 
law on the matter, as succinctly summarized in Lynch Livestock, Inc. v. Bursell, 870 N.W.2d 274 (Table) 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2015), is as follows:  
The employee requesting the care has the burden to prove the care being offered by the 
employer is unreasonable. R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 196-96 (Iowa 
2003). ‘“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.’” 
Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997) (quoting Long 
v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995)). But, if the employee proves the 
care authorized by the employer has not been effective and that the care is inferior or less 
extensive than the care requested by the employee, the agency is justified in ordering the 
alternate care. Id. at 437. 
 
Additionally, as cited by the Deputy Commissioner in Long, unreasonableness can be shown where the 
claimant shows either that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, 
or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.3d 122, 123 
(Iowa 1995).  
 
As an initial matter, the Court finds that the Deputy Commissioner cited the correct case law with 
respect to the burden of proof in alternate medical care proceedings. Nevertheless, Petitioners observe that 
in this case the Deputy Commissioner determined that the failure of Petitioners to authorize the FCE 
recommended by Heilman’s authorized treating physician was unreasonable. They contend that the finding 
the Deputy Commissioner needed to make was that the care being offered to Heilman, in the form of 
physical therapy recommended by Dr. Boulden, was unreasonable, and because he did not, he committed 
an error of law.  
 
On this point, the Court disagrees. While the Deputy Commissioner’s ultimate finding was not 
stated with perfect clarity, by finding Petitioners’ failure to authorize the FCE was unreasonable, the logical 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
complement of that proposition is that the care the Petitioners offered, which did not include provisions for 
an FCE, was unreasonable. The Court finds this case is distinguishable from Bursell where the Iowa Court 
of Appeals found fault with the application of law to fact of the agency’s alternate care decision because 
“[n]owhere in the decision did the deputy commissioner conclude that the care being offered by the 
employer was unreasonable, had not been effective, or was inferior or less extensive.” Bursell, 870 N.W.2d 
at 274.  
Nevertheless, the Court does take issue with whether the Deputy Commissioner applied the correct 
law to the facts in reaching his ultimate determination which, as noted above, was phrased appropriately.  
In applying the law to the facts the Deputy Commissioner stated:  
I conclude based on the above stated law that failure to authorize the FCE as recommended 
by the authorized treating physician, which will assist with the establishment of current 
and safe restrictions, is unreasonable. 
 
In the Court’s view, the above-stated law the Deputy Commissioner was relying on and the law the 
agency’s decision rested on were the prior agency rulings in Assman and Pote, and not case law of Iowa 
courts, such as Long, which provides Court sanctioned grounds for establishing the care authorized by the 
employer is unreasonable. In Respondent's brief, Heilman apparently agrees, citing Pote and Assmann as 
the law on which the Deputy Commissioner reached his conclusion.  Pote explains that employers cannot 
interfere with the medical judgment of their own treating physician and that reasonable care includes care 
necessary to diagnose the claimant’s condition. In Bursell, the Iowa Court of Appeals encountered a similar 
situation, observing that the agency cited Pote in its alternate medical care decision for the proposition that 
an employer is “not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating physician.” The Court 
pointed out that the Pote case itself was not an alternate medical care decision and explained it was “not 
bound by the agency's precedent and offer[s] no opinion on whether this is a correct statement of the law 
as that issue is not before us on appeal.” This court observes that the “controlling legal standards are those 
set out in the workers' compensation statutes and in this court's opinions, not in prior agency decisions.” 
Finch v. Schneider Specialized Carriers, Inc., 700 N.W.2d 328, 332 (Iowa 2005). As such, this Court finds 
the Deputy Commissioner’s over-reliance on Assmann and Pote in reaching its ultimate conclusion to be 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
misplaced. Because the agency failed to apply the correct legal standard to the facts of the case, i.e. the 
legal standards set out in the workers’ compensation statutes and Iowa courts’ opinions, the Court finds the 
agency's decision was irrational, illogical, and wholly unjustifiable and must be remanded to the agency to 
apply the correct standard to Heilman’s application for alternate medical care.  
CONCLUSION 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED the Deputy Commissioner’s alternate care decision is 
AFFIRMED in part and REMANDED back to the agency to rule on Respondent’s alternate medical care 
application consistent with the Court’s ruling.   
Costs of the appeal are taxed to Petitioners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV058918
LANDUS COOPERATIVE ET AL VS AUSTIN HEILMAN
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-04-09 17:12:17     page 13 of 13
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 5:12 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
