Case Number: 5068414
Case Title:  WEBBER, JOHN V. WEITZ GROUP/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Webber John-5068414D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOHN WEBBER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 5068414 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  ARBITRATION DECISION      
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SENTINEL INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
Head Notes: 1402.40; 1803; 2206; 
 
 
  : 
 
 
2502; 2907; 3800 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant John Webber filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against The Weitz Group, LLC, employer, and Sentinel 
Insurance Company, insurer, for an accepted work injury date of June 8, 2017.  The 
case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on July 1, 2020. This case 
was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines. However, due to 
the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall. Accordingly, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through C.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Debora Keiser also testified on behalf of the 
claimant. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
July 1, 2020. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on August 3, 2020, and the case 
was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Aug-02  09:37:44     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits as a result 
of the accepted work injury that occurred on June 8, 2017; 
2. 
If so, the extent of permanent disability; 
3. 
Payment of certain medical expenses, medical mileage, and claimant’s 
Independent Medical Evaluation; and 
4. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was 63 years old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 10) 
Claimant lives in Urbandale, Iowa, with his companion, Debby Keiser. Claimant 
graduated from high school in 1975. For the past 32 years, claimant has worked as a 
cement finisher and plasterer, receiving job assignments through Local Union 21. (Tr., 
pp. 10-11) 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was working as a cement mason for DML 
Construction Services, which is a general construction company. (Tr., p. 11) Claimant 
described his work as concrete flatwork, meaning he works on commercial and 
industrial floors, parking ramps, and whatever else the flatwork entails. 
 
In addition to his concrete work through the Union, claimant operates two small 
businesses from his home. One is called Blue Note Gardens, and claimant grows 
perennials, flowers, and heirloom vegetables. (Tr., p. 12) Claimant testified that he 
makes approximately $4,000 to $5,000 per year from that business. The other business 
is called Re-Con Ornamental. Claimant testified that he acquired that business about 9 
years ago, and he manufactures concrete lawn ornaments. (Tr., pp. 12-13) Through that 
business claimant makes about $5,000 per year. (Tr., p. 13) 
 
On June 8, 2017, claimant was working for The Weitz Group. He was working on 
a parking ramp in downtown Des Moines, and toward the end of the workday, claimant 
was walking down a stairwell in the garage. As he neared the bottom of the stairs, he 
stepped on a small rock on the edge of the step, which caused his foot to slip over the 
edge of the step and down the next step. (Tr., p. 14; Joint Exhibit 2, p. 1) Claimant 
landed on a cement landing on the outside edge of his right foot, which caused his right 
knee to twist inward. He had immediate pain in his right knee, and swelling developed 
shortly thereafter. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) Claimant testified that he reported the injury right 
away, as is company policy, but initially declined medical treatment as he preferred to 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 3 
 
wait to see if it would improve. Claimant testified that he did not want to just “sit around” 
on light duty, so he was hopeful his knee would improve on its own. (Tr., pp. 14-15) 
 
Claimant’s knee did not improve, and on June 22, 2017, he saw Jon R. Yankey, 
M.D., at Methodist Occupational Health in Des Moines. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 1-2) Dr. Yankey 
noted that claimant denied a past history of prior right knee injuries or other knee 
problems. X-rays taken that day showed minimal medial compartment joint space 
narrowing; chondrocalcinosis within the medial and lateral compartments, and joint 
effusion. (Jt. Ex., 2, p. 1) Dr. Yankey opined that claimant’s evaluation was most 
consisted with a strain injury of the right knee, and associated joint effusion. He 
recommended conservative treatment, including over-the-counter medication, 
intermittent icing of the knee, and use of a sleeve-type knee brace. Claimant was 
allowed to continue with full work duties, and told to return in 6 to 7 days for a recheck. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 1-2) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Yankey on June 29, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) At that visit, 
claimant reported that his knee was much improved since his appointment one week 
prior. He reported that most of the time he had no pain in his knee, but occasionally 
would have brief discomfort with certain motions. He also reported the swelling in his 
knee had resolved. He had been using the knee sleeve occasionally, especially at work, 
and was tolerating his usual work duties. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) Dr. Yankey noted his 
assessment of right knee strain and “flare up of the DJD [degenerative joint disease] of 
the right knee.” Dr. Yankey felt that the strain injury and flare up of the degenerative 
changes had resolved. He recommended continuing stretching and range of motion 
exercises, and using ice packs and over-the-counter ibuprofen as needed. Claimant 
was discharged from care and to continue with full work duties. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 4-5) 
 
Approximately 8 weeks later, on August 22, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. 
Yankey. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) At that time, claimant reported that since his last follow up visit, 
he had continued pain and swelling in the right knee. He stated that the pain was severe 
enough at times that it caused him to walk up and down stairs differently. He had 
continued with his usual work duties, and had been using a knee cushion when 
kneeling. Dr. Yankey examined claimant and noted mild joint effusion, mild tenderness 
over the medial aspect of the knee, and fullness and possible cystic structure 
posteriorly. Dr. Yankey stated that the pain and swelling “may still be related to a flare 
up of the DJD of his right knee,” and recommended an MRI. In the interim, he 
recommended continued conservative treatment, and allowed claimant to return to full 
duty work. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) 
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right knee on August 24, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 23) He 
returned to Dr. Yankey on August 28, 2017, who noted the MRI showed a tear of the 
medial and lateral menisci, a partial tear of the ACL, tear of the lateral femoral articular 
cartilage, bone contusion of the lateral tibial plateau, and moderate joint effusion with a 
Baker’s cyst. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9) Dr. Yankey noted that the MRI findings seemed more 
significant than the claimant’s symptoms and physical findings, and recommended an 
orthopedic evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9) 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 4 
 
 
Claimant was seen by Matthew DeWall, M.D., at Des Moines Orthopaedic 
Surgeons (DMOS) on September 7, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 25) Dr. DeWall noted that 
claimant denied any previous problems with his right knee. Dr. DeWall reviewed the 
MRI and noted evidence of an ACL rupture, medial meniscus and lateral meniscus 
tears, and osteoarthritis and chondromalacia. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26) Dr. DeWall advised 
claimant that due to the degree of chondral loss in the medial compartment, he would 
not rush to surgical treatment of the meniscus. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 27) His recommendation 
was to try to get the knee to “settle down” with a steroid injection and aspiration. Dr. 
DeWall noted that it was possible that the ACL rupture and degenerative meniscus may 
have been there in the past, but it was difficult to tell on the MRI, and claimant reported 
no significant symptoms prior to the injury. As such, they “certainly could have been 
new injuries as well.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 27) Either way, Dr. DeWall advised to proceed 
conservatively, and gave claimant a steroid injection that day. Claimant was allowed to 
continue working full duty, as he requested, as long as he can tolerate it. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. DeWall for a follow up visit on October 5, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 29) He reported his knee feeling better since the injection. He still had some 
discomfort, and occasionally mild swelling, popping, and grinding. Dr. DeWall opined 
that claimant had an aggravation of his underlying arthritis, which they had gotten to 
“settle down.” He placed claimant at MMI, with no work restrictions and no permanent 
impairment. He noted that claimant “may need future treatment down the road, but 
unless a new work injury occurs I think it would be under his regular insurance and I am 
happy to take care of him.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 29) 
 
Claimant testified that after Dr. DeWall released him, he called Sean Graham 
with the defendant insurance carrier. He asked Mr. Graham to contact his personal 
health insurance company to let them know the status so he “didn’t get called up on 
fraud.” (Tr., p. 19) Claimant stated he was “kind of mystified” by the decision that his 
personal insurance should pay for any future treatment, because he assumed that “it 
was work oriented so that would be dealt with with the company insurance.” (Tr., p. 18) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. DeWall, using his personal insurance, on April 9, 2018. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 31) At that time his injection from September had worn off, and he was 
given another injection. Around this time, claimant also asked the insurance carrier to 
send him for a second opinion regarding permanency. Claimant testified that he chose 
Iowa Ortho, and Iowa Ortho assigned Benjamin R. Beecher, M.D., to perform an 
independent medical evaluation (IME). (Tr., p. 20) Claimant made this request prior to 
retaining legal counsel. (Tr., p. 20) 
 
Dr. Beecher’s IME took place on April 19, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 4) After reviewing the 
medical records and examining claimant, Dr. Beecher opined that claimant’s work injury 
lead to a high-grade partial anterior cruciate ligament tear with active instability. (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 4) Claimant also had a symptomatic medial meniscal tear. Dr. Beecher noted mild 
degenerative changes with respect to osteoarthritis. Dr. Beecher concluded claimant’s 
knee symptoms were related to the work injury, with the biggest symptoms being the 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 5 
 
high-grade ACL rupture and medial meniscal tear. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 5) Dr. Beecher did not 
make any recommendations regarding additional treatment or restrictions, and did not 
provide an impairment rating.  
 
The letter the insurance carrier sent to Iowa Ortho does ask for the evaluation “to 
provide an opinion on his [claimant’s] condition and impairment.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 9) It is 
unclear whether Dr. Beecher received that letter prior to the IME, or if any other 
correspondence was provided to him. At some point after receiving Dr. Beecher’s 
report, claimant retained legal counsel, who then requested that the defendants send 
claimant back to Dr. Beecher for an impairment rating, since that was not included in his 
first report. (Tr., pp. 20-21; Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 10-12) Claimant was not sent back to Dr. 
Beecher, and he has not provided an impairment rating to date. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. DeWall, again using his personal insurance, on October 
5, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 40) Claimant reported that his knee was continuing to bother him, 
limiting his activity. He continued to report pain and swelling, worse by the end of the 
day. Claimant expressed frustration with his symptoms, and had questions as to why 
Dr. DeWall did not “fix” his ACL. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 40) Dr. DeWall notes that the reason he 
did not pursue ACL reconstruction was due to claimant’s underlying problem of 
osteoarthritis, which pre-existed the ACL injury and is why Dr. DeWall did not believe 
further treatment of the osteoarthritis would be work related. Dr. DeWall also discussed 
that ACL reconstruction is a long recovery, and is performed to help with instability, as 
opposed to pain and swelling. As such, Dr. DeWall did not feel that claimant would 
benefit from ACL reconstruction, given his age and arthritic condition, as claimant may 
eventually need a total knee arthroplasty. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 40) Claimant was provided with 
another steroid injection in the knee, and again released with no work restrictions. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. DeWall for injections on February 7, 2019, May 28, 
2019, September 5, 2019, December 13, 2019, and March 17, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 42-
47) Claimant also testified that he had another injection on June 18, 2020, just prior to 
hearing. (Tr., pp. 21-22) At the last appointment prior to hearing, claimant also had his 
knee aspirated. (Tr., p. 22) Claimant testified that the injections usually help him for 
close to three months, and when they wear off he starts to get swelling in his knee down 
his leg to his sock line, and it becomes more difficult to walk. (Tr., p. 22; Jt. Ex. 9) He 
also experiences more grinding in the knee, and general pain, which causes him to take 
more ibuprofen. (Tr., p. 24) Claimant’s understanding is that Dr. DeWall will continue to 
provide the injections every three months until they stop working, at which time he will 
likely need a total knee replacement. (Tr., pp. 24-25) 
 
Claimant had an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D., M.P.H., on October 16, 2019. (Jt. 
Ex. 5) Dr.  Bansal opined that claimant’s work injury on June 8, 2017 caused a right 
knee anterior cruciate ligament tear, medial and lateral meniscus tears, and an 
aggravation of his osteoarthritis. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 9) He agreed that claimant reached MMI 
on October 5, 2017. For future treatment, Dr. Bansal recommended intermittent steroid 
and/or viscosupplementation injections. He further noted that the “endpoint” is a knee 
replacement, which has been accelerated by the June 8, 2017 work injury. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 6 
 
10) Dr. Bansal recommended restrictions of no frequent kneeling or squatting, avoiding 
walking for more than one hour at a time, and avoiding multiple stairs. Finally, Dr. 
Bansal provided a 10 percent lower extremity impairment rating for claimant’s medial 
and lateral meniscal tears, a 7 percent lower extremity impairment for ACL laxity, and 7 
percent lower extremity impairment for the aggravation of claimant’s degenerative joint 
disease. Combined, Dr. Bansal assigned a total of 22 percent lower extremity 
impairment. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 10; 14-15) 
 
Claimant had another IME, at the defendants’ request, with Scott B. Neff, D.O., 
FAAOS. (Jt. Ex. 6) Dr. Neff’s exam took place on February 12, 2020. After examining 
claimant and reviewing the medical records, Dr. Neff opined that claimant, “in all 
likelihood” tore his ACL in his right knee on June 8, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 6) He indicated 
that claimant also had chondrocalcinosis in his knee, which causes the meniscal 
cartilage to lose its rubberiness and increases stiffness. He stated that commonly 
patients with chondrocalcinosis have meniscal tears in the medial and/or lateral 
meniscus. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 6) Dr. Neff noted that claimant is motivated to continue working, 
and as long as he continues to get the injections every three months, he can function. 
Dr. Neff provided a 7 percent impairment rating for the mild anterior cruciate ligament 
instability in claimant’s right knee. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 6-7) He noted that attribution of 
impairment for claimant’s meniscal tears is not appropriate under the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, as claimant had not had surgery. 
 
Dr. Neff recommended that claimant continue with the steroid injections every 3 
to 4 months as long as they continue to relieve his symptoms, and suggested that 
viscosupplementation might also be considered. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 7) He noted that 
claimant’s arthritis will continue to worsen, and his medial and lateral meniscus tissue 
will continue to deteriorate “directly as a result of chondrocalcinosis.” As a result, at 
some point in the future, claimant may require a total knee arthroplasty. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 7) 
 
Dr. Bansal provided a response to Dr. Neff’s report on March 26, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 14-15) Dr. Bansal affirmed his prior 10 percent impairment rating to the un-operated 
meniscal tears, stating that they are perhaps more debilitating as they have not been 
repaired. He further reiterated that while claimant had preexisting degenerative 
changes, he was asymptomatic prior to the work injury. As such, Dr. Bansal opined that 
the work injury caused an aggravation of claimant’s preexisting arthritis, and the end-
point is a “knee replacement that has been accelerated by the lighting up and 
aggravation of his right knee degenerative changes.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 15) 
 
With respect to his current condition, claimant testified that he has to watch what 
he does, and some activities are more difficult than others. (Tr., p. 27) He stated that he 
cannot walk very far, especially up and down hills, and that twisting and turning can 
worsen his symptoms. He also notices worsening with certain weather changes and 
humidity. (Tr., pp. 27-28) Claimant testified that his right knee had never been 
completely pain-free since the injury. (Tr., p. 28)  
 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 7 
 
Claimant also testified that prior to the June 8, 2017 injury, he had never suffered 
any problems with his right knee, including pain, swelling, or stiffness. (Tr., p. 40) This 
testimony is consistent with all of the medical evidence. There is no evidence that 
claimant’s right knee was ever symptomatic prior to the work injury, and claimant 
consistently advised every physician he saw that he had never experienced issues with 
his right knee before the work incident. Additionally, the medical reports are generally in 
agreement that claimant’s work incident more likely than not resulted in the ACL tear. It 
is less clear whether the meniscal tears were preexisting. Regardless, claimant’s knee 
was completely asymptomatic prior to the June 8, 2017 incident, and became 
immediately symptomatic after and has remained so since. As such, I find that 
claimant’s work related injury on June 8, 2017 caused a traumatic ACL tear in his right 
knee, which has resulted in a permanent aggravation of his previously asymptomatic 
degenerative condition. 
 
Having found that claimant sustained a permanent aggravation of his preexisting 
degenerative condition, the next issue to be decided is the extent of disability to 
claimant’s right lower extremity. Dr. DeWall opined that claimant has no permanent 
impairment. As the primary physician who treated claimant’s knee, his opinion is entitled 
to a great deal of weight. However, Dr. DeWall’s rating is dated October 5, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 29) At that time, claimant’s condition was stable as he had recently received his 
first injection. Once that injection wore off, his symptoms returned. Both Dr. Bansal and 
Dr. Neff saw claimant in 2020, after claimant had received multiple additional injections. 
As such, I find their opinions to carry more weight with respect to claimant’s ultimate 
permanent impairment. 
 
Dr. Bansal provided a 10 percent lower extremity rating for claimant’s medial and 
lateral meniscal tears, a 7 percent lower extremity impairment for ACL laxity, and 7 
percent lower extremity impairment for the aggravation of claimant’s degenerative joint 
disease. Combined, Dr. Bansal assigned a total of 22 percent lower extremity 
impairment. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 10; 14-15) Dr. Neff provided a 7 percent impairment rating for 
the mild anterior cruciate ligament instability in claimant’s right knee, and noted that 
attribution of impairment for claimant’s meniscal tears is not appropriate as claimant had 
not had surgery. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 6-7) The greater weight of evidence suggests that 
claimant’s work injury resulted in an ACL tear with permanent instability. It is less clear 
from the evidence whether the incident caused the medial and lateral meniscal tears. 
However, as Dr. Neff points out, claimant has not had surgery for the meniscal tears, 
and it is therefore inappropriate to provide an impairment rating under the AMA Guides. 
Therefore, I find Dr. Neff’s 7 percent lower extremity rating to be the most persuasive. 
Claimant is entitled to 7 percent permanent partial disability of his right lower extremity, 
which is equal to 15.4 weeks of benefits. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The threshold inquiry is whether claimant sustained a temporary or permanent 
aggravation of his pre-existing right knee condition. 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 8 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).   
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 9 
 
I found that that claimant’s work-related injury on June 8, 2017 caused a 
traumatic ACL tear in his right knee, which has resulted in a permanent aggravation of 
his previously asymptomatic degenerative condition. There is no evidence that claimant 
had any symptoms or treatment related to his right knee prior to the June 8, 2017 injury. 
The greater weight of evidence supports claimant’s argument that the injury caused a 
permanent aggravation of his preexisting degenerative condition. 
 
Having found that claimant sustained a permanent injury, the next issue to be 
decided is the extent of claimant’s permanent partial disability. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(u).1  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
The fact finder must consider both medical and lay evidence relating to the extent of the 
functional loss in determining permanent disability resulting from an injury to a 
scheduled member.  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 N.W.2d 267, 272-273 
(Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994). 
As noted above, I found that Dr. Bansal and Dr. Neff provided more recent 
impairment ratings, after claimant had received additional treatment, and their opinions 
are entitled to greater weight with respect to impairment. The greater weight of evidence 
suggests that claimant’s work injury resulted in an ACL tear with permanent instability. It 
is less clear from the evidence whether the incident caused the medial and lateral 
meniscal tears. However, as Dr. Neff points out, claimant has not had surgery for the 
meniscal tears, and it is therefore inappropriate to provide an impairment rating under 
the AMA Guides. Therefore, I find Dr. Neff’s 7 percent lower extremity rating to be the 
most persuasive. Claimant is entitled to 7 percent permanent partial disability of his right 
lower extremity, which is equal to 15.4 weeks of benefits, at the stipulated weekly 
benefit rate of $596.89. Benefits commence on the stipulated date of October 5, 2017. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for medical expenses he has incurred for medical 
treatment related to his right knee injury after October 5, 2017, when Dr. DeWall opined 
further treatment would be under his personal health insurance. Claimant is not entitled 
to reimbursement for medical bills unless claimant shows that they were paid from his 
own funds.  See Caylor v. Employers Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. 
App. 1983).  Otherwise, claimant is entitled only to an order directing the responsible 
defendants to make such payments directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 
N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Where medical payments are made from a plan to which the 
employer did not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest 
Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold 
                                                                 
1 Claimant’s date of injury, June 8, 2017, predates the 2017 amendments to the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. As such, the prior version of the code is referenced in this decision. 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 10 
 
that the commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past 
medical expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant 
independent of any employer contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 
(Iowa App. 2015) 873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-
0323.  Claimant has the burden of proving that the fees charged for such services are 
reasonable.  Anderson v. High Rise Construction Specialists, Inc., File No. 850096 
(App. July 31, 1990). 
Having found that claimant’s injury caused a permanent aggravation of claimant’s 
underlying arthritis, I find that the treatment claimant has received since October 5, 
2017, is causally connected to his work injury. As such, defendants are liable for that 
medical care. Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the portions of the medical bills 
he paid from his own funds. Defendants shall further authorize ongoing treatment, 
including injections, to treat claimant’s right knee symptoms.  
Because I found the medical care is related to claimant’s work injury, defendants 
are also responsible for the mileage claimant has accrued in attending those 
appointments. Claimant set forth calculations for mileage in his post-hearing brief for a 
total of $161.62 in mileage reimbursement. I find claimant’s calculations reasonable and 
supported by the evidence. As such, defendants shall reimburse claimant $161.62 for 
mileage. 
There was some question at hearing as to whether claimant will be entitled to a 
total knee replacement surgery in the future. Claimant did not specifically request such 
a finding at this time. Additionally, no doctor has recommended that claimant undergo 
that procedure in the immediate future. As such, the issue of whether the need for a 
total knee replacement surgery is related to the claimant’s work injury is not ripe for 
consideration.  
The next issue to address is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for Dr. 
Bansal’s IME report. Defendants dispute claimant’s entitlement to reimbursement 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination. Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).   
Regarding the IME, the Iowa Supreme Court provided a literal interpretation of 
the plain-language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section 85.39 only allows 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 11 
 
the employee to obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if 
dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. Des Moines Area Reg’l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). 
Under the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the 
employer’s expense if an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an 
employer-retained physician. Iowa Code section 85.39 limits an injured worker to one 
IME. Larson Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842 (Iowa 2009). 
The Supreme Court, in Young noted that in cases where Iowa Code section 
85.39 is not triggered to allow for reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination (IME), a claimant can still be reimbursed at hearing the costs associated 
with the preparation of the written report as a cost under rule 876 IAC 4.33. Young at 
846-847. 
In this case, employer-selected, authorized treating physician, Dr. DeWall, issued 
a disability rating on October 5, 2017. Claimant then asked for a second opinion 
regarding impairment, as he is entitled pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. Claimant 
credibly testified that he asked for his second opinion to take place at Iowa Ortho, but 
he did not chose the physician. Iowa Ortho assigned Dr. Beecher, who saw claimant on 
April 19, 2018. However, Dr. Beecher did not provide an impairment rating in his 
subsequent letter, despite being asked to do so by the insurance carrier. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 9) 
Later, when claimant’s attorney asked for defendants to pay for an additional report 
from Dr. Beecher in order to obtain his opinion regarding impairment, defendants denied 
that request. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 11-12) Claimant later sought an IME with Dr. Bansal, who 
did provide an impairment rating. Claimant argues that he is entitled to reimbursement 
for Dr. Bansal’s IME, because the purpose of section 85.39 is to allow the claimant to 
obtain an impairment rating, which Dr. Beecher did not provide. Defendants argue that 
they met their burden under section 85.39 by providing claimant with an IME with Dr. 
Beecher, and that claimant did not apply to the Commissioner to receive reimbursement 
and provide notice to the employer and carrier as required by Iowa Code section 
85.39(2).  
In Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 
2015) (hereinafter “DART”), the Iowa Supreme Court spent a good deal of time 
discussing the purpose of Iowa Code section 85.39. The Court noted that the purpose 
of section 85.39 is to provide for the “examination of an injured worker for the purpose 
of ascertaining ‘the extent and character of the injury’ for purposes of paying benefits in 
the event of a disability resulting from the injury.” DART, 867 N.W.2d at 843. (citing 
Daugherty v. Scandia Coal Co., 219 N.W. 65, 67 (Iowa 1928)) The Court further notes 
that the legislature created section 85.39 “to govern examinations of an injured worker 
in order to obtain a disability rating to determine the amount of benefits required to be 
paid by the employer.” DART, 867 N.W.2d at 847 (emphasis added).  
The Court recognized that an injured worker “needs to be evaluated by a 
physician under the workers’ compensation law to determine an award of compensation 
for permanent disabilities. The assessment is a critical component to an award of 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 12 
 
benefits for permanent disabilities.” DART, 867 N.W.2d at 844. (internal citations 
omitted). In other words, an independent medical evaluation that does not contain a 
functional impairment rating is fairly useless in helping the agency determine an award 
of compensation, and does not comport with the legislature’s purpose in enacting 
section 85.39. In this particular instance, Dr. Beecher’s report is not one from which the 
parties could infer a zero percent rating. Rather, Dr. Beecher completely ignored the 
issue of whether any permanent impairment existed. Under section 85.39, claimant was 
entitled to an evaluation of permanent impairment, and Dr. Beecher did not provide that.  
Further, section 85.39 states that the injured worker is entitled to an examination 
by a physician of the employee’s own choice. In this case, claimant chose the clinic, but 
did not specifically choose Dr. Beecher as the physician to perform his examination. 
Finally, while claimant did not file a separate petition for IME reimbursement, this 
agency has never held that to be an absolute prerequisite to reimbursement. Dr. 
Beecher’s evaluation and report did not satisfy the purpose of section 85.39, which is to 
provide the claimant with an evaluation of permanent impairment made by a physician 
of his choosing. As such, I find that claimant is entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s 
IME in the amount of $3,378.00. (Cl. Ex. 3) 
The final issue to be decided is claimant’s entitlement to costs. Claimant seeks 
the following costs:  $100.00 for the filing fee; $103.25 for claimant’s deposition 
transcript. Because claimant was generally successful in his claim, an assessment of 
costs is appropriate. 
 
 
Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 
86.40. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or 
workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33.   
Because I found claimant was generally successful in his claim, I exercise my 
discretion and conclude an assessment of costs against the defendants is appropriate. I 
conclude it is appropriate to assess the cost of the $100.00 filing fee, as well as the 
$103.25 cost of the deposition transcript.  876 IAC 4.33(2)(7). In total, I assess costs 
against defendants in the amount of $203.25. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant permanent partial disability benefits for fifteen 
point four (15.4) weeks, beginning on the stipulated commencement date of October 5, 
2017. 
 
 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred ninety-six 
and 89/100 dollars ($596.89) per week. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 

WEBBER V. THE WEITZ GROUP, LLC 
PAGE 13 
 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall pay claimant medical expenses as set forth in this decision. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant one hundred sixty-one and 62/100 dollars 
($161.62) for medical mileage as set forth in this decision. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant in the amount of three thousand three 
hundred seventy-eight and 00/100 dollars ($3,378.00) for Dr. Bansal’s IME. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _____2nd ____ day of August, 2021. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Greg Egbers (via WCES) 
Timothy Wegman (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
