Case Number: 24700207.01
Case Title:  LEWIS, GWENDOLYN V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER D/B/A JUNE E. NYLEN CANCER CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lewis Gwendolyn-24700207.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
GWENDOLYN LEWIS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
          File No.  24700207.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
        
 
 
  :                 
SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
  : 
CANCER CENTER, 
  : 
       
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SFM SELECT INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes:  1108, 1402.30, 2601.10 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Gwendolyn Lewis filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Siouxland Regional Cancer Center, d/b/a June E. Nylen 
Cancer Center, employer, and SFM Select Insurance Company, insurance carrier, for 
an alleged work injury date of December 22, 2022. The case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on April 4, 2025. The case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via Zoom, with all participants appearing remotely. The hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 9, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G.  
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. The evidentiary record remained open after 
hearing until April 18, 2025, to allow for the submission of additional deposition 
testimony, if the parties so chose. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on May 30, 
2025, and the case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Oct-08  10:02:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury to her neck and arm arising out of and 
in the course of her employment on December 22, 2022; 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability/healing period benefits; 
3. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent partial disability, if any; 
4. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
5. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; 
6. 
Whether defendants are entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) 
for payment of sick pay/disability income; 
7. 
Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits; and 
8. 
Whether claimant is entitled to future medical care at GIKK in Omaha, 
Nebraska. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was somewhat consistent as compared to the evidentiary 
record. Her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt 
her veracity. She did testify as to some memory problems, as discussed below. Overall, 
claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 66-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
18) She is a high-school graduate, and received an associate of science degree from 
Wayne State college in business. (Tr., pp. 24-25) She has also taken classes in 
administrative work and education, so she could become a preschool teacher. (Tr., p. 
25) Her past work includes working at Premier Credit until the Sioux City area 
experienced flooding in 2011. (Tr., pp. 26-27) She later began working as lead 
preschool teacher at Prodigy Preschool and Daycare, which she described as a 
passion. (Tr., p. 29) Unfortunately, claimant was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2016. 
(Tr., p. 31) She continued working at Prodigy, but due to her difficult cancer treatment, 
she was no longer able to work every day and could not do all the things she enjoyed 
with the children. (Tr., pp. 31-32) When she realized she could not give one hundred 
percent, she left the preschool and started working at Midlands Clinic at the check-in 
desk. (Tr., p. 32) Claimant also testified that the cancer treatment affected her memory, 
as there are some things that she just does not remember. (Tr., p. 32) 
 
In approximately 2021, claimant left Midlands Clinic and began working at June 
Nylen Cancer Center, where she continues to work today. (Tr., p. 35) Claimant works as 
the lead employee in medical records, which includes keeping the records, scanning 
them to patient charts, responding to requests, and speaking with doctors. (Tr., pp. 22-
23) She also helps with billing if additional information is needed for insurance reasons. 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 3 
 
(Tr., p. 23) At the time of hearing, claimant continued to work in her same job at the 
Cancer Center, earning more than she was making on the date of injury. (Tr. pp. 23; 
105) At the time of the work injury, she was also working at V.I.P. Gymnastics, Ninja, 
and Cheer. (Tr., p. 21) Her role there was helping teach children gymnastics, 
cheerleading, and “ninja warrior” classes.” She worked there with her son, who was a 
manager. (Tr., p. 22) Claimant testified the job was very physical. (Tr., pp. 22)  
 
In addition to breast cancer, claimant testified to some additional health 
conditions she has experienced in the past, including problems with her neck and 
shoulders. (Tr., p. 42) In 2012, she saw Wade Lukken, M.D., for right-sided neck pain, 
right upper back pain, and right arm pain for the prior 1 to 2 years. (Defendants’ Exhibit 
D, p. 17) Dr. Lukken noted her right arm pain seemed to be in a distribution of the C6 
nerve. A cervical MRI showed multilevel spondylitic changes and degenerative disc 
disease; multilevel spinal stenosis; and multilevel neuroforaminal stenosis. (Def. Ex. D, 
p. 16) Claimant had a great deal of conservative treatment, including multiple injections 
and physical therapy. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 17-33) When her condition failed to resolve, she 
underwent surgery with Matthew Johnson, M.D. 
 
Dr. Johnson performed C4-5, C5-6, C6-7 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion 
on March 10, 2014. (Def. Ex. D, p. 34) Following surgery, claimant had physical 
therapy, and her condition improved. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 35-40) She had an MRI of the 
right shoulder on July 8, 2014, which showed some mild degenerative issues but no 
tears. (Def. Ex. D, p. 38) Her post-surgical cervical MRI on September 3, 2014, showed 
intact hardware from her fusion surgery, and no significant problems remaining. (Def. 
Ex. D, pp. 41-42)  
 
Claimant was in a motor vehicle accident on or around October 22, 2014, in 
which the vehicle she was riding in was rear-ended. (Def. Ex. D, p. 43) Claimant 
testified she does not remember much about the accident, but her husband told her 
they were both concerned that something might have happened to her neck in the 
accident, so she went to get checked out. (Tr. pp., 45-46) X-rays from October 22, 2014 
showed the fusion was intact. (Def. Ex. D, p. 43) Physical therapy records from 
November 18, 2014, indicate that claimant complained of continued neck pain following 
the fusion surgery, which was significantly exacerbated since the motor vehicle 
accident. (Def. Ex. D, p. 44) She was later discharged from physical therapy on April 9, 
2015. (Def. Ex. D, p. 47) The discharge report indicates she attended 9 visits, from 
November 18, 2014 to December 18, 2014, after which she failed to attend the 
remainder of her scheduled sessions.  
 
Claimant saw her primary care physician on May 22, 2015, with complaints of 
neck, shoulder, and arm pain for two weeks. (Def. Ex. D, p. 48) An MRI of the cervical 
spine was ordered, and took place on May 26, 2015. (Def. Ex. D, p. 52) Her fusion was 
solid, and there was a mild central disc protrusion at C3-4 without abutting the spinal 
cord. Claimant was returned to physical therapy in July of 2015, which continued until 
September 11, 2015. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 54-58)  

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 4 
 
The next treatment record in evidence is a physical therapy record dated January 
10, 2018. (Def. Ex. D, p. 59) The record states that claimant had not had any recent 
injury, but had experienced neck pain off and on in the years since her cervical fusion. 
The medical diagnosis states neck pain, pseudoarthrosis status post previous ACDF. 
Claimant saw Dr. Lukken on February 12, 2018, who noted her complaints of throbbing 
pain in the back of her neck, and ordered injections. (Def. Ex. D, p. 62) She was later 
discharged from physical therapy after attending four of her scheduled sessions. ( Def. 
Ex. D, p. 65) The discharge summary notes that the cervical injection helped her 
symptoms.  
 
On March 26, 2019, claimant saw her primary care physician for a follow-up 
regarding right shoulder pain. (Def. Ex. D, p. 66) The record states the pain had 
improved with prednisone and naproxen. It also mentions shooting pain with pins and 
needles sensation, as well as upper back pain. Claimant was prescribed Gabapentin 
and told to consider another cervical spine injection. (Def. Ex. D, p. 67) 
 
It appears claimant saw Scott Feese, P.A., at Dr. Johnson’s office, on May 27, 
2020. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 7) 1 She reported an increase in right upper extremity 
pain over the prior year, which radiated all the way down into her first, second, and third 
fingers. It was quite bothersome, and a constant ache in her arm. Cervical spine x-rays 
showed pseudoarthrosis and minimal movement at the C6-C7 level. Mr. Feese noted 
claimant was fairly strong, and opined it seemed to be more of a triceps weakness and 
right sided radiculopathy. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) Based on the distribution of her pain, he 
thought it was in the C7 distribution. He referred her for C6-C7 epidural steroid injection. 
If she did not get a good response, he noted she may at some point need a posterior 
fusion for the pseudoarthrosis.  
 
The final record in evidence pre-dating the work injury is from November 23, 
2021. (Def. Ex. D, p. 68) Claimant saw her primary care physician for a follow-up of 
chronic health conditions. It is noted that she had continued neck and back pain, and 
felt Voltaren had been helpful. There is no other mention of neck or back issues. (Def. 
Ex. D, pp. 68-70) 
 
Claimant testified that after the 2019 flare of her symptoms, she did not have any 
additional problems with her neck. (Tr., pp. 47-48) She did not have any additional 
physical therapy or injections. (Tr., p. 48) At the time of her 2021 visit with her primary 
care physician, she noted that she was feeling fine, and she was exercising regularly, 
as she is very athletic. (Tr., pp. 49-50)  
 
Claimant was injured when she slipped on ice and fell on December 22, 2022. 
(Tr., pp. 35; 38) She explained that employees of the Cancer Center were to park 
across the street from the building in a municipal parking garage, and then cross two 
streets to get to the entrance. (Tr., pp. 36-37) On the date of injury, it was cold, there 
                                                 
1 This record is not in evidence, but is summarized in Dr. Bansal’s IME report. 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 5 
 
was snow on the ground, and it was icy. (Tr., p. 37) Claimant had crossed the streets 
and was walking on the sidewalk toward the entrance of the Cancer Center, when she 
slipped on ice and fell. (Tr., p. 38) She testified that she was maybe about seven steps 
away from the entrance. She said she initially started to fall backwards, but tried to 
catch herself, and as she did so, she ended up falling directly on her face. She 
remembered getting up and bushing herself off, taking a step, stopping again to check 
her glasses, and being happy to make it to her office. (Tr., pp. 38-39) When she got into 
the office, a coworker greeted her and then asked what was wrong; claimant replied “I 
fell.” (Tr., p. 39) The coworker told their supervisor, and eventually a report was filed 
and claimant was sent to get checked out. 
 
Claimant was later informed by a maintenance worker that there was a video 
showing her fall, and she watched the video with him. (Tr., pp. 39-40) She testified that 
in the video, she initially wondered where she went, because she was wearing a white 
coat that blended in with the snow. (Tr., p. 40) On the video, it took her a minute to get 
up after she fell, which she did not realize until she saw it. (Tr., p. 40) The video was not 
produced in evidence. Defense counsel made a professional statement indicating that 
the surveillance footage was only stored for 180 days, and the petition was filed more 
than 180 days after the incident occurred. (Tr., pp. 14-15) As such, the video was no 
longer available by the time the petition was filed, and could not be produced. (Tr., p. 
15) 
 
Claimant was sent to CNOS Urgent Care on December 22, 2022. (Tr., p. 41) She 
reported right shoulder and right knee pain. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) She reported 
significant right shoulder pain, especially with range of motion. Her pain was in the 
lateral and anterior aspect of the shoulder. She denied numbness or tingling down the 
arms. Her knee pain was over the anterior/lateral aspect of the knee. It is noted she had 
a prior right partial knee arthroplasty. After physical examination and x-rays, the 
assessment was right shoulder strain with suspected rotator cuff tear and right knee 
contusion. An MRI of the right shoulder was recommended, followed by consultation 
with a shoulder specialist. For her knee, it was recommended she use rest, ice, 
compression, and elevation, as well as a knee sleeve.  
 
The MRI of claimant’s right shoulder took place on December 29, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 4) Claimant returned to CNOS and saw Joseph Carreau, M.D., on January 10, 
2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) At that time, claimant reported most of her pain was resolved, but 
her right shoulder continued to be “exquisitely symptomatic.” She was having difficulty 
with any use of her arm and was unable to elevate it above the level of her chest. Dr. 
Carreau reviewed the MRI, and noted mild tendinosis of the rotator cuff, and mild 
glenohumeral joint arthritis, as well as some reactive bone marrow edema within the 
glenoid, and a small joint effusion. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) On physical examination, she was 
grossly tender over the deltoid and superior shoulder, and had some limited range of 
motion due to pain. Dr. Carreau noted her pain was fairly diffuse, and may be related to 
the bony edema within the glenoid. He recommended a trial glenohumeral joint injection 
with steroid medication, and prescribed an anti-inflammatory. 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 6 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Carreau on January 31, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) She 
stated that overall things had improved somewhat, but she was still having significant 
difficulty, and that day was particularly painful. Her knee was also problematic, as she 
noted swelling and global discomfort. Dr. Carreau made a referral for physical therapy, 
and ordered a knee brace to enhance compression and stability. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10) He 
continued the anti-inflammatory and prescribed Voltaren gel as well.  
 
Claimant started physical therapy at Athletico on February 8, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
86) She was assessed with decreased right shoulder and right knee range of motion 
and strength and increased pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 89) She presented with high levels of 
pain and fear of movement. Her rehab potential was excellent. At her next session on 
February 10, 2023, she reported being quite sore after her first session. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 90) 
She reported her pain that day was a level 10 out of 10 until she took her pain 
medication, after which it reduced to level 8 out of 10. Claimant continued with regular 
therapy sessions, and by February 24, 2023, she reported right shoulder pain at a level 
7 out of 10, and right knee pain at 5.5 to 6 out of 10.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 91-100) She also 
noted she had popped her upper back/shoulder at work when stretching. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Carreau on February 28, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 12) She 
reported that she was much improved overall, but still had some difficulty with overhead 
use of the shoulder. With respect to the knee, she reported continued improvement, 
decreased swelling, and mild discomfort occasionally. On physical examination, Dr. 
Carreau noted her range of motion was much improved. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13) With respect 
to her knee, he found nothing concerning. He noted that both joints seemed to be 
improving nicely with physical therapy and time, although she continued to have some 
mild persistent shoulder impingement. He provided a subacromial injection due to the 
impingement, and recommended she continue physical therapy and medication.  
 
Claimant continued with physical therapy for both her right shoulder and knee. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 102-111) By March 17, 2023, she reported very little pain in the right 
knee. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 112) On March 22, 2023, she reported increased right shoulder pain 
in the posterior aspect of her shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 116) However, at her next session 
on March 27, 2023, she was feeling good. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 118) She continued with regular 
sessions, and continued to improve. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 119-125) Her last session was on 
April 6, 2023, and she reported zero pain and that she was happy to be done with 
therapy. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 126) The discharge summary states that all functional goals were 
achieved, and that claimant had returned to her prior functional level with no remaining 
deficits. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 129) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Carreau on April 25, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 15) she reported 
doing quite well overall, with some occasional discomfort in the knee. She reported 
completing physical therapy, but remaining quite active at home and doing her home 
exercise program. On physical examination, she had much improved range of motion of 
the right shoulder, and full strength with external rotation and her rotator cuff. (Jt. Ex. 1, 
p. 16) Impingement testing was largely negative. Examination of her knee was also 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 7 
 
largely normal. Dr. Carreau noted that both joints had improved immensely since the 
injury, and were minimally symptomatic. He said claimant was overall happy with her 
progress, and continued working full duty with no difficulty. He placed her at maximum 
medical improvement (MMI) and released her from care to return as needed.  
 
Claimant testified that she did not tell Dr. Carreau that she was not having any 
problems with her shoulder at that time. (Tr., p. 53) She testified that she was still 
having problems, but she continued to work. Over the course of the next several 
months, claimant’s condition worsened. She testified that her ability to use her right arm 
was getting worse, and her right hand became swollen to twice it’s normal size. (Tr., p. 
54) She said that the head of the company noticed her swollen hand, and told her to 
return to Dr. Carreau.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Carreau on September 19, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 18) His note 
indicates that claimant was doing “extremely well” and had returned to all activities in 
April, after which she developed progressive pain, swelling, and range of motion deficits 
over the past week or two. She denied any injury or aggravation occurred. She told Dr. 
Carreau it felt similar as it had previously, and she was unable to sleep due to pain. Dr. 
Carreau noted that with no clear aggravation or reinjury, he assumed her resurgence in 
pain was related to the previous injury. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 19) He recommended a trial of an 
intra-articular injection as it seemed to help before, and prescribed oral steroids.  
 
Claimant returned on October 5, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 20) She reported only about 
four days of relief from the injection, and actually worsening since then. On physical 
examination, Dr. Carreau noted limited mobility of the cervical spine and a “significantly 
positive Spurling’s test.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 21) She was tender about the trapezius and 
posterior musculature. She had some increased pain with movements of her shoulder 
above chest level, and mildly positive impingement signs, but Dr. Carreau noted it was 
difficult to say whether that was coming from the shoulder itself. Dr. Carreau stated he 
suspected the cervical spine was the cause of her shoulder and arm pain, and 
recommended a cervical MRI. He noted that claimant’s “pain pattern has always been 
somewhat atypical for organic shoulder pathology, and it remains possible that a 
cervical disc herniation occurred during the fall and has been a source of her continued 
shoulder and arm pain since the injury.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 21) He performed a subacromial 
injection, and prescribed Gabapentin. 
 
Claimant had the cervical MRI on October 16, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 23-24) She 
returned to Dr. Carreau on October 24, 2023, and reported the gabapentin had been 
helpful. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 25) Dr. Carreau reviewed the cervical MRI, and noted a posterior 
disc osteophyte at C3-4 with severe right neuroforaminal stenosis. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26) He 
suspected the C3-4 disc herniation might be the source of her pain, and recommended 
a neurosurgery evaluation. He also noted a neuroforaminal injection might help as a 
diagnostic tool.  
 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 8 
 
Claimant testified that the October 5, 2023 visit was the first time Dr. Carreau 
examined her neck and performed the Spurling’s test. (Tr., pp. 56-57) Claimant also 
testified that she initially requested to return to Dr. Johnson, who performed her prior 
neck surgery, but was informed that he does not handle workers’ compensation cases. 
(Tr., p. 60) As such, she was instead referred to Hendrik Klopper, M.D. (Tr., pp. 60-61) 
 
Claimant first saw Dr. Klopper on November 30, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 28) He noted 
her chief complaint was right shoulder and arm pain, and at that visit she denied neck 
pain but stated it was difficult to turn her head to the right and to reach across the 
keyboard to type. She described her slip and fall to Dr. Klopper, and complained of pain 
down the backside of her shoulder and down her right arm ever since. She was unable 
to make a full fist at the time of this appointment. Dr. Klopper noted that physical 
therapy and injections were helpful for a short time, but after two months of not doing 
physical therapy, her pain started to get worse, and had progressively gotten worse 
since then.  
 
After physical examination and reviewing the cervical MRI, Dr. Klopper’s 
assessment was cervical radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 29) He discussed with claimant 
that it can be difficult to determine how much of her symptoms are coming from the 
neck and how much are from the shoulder. He recommended a cervical injection for 
both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, and set her up for an EMG of the right upper 
extremity as well.  
 
Claimant testified that Dr. Klopper told her at the initial visit that her slip and fall 
could have caused the problems on the MRI. (Tr., p. 59) She said that he told her the 
fact that she jerked backwards and then fell flat forward could cause damage.  
 
The EMG took place on December 28, 2023, and was normal. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 31-
32) Claimant returned to Dr. Klopper on January 11, 2024, and reported ongoing pain in 
the neck, back of the right shoulder, and down the right arm into the hand. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
37) The cervical injection was not very helpful. Dr. Klopper discussed a second injection 
versus considering surgery, and claimant wished to proceed with the recommended 
surgery, which was a C7 laminectomy and C6-T1 posterior fusion.  
 
Claimant testified that Dr. Klopper submitted authorization to workers’ 
compensation prior to surgery. (Tr., p. 62) In the meantime, claimant continued working.  
On February 13, 2024, claimant was sent for an independent medical examination 
(IME) with Douglas Martin, M.D, another physician at CNOS. (Def. Ex. B, p. 2). Dr. 
Martin reviewed the medical records, including claimant’s prior records, and discussed 
the work-related slip and fall incident with claimant. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 2-4) It is noted that 
Dr. Martin states on the date of injury, claimant had carried some items into the building 
prior to her fall; however, claimant testified that was actually the day prior to the injury. 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 3; Tr., p. 36) In any event, Dr. Martin also noted claimant’s previous 
medical history with neck and shoulder issues and her prior cervical surgery. The last 
record he notes prior to the work incident was from May of 2020, when claimant was 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 9 
 
complaining of right upper extremity pain radiating into the first, second, and third digits 
of her right hand. (Def. Ex. B, p. 4)  
 
Dr. Martin recorded claimant’s complaints at the time of his examination as neck 
pain and right upper extremity pain and swelling; numbness and tingling in all of her 
digits; and trouble moving her arm. On physical examination, Dr. Martin stated claimant 
had a “considerable amount of pain behaviors concerning her right shoulder and neck 
region.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) It appears he had some difficulties with some portions of his 
examination due to claimant’s pain levels. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 5-6) He stated that claimant 
had “extremely poor effort” with respect to strength testing, but he did not see any 
evidence of upper extremity muscle tone loss, atrophic change, or spasm. (Def. Ex. B, 
p. 6) Claimant also had “quite of bit” of hypersensitivity over the anterior aspect of her 
shoulder, and over the trapezius and posterior scapular structures. He did not believe 
her active range of motion of the right shoulder was valid secondary to pain inhibition. 
Despite difficulties, he felt she had positive impingement tests of the right shoulder, but 
was unable to get her arm in the right position for the “empty pop can maneuver,” due to 
pain. With respect to her cervical range of motion, he noted she was limited again by 
pain, but she appeared to have a positive Spurling’s maneuver with an increase in right 
upper extremity pain. 
 
Dr. Martin’s assessment was history of prior C4-C6 fusion; history of C6-C7 
pseudoarthrosis; right shoulder pain most likely rotator cuff tendinitis/impingement; right 
shoulder glenohumeral and acromioclavicular degenerative joint disease; and right C7 
radiculopathy. He did not disagree with Dr. Klopper’s recommendation for additional 
cervical decompression and fusion, but he did not believe that was going to address her 
other complaints, especially her shoulder pain. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 6-7) He said that her 
presentation was one of “significant symptom magnification.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 7) He also 
stated he was unable to equate her current complaints of shoulder pain and her 
hypersensitivity on exam with what was in the most recent treatment records from Dr. 
Carreau.  
 
With respect to causation, Dr. Martin opined that claimant’s slip and fall injury on 
December 22, 2022 likely created contusions to the chest, right shoulder, and face, as 
well as a soft tissue strain or sprain of the cervical spine and possibly the right shoulder 
structures. He opined that those problems would have been expected to resolve within 
several weeks, and the fall does not explain claimant’s current symptoms. He opined 
that the findings on claimant’s cervical MRI are degenerative, and are “due to a 
combination of age, genetics, and anthropomorphic factors.” 2 He also notes that the 
pseudoarthritis at C6-7 preexisted claimant’s fall. With respect to her shoulder, Dr. 
Martin opined that the tendinosis and degeneration on the MRI are also age-related 
                                                 
2 As claimant’s attorney points out, “anthropomorphic” means assigning human traits to animals or 
inanimate objects. (See Claimant’s Brief, p. 16) I could speculate that Dr. Martin means “anthropometric” 
factors, which are essentially measurements and proportions of the human body, but such speculation 
would be inappropriate for a factfinder in this case. 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 10 
 
changes, primarily. Finally, he noted claimant’s cervical spine and shoulder had been 
problems for a number of years, and that medical records go back to at least 2012. 
 
Dr. Martin opined that claimant would not have impairment due to the work-
related slip and fall. He declined to issue an impairment rating related to the 
degenerative cervical condition as claimant had not reached maximum medical 
improvement (MMI), due to the recommendation for additional surgery. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 
7-8) 
 
Dr. Martin responded to specific questions posed by the claims representative. 
(Def. Ex. B, pp. 8-9) With respect to claimant’s condition, he opined she likely had a 
component of right C-7 radiculopathy, which he thought was due to ongoing 
degenerative conditions. (Def. Ex. B, p. 8) He opined claimant had “quite a bit” of pain 
behaviors and symptom magnification on examination. With respect to her shoulder, he 
opined there was “probably” some evidence of right shoulder impingement syndrome. 
He stated it was “fairly clear” that the shoulder and neck conditions preexisted the work 
related slip and fall. He opined that claimant’s condition was not related to the fall injury. 
He stated that the fall caused a contusion and likely some soft tissue strain injuries, but 
that did not explain claimant’s presentation, which he thought was due to degenerative 
and preexisting issues. Dr. Martin further opined that the work-related fall did not 
aggravate or exacerbate claimant’s degenerative conditions or preexisting problems.  
 
With respect to medical treatment, Dr. Martin opined that the treatment claimant 
had received had been reasonable and necessary, as it appeared the physicians had 
difficulty in identifying whether her problems were coming from her back or her 
shoulder. (Def. Ex. B, p. 9) He opined that she is able to work, but probably needed to 
have restrictions of her right upper extremity. Finally, he reiterated that he would assign 
zero percent impairment related to claimant’s slip and fall, but would not comment on 
impairment due to the degenerative conditions. 
 
There are several issues with Dr. Martin’s opinion, especially his comments 
regarding symptom magnification, as discussed further below. Additionally, he did not 
adequately explain why the slip and fall incident could not have caused an aggravation 
of claimant’s preexisting degenerative condition. Overall, I do not find his report to be 
particularly helpful or reliable in determining causation. 
 
Claimant was seen at the emergency room at Unity Point Sioux City on March 6, 
2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 77-79) Records indicate she was seen for chronic right shoulder 
pain and neck pain. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 78) Claimant testified that on that day, she was at work 
and was unable to lift her arm. (Tr., p. 64) She said she started crying, and her coworker 
went to get her supervisor, who told her to go to the hospital. She testified that she 
called Dr. Klopper’s office on the way to the hospital and said “I’m in so much pain. I 
can’t lift my arm.”  
 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 11 
 
Later, while at the hospital, claimant got a call advising that workers’ 
compensation had denied her surgery. (Tr., p. 65) There is also a letter in evidence 
dated March 6, 2024, which communicates the denial of the claim. (Def. Ex. E, p. 71) 
Dr. Klopper’s office also called claimant and said that while surgery was not approved 
by workers’ compensation, she still needed it right away. (Tr., pp. 65-66) Claimant 
testified that her hand was huge, and she could not lift anything or open a bottle of 
water, so she needed the surgery right away. (Tr., p. 66) As such, she scheduled 
surgery with Dr. Klopper.  
 
Claimant had surgery with Dr. Klopper on April 10, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 75) The 
procedure performed was right C7 hemilaminectomy with C7-T1 medial facetectomy 
and foraminotomy; C6-T1 posterolateral fusion; lateral mass screw instrumentation C6 
bilaterally; and pedicle screw instrumentation C7 and T1 bilaterally, using a 
neuronavigation system for pedicle screw placement. The post-operative diagnoses 
included intractable right upper extremity radiculopathy with weakness; right C7-T1 
foraminal stenosis; and previous anterior cervical fusion.  
 
Claimant saw James Ramos, P.A. with Dr. Klopper’s office, on April 26, 2024. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 42) She reported her symptoms had improved since the surgery, although she 
did have some residual achiness in her arm. Mr. Ramos recommended starting physical 
therapy for the right upper extremity weakness. Claimant began physical therapy on 
May 2, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 80) 
 
Claimant returned to Mr. Ramos on May 31, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 46) She had 
been attending physical therapy and felt it was helpful. She reported her right arm was 
still quite weak, but she had noticed improvement in her grip strength. She was to 
remain off work and continue with physical therapy. 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Klopper on July 8, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 50) She reported some 
ongoing pain down her right arm, but said it was better and continued to improve. She 
also reported some intermittent neck pain, but said it was not terrible. She reported 
being about 70 percent better than before surgery. Dr. Klopper advised claimant that he 
would expect her symptoms to continue to improve with time, and he recommended she 
follow up with orthopedics for her right shoulder since things had settled with the neck 
surgery. Dr. Klopper allowed claimant to return to work for a few days the next week, to 
allow her to ease back into it, and told her to return to see him in three months.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Carreau on July 9, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 53) She reported that her 
radicular pain down the right arm and her weakness had improved substantially since 
the neck surgery, but she continued to have some persistent shoulder stiffness. On 
physical examination, Dr. Carreau noted significant stiffness in the right shoulder. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 54) His assessment was significant right shoulder stiffness “in the setting of a 
remote workers’ compensation injury which resulted in cervical disc herniation.” He felt 
the persistent shoulder stiffness was related to adhesive capsulitis, for which he 
recommended an intra-articular injection.  

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 12 
 
 
On July 29, 2024, Dr. Klopper responded to a letter authored by claimant’s 
attorney regarding her medical condition. (Def. Ex. C, pp. 11-13) Dr. Klopper indicated 
his diagnosis was cervical radiculopathy, and stated that claimant’s symptoms would 
continue to improve with time. (Def. Ex. C, p. 11) Dr. Klopper was asked whether the 
December 22, 2022 fall on concrete was a significant contributing factor to claimant’s 
need for care. He responded “[n]o, on review of the records it appears the radicular 
symptoms started several months after the fall.” He was not able to say whether 
claimant would have needed cervical fusion in the near future if not for the fall, due to 
her cervical issues that were present prior to the fall. He further opined that the fall did 
not necessitate the cervical fusion he performed, and that the need for surgery arose as 
a consequence of progression of the degenerative disease unrelated to the fall. Finally, 
he stated that he had not witnessed any type of symptom magnification behavior while 
he was treating claimant.  
 
Also on July 29, 2024, defense counsel wrote to Dr. Klopper with a summary of a 
conversation they had, and a request for confirmation of his opinions. (Def. Ex. C, pp. 
14-15) The letter indicates that they discussed that it is common after a fusion surgery 
for the vertebrae directly adjacent to the fusion to sustain degenerative changes over 
time. They also discussed claimant’s symptom presentation, noting that claimant was 
not having radicular symptoms in her upper extremities immediately following the injury, 
nor did she complain about such symptoms immediately following the injury. (Def. Ex. 
C, p. 15) Claimant did, however, have a delayed onset of radicular symptoms following 
her injury, after which she presented to Dr. Klopper for evaluation. Because of the 
delayed onset, Dr. Klopper indicated he did not believe the radicular symptoms 
correlated with the injury, but rather correlated with having a prior fusion surgery and 
issues to the adjacent vertebrae as a result. Dr. Klopper indicated he agreed with the 
statement that claimant’s slip and fall injury at work on December 22, 2022 was not a 
significant or substantial contributing factor in her neck and upper extremity 
radiculopathy for which he treated her and eventually performed surgery. Dr. Klopper’s 
signature on the letter is dated August 5, 2024. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Carreau’s office on August 6, 2024, and saw Trisha 
Anderson, P.A. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 56) She reported slight improvement in shoulder pain and 
function following the injection, but overall she continued to have symptoms. Ms. 
Anderson recommended an MRI of the right shoulder since the injection provided only 
minimal relief. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 58) The MRI took place on August 14, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 
59-60)  
 
On August 20, 2024, claimant saw Ashton Redstone, P.A., at CNOS Urgent 
Care, due to increasing neck pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 61) She said she was doing well up until 
August 4, 2024, when she was getting up to a sitting position and felt a pop. She 
reported increasing pain since then, but denied numbness and tingling down her arms 
or into her hands. She reported pain with moving her neck, and pain into the left 
trapezius that was very sensitive. On physical examination, she was hypersensitive to 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 13 
 
palpation about the left trapezius area and cervical spine. X-rays showed no change 
from her prior x-rays, so she was prescribed steroid medication and told to follow up 
with Dr. Klopper. 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Carreau on August 22, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 63) He reviewed the 
MRI, which showed an intact rotator cuff, no significant arthritis, and significant 
thickening of the capsule, consistent with adhesive capsulitis. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 64) Dr. 
Carreau discussed continued activity modification, aggressive stretches, and future 
injections to address the adhesive capsulitis. With respect to her neck, he felt the recent 
exacerbation was likely a muscle strain, but told her to follow up with Dr. Klopper should 
symptoms persist.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Klopper on September 23, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 65) She 
reported the recent exacerbation, which had not improved. She had some pain radiating 
up to her head. On physical examination, she had quite a bit of trapezius spasm on the 
left, and was tender to palpation. Dr. Klopper recommended a CT scan to assess her 
hardware and fusion, as well as trigger point injections. She returned to Dr. Klopper 
again on November 14, 2024, who noted the CT scan looked good. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 71) 
Claimant reported her pain was somewhat better, although she was still getting some 
headaches and neck tiredness/pain. Her radicular symptoms had resolved. Dr. Klopper 
recommended she continue with her home exercise program, and recommended 
additional trigger point injections and possibly occipital nerve blocks for headaches. 
 
Claimant attended an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D., on October 18, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal reviewed claimant’s medical records and discussed her treatment 
and condition with her in detail. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-22) With respect to her more recent 
exacerbation, she told Dr. Bansal that her providers had recommended additional 
physical therapy, but her health insurance had a limit and she was not approved for any 
additional sessions. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 22) She said after physical therapy was discontinued, 
her pain began to return, until the point when she felt the pop in her neck in August and 
later reported to CNOS Urgent Care. She reported that she had a neck injection the day 
prior to the IME with Dr. Bansal, and was scheduled for follow up shortly after. 
 
At the time of Dr. Bansal’s IME, claimant reported continued pain in her neck, 
radiating down both shoulders and into her shoulder blades. She reported pain further 
down into her arms, but said her neck and shoulder pain was worse. The surgery 
helped with the numbness and tingling in her hands. She also reported significant 
headaches due to the neck pain. She reported that the surgery did help, but she 
continued to experience issues with range of motion and strength. She reported 
continuing to work her same job in medical records, but said she is slower since the 
injury, and turning her head to look between her dual monitors all day causes soreness. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 23) 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Bansal noted tenderness to palpation over the 
cervical paraspinal musculature, greater on the right. He noted tenderness to palpation 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 14 
 
anteriorly in her right shoulder. He took measurements of her range of motion, and 
tested sensation in both upper extremities. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 23-24)  
 
With respect to claimant’s cervical spine, Dr. Bansal’s diagnoses included 
intractable right upper extremity radiculopathy with weakness; right C7-T1 foraminal 
stenosis; previous anterior cervical fusion; status post right C7 hemilaminectomy with 
C7-T1 medial facetectomy and foraminotomy; C6 through T1 posterolateral fusion; 
lateral mass screw instrumentation at C6 bilaterally; and pedicle screw instrumentation 
at C7 and T1 bilaterally. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 24) With respect to her right shoulder, Dr. Bansal 
diagnosed referred pain from the cervical spine. 
 
With respect to causation, Dr. Bansal opined that the work-related slip and fall 
was a substantial contributing factor toward the aggravation of claimant’s cervical spine 
condition, directly leading to the necessity for surgical intervention. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 25) He 
explained that the fall mechanism involved a complex multi-planar trauma in which 
claimant experienced an initial forceful posterior translation, followed by an even more 
forceful anterior translation, before impacting the ground on her right facial area. Dr. 
Bansal opined that the trauma sequence created significant shear, compressive, and 
rotational forces on her cervical spine, particularly affecting the segments adjacent to 
her prior C4-C7 fusion. The rigid fusion mass acted as a lever arm, concentrating the 
biomechanical forces at C3-C4 and C7-T1, making those levels especially vulnerable to 
injury, especially given her preexisting cervical spondylosis.  
 
Dr. Bansal noted that prior to the incident, claimant had maintained a relatively 
stable baseline for over eight years following the 2014 fusion. While she did have some 
symptoms and occasional flare-ups, those symptoms were controlled with conservative 
care and did not require surgical intervention. Dr. Bansal opined that the mechanical 
forces from the slip and fall disrupted that stability, initiating a clear progression of 
symptoms that evolved from shoulder complaints initially to clinically significant 
radiculopathy. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 25-26) He further noted that the October 2023 MRI 
showed severe right and moderate left foraminal stenosis at C3-4, along with 
anterolisthesis of C7 on T1, which represented a clear change from her prior condition. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 26) He opined that the anatomic findings directly correlated with the 
trauma mechanism, showing adjacent segment pathology above and below her prior 
fusion. He further opined that the surgical findings, including right C7 radiculopathy 
requiring hemilaminectomy and C7-T1 foraminal stenosis requiring medical facetectomy 
further confirmed the structural nature of her post-traumatic pathology. 
 
Dr. Bansal stated that Dr. Klopper’s opinion failed to account for several aspects 
of claimant’s case, and “appears to contradict his own clinical observations and 
treatment decisions.” Dr. Bansal stated that Dr. Klopper’s dismissal of causation based 
solely on the temporal delay between trauma and documented radicular symptoms 
ignored well-established patterns of post-traumatic cervical pathology. He stated that 
medical literature documents that trauma-induced cervical changes can manifest 
progressively over months, and notes that Dr. Klopper’s treatment records acknowledge 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 15 
 
the significance of the traumatic incident. Dr. Bansal stated that Dr. Klopper’s decision 
to proceed with surgery was based on imaging findings that correlated with the 
traumatic mechanism.  
 
With respect to Dr. Martin’s opinion, Dr. Bansal opined that his attribution of 
claimant’s cervical pathology to age, genetics, and “anthropomorphic” factors is 
“fundamentally flawed and scientifically unsupportable.” He stated that if Dr. Martin’s 
opinion was correct, “we would expect to see a gradual symmetric progression of 
degeneration over time." Instead, records demonstrate an abrupt change in her 
condition following a well-documented trauma. Dr. Bansal opined that the asymmetric 
nature of claimant’s post-injury pathology, predominant on the right side where the 
impact occurred, argues against claimant’s issues being solely degenerative in nature. 
Dr. Bansal concluded that the abrupt change in claimant’s clinical course with the 
development of progressive radicular symptoms and structural changes seen on 
imaging cannot be explained by the gradual process Dr. Martin suggests, and fails to 
account for the role of biomechanical trauma in accelerating and exacerbating 
underlying pathology, which is “a well-established principle in spine care.” (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 
26-27) 
 
Dr. Bansal further opined that the December 22, 2022 trauma was the “direct 
catalyst” necessitating claimant’s cervical surgery. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 27) Prior to the incident, 
claimant only needed intermittent conservative care for predominately mechanical 
symptoms. Dr. Bansal stated that the “violent whiplash mechanism” of the slip and fall 
created significant stress at the mobile segments of claimant’s cervical spine adjacent to 
her fusion. He stated this was evidenced by claimant’s “immediate onset of neck pain” 
and later development of progressive neurological symptoms in a dermatomal pattern. 
He also points to the transition from shoulder-focused treatment to the later discovery of 
clinically significant nerve root compression. He further opined that the failure of multiple 
shoulder injections, followed by dramatic improvement of her radicular symptoms after 
cervical decompression, was evidence that the trauma created structural pathology 
requiring surgical correction. He opined that the work injury did not simply aggravate a 
preexisting condition, but caused a distinct acceleration of pathology directly attributable 
to the documented trauma.  
 
Despite claimant not yet having reached MMI, Dr. Bansal was asked to speculate 
as to an impairment rating. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 27-28) Using the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal opined claimant met the 
criteria from DRE Category IV. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 28) He stated that the range for that 
category is 25 to 28 percent of the whole person. With respect to future medical 
treatment, Dr. Bansal stated that ongoing epidural steroid injections may be needed to 
manage radicular symptoms, as well as trigger point injections and occipital nerve 
blocks as recommended by Dr. Klopper. He also noted that facet joint injections may be 
needed if claimant’s neck pain becomes prominent, and possibly radiofrequency 
ablation if facet blocks provide good relief. 
 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 16 
 
Finally, with respect to Dr. Martin’s statement that claimant showed signs of 
symptom magnification, Dr. Bansal disagreed. He noted that claimant’s postinjury 
symptoms correlated precisely with the objective anatomical findings on imaging. He 
further noted that claimant’s work ethic and behavior demonstrate the opposite of 
magnification, as she continued working full-time despite pain, only seeking treatment 
when her symptoms became functionally limiting. Third, he noted that her response to 
treatment showed internal consistency and honesty, which is inconsistent with symptom 
magnification. (CL. Ex. 1, pp. 28-29) Next, he noted the post-surgical improvement of 
her radicular symptoms provided objective validation of her preoperative complaints. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 29) Finally, he noted that Dr. Klopper, her treating surgeon, noted that he 
had not witnessed any type of symptom magnification behavior during his treatment. 
Based on his own examination, he affirmed that opinion.   
 
On April 1, 2025, Dr. Carreau responded to a letter authored by defense counsel 
regarding a summary of a conversation they had about claimant’s care. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 
72-74) In the letter, counsel noted that when claimant first sought treatment on 
December 22, 2022, she denied numbness or tingling down her arms, and reported 
pain in her right shoulder and right knee. (Def. Ex. F, p. 72) It was not until September 
25, 2023 that her symptoms changed, and she reported radiculopathy/numbness and 
tingling down her right arm. Additionally, claimant never reported any complaints of pain 
or discomfort in her neck to Dr. Carreau. (Def. Ex. F, p. 73) 
 
Dr. Carreau indicated that he agreed with the statement that based on claimant’s 
delayed onset of radiculopathy in her right arm, and her extensive history of neck 
complaints and treatment, he opined that her work injury and/or her job duties were not 
a significant or substantial contributing factor in her neck pain, complaints, or 
discomfort, nor her right arm radiculopathy. Dr. Carreau’s signature on the letter is 
dated April 1, 2025. (Def. Ex. F, p. 74) 
 
On April 3, 2025, Dr. Klopper provided a letter to defense counsel indicating he 
had reviewed Dr. Bansal’s IME report. (Def. Ex. G, p. 76) He disagreed with Dr. 
Bansal’s assessment that claimant’s fall was a substantial contributing factor toward the 
aggravation of her spine condition that culminated in her most recent operation. He 
noted that Dr. Bansal talked about medical literature that documents “trauma-induced 
cervical changes can manifest progressively over months.” Dr. Klopper points out that 
Dr. Bansal did not cite any specific literature, but stated that his point of view is 
inconsistent with the AMA Guides, which is the standard in evaluation and rating of 
post-injury impairment.  
 
Dr. Klopper noted again that claimant’s symptoms of nerve root irritation in the 
neck, specifically pain and numbness radiating to the hand, did not come about until a 
number of months after the fall. Instead, immediately after the fall, claimant had pain in 
her right shoulder area. Dr. Klopper stated that the nerve root compression that led to 
claimant’s surgery affects the hand, not the shoulder. He opined that claimant’s inability 
to abduct her right arm at the shoulder was more consistent with the shoulder injury, 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 17 
 
and there was never any concern or issue with nerves higher up in the neck associated 
with abducting the arm.  
 
Dr. Bansal provided an update to his IME report, dated April 4, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 8, 
pp. 53-56). He indicated that he reviewed claimant’s deposition transcript, dated March 
13, 2025, as well as some additional medical records from claimant’s primary care 
physician and the letters between defense counsel and Dr. Carreau and Dr. Klopper. 
(Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 53-54) Dr. Bansal disagreed with Dr. Klopper’s analysis, noting that his 
dismissal of the causal relationship between claimant’s fall and her subsequent cervical 
pathology was contradicted by well-established medical principals as well as Dr. 
Klopper’s own clinical actions. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 54) 
 
Dr. Bansal notes that Dr. Klopper’s primary argument rests on the temporal delay 
between the slip and fall incident and the reported radicular symptoms. Dr. Bansal 
opined that this reasoning ignored critical aspects of claimant’s post-injury presentation 
and the established pathophysiology of traumatic spinal injury. First, he stated that 
claimant’s testimony contradicted the assertion, as she reported immediate and 
significant pain in the right shoulder and scapular area post-injury. He said that she 
consistently told providers the pain was “right here, coming down” while indicating to her 
upper shoulder and scapular region, which corresponds to the referral pattern of 
cervical radiculopathy. He noted that her inability to identify it specifically as “neck pain” 
reflects her “medical understanding as a layperson, not the absence of radicular 
symptoms.”  
 
Next, Dr. Bansal states that medical literature is “replete” with evidence that 
trauma to a previously fused spine creates biomechanical stress at adjacent segments 
that frequently manifest as progressive symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 54-55) He again 
neglects to identify any specific medical literature, however. He then notes that Dr. 
Klopper’s reference to the AMA Guides is irrelevant to causation, as the Guides focus 
on impairment rating and methodology, not causation analysis in complex spine cases. 
(Cl. Ex. 8, p. 55) He then turns to Dr. Klopper’s clinical documentation, noting in his 
operative report that he confirmed right upper extremity radiculopathy with weakness at 
C7-T1, directly adjacent to her previous fusion. He asks why Dr. Klopper would perform 
extensive decompression and fusion surgery targeting these levels if he “truly believed 
these findings were unrelated to trauma.”  
 
Dr. Bansal also opined that dismissing causation in this case would require one 
to believe that some other intervening trauma occurred during the window of symptom 
development, which is highly implausible given claimant’s limited physical activity during 
that period and consistent pattern of deterioration immediately after the slip and fall. Dr. 
Bansal opined that claimant’s documented progression of symptoms followed the 
“classic pattern” of post-traumatic adjacent segment degeneration, as she reported 
progressive weakness in her right arm that worsened over time, followed by swelling 
and eventually numbness and tingling. He stated this evolution is “textbook” for nerve 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 18 
 
compression that worsens as post-traumatic inflammation resolves and is replaced by 
progressive mechanical degeneration.  
 
Dr. Bansal next points to Dr. Carreau’s clinical notes from October 5, 2023, 
where he discussed that claimant’s pain pattern had always been atypical for organic 
shoulder pathology, and it was possible that a cervical disc herniation occurred that was 
the source of her continued shoulder and arm pain. Dr. Bansal stated that his 
assessment directly contradicted Dr. Klopper’s later dismissal of the causal connection. 
I note here, however, that Dr. Carreau had a suspicion that the C3-4 disc herniation was 
the source of claimant’s pain, which was not the case. (See Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26) Rather, Dr. 
Klopper’s surgery, which resolved the radiculopathy, involved C6 through T1. (See Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 75) Additionally, claimant had an epidural steroid injection at C3-4, which did 
not help her symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 29-30; 37) 
 
Dr. Bansal opined that the delayed recognition of cervical pathology was not due 
to a delayed onset of symptoms, but due to the treating orthopedist’s persistent focus 
on shoulder pathology despite clear indications of neurological involvement. He noted 
that once appropriate cervical imaging was obtained, the pathology was immediately 
evidenced and Dr. KIopper proceeded with surgical intervention, “actions that belie his 
current position on causation.” He concluded that Dr. Klopper’s focus on temporal delay 
represented a “selective interpretation” that ignored the full clinical picture and 
progression of claimant’s condition. 
 
I do not find Dr. Bansal’s reasoning persuasive. Dr. Klopper’s actions in 
performing a necessary surgery have nothing to do with causation. Claimant needed the 
surgery regardless of whether the condition was related to work or was personal in 
nature. She testified that after her claim was denied by workers’ compensation, Dr. 
Klopper’s nurse called and said they were setting up the surgery anyway because she 
needed to have it done. (Tr., p. 65) Claimant testified it was her understanding that the 
surgery was somewhat urgent, and that if she did not have it done, her condition would 
get worse. (Tr., p. 66) As such, the fact that Dr. Klopper performed surgery despite his 
opinion that the trauma from the slip and fall did not necessitate the surgery he 
performed is not contradictory nor does it “belie his current position on causation.”  
 
As noted above, claimant’s deposition was taken on March 13, 2025. (Def. Ex. A, 
p. 1) She testified that she told Dr. Carreau right away that she had pain and discomfort 
down her arms and into her hands, and that she told the physical therapist at Athletico 
that she had pain, discomfort, or radiating pain down her right arm and into her hands. 
(Def. Ex. A, pp. 10-11; Deposition Transcript, pp. 37-38) She also testified that she told 
the physical therapist and Dr. Carreau that she had numbness and tingling down her 
right arm and into her hands. (Def. Ex. A, p. 11; Depo. Tr., p. 38) Later in her deposition, 
she testified that she first noticed pain and discomfort in her right shoulder and right arm 
right away after falling. (Def. Ex. A, p. 12; Depo. Tr., p. 42) She said at first it was just 
pain, just hurt, and at that time she had no swelling. She testified that the numbness 
and tingling down her shoulder and arm into her hand did not start immediately. She 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 19 
 
said that around February of 2023, she started noticing things were not getting better, 
and started to notice weakness in her right arm. (Def. Ex. A, p. 12; Depo. Tr., pp. 42-43) 
She still had not developed numbness and tingling or swelling. She said it kept 
progressing, and it was probably about seven months after the injury that she started to 
get the numbness and tingling. (Def. Ex. A, p. 12; Depo. Tr., pp. 43-44) She testified 
that it started slowly swelling, and progressively kept getting worse. (Def. Ex. A, p. 12; 
Depo. Tr., p. 44) She said that when the swelling started, that was when the numbness 
“kicked in” as well, about seven months after the injury. (Def. Ex. A, p. 13; Depo. Tr., p. 
46) It continued to slowly get worse until she was finally told to return to Dr. Carreau in 
September of 2023. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 12-13; Depo. Tr., pp. 44-46) 
 
At hearing, claimant’s testimony was similar. She denies telling Dr. Carreau she 
was not having any problems with her shoulder when he placed her at MMI in April of 
2023. (Tr., p. 53) However, she again testified that between April and September of 
2023, her ability to use her right arm was getting worse, and her hand kept swelling. 
(Tr., p. 54) However, she later testified that the radicular symptoms were present right 
away after the fall. (Tr., p. 76) She said she told Dr. Carreau “I’m in pain,” and trusted 
him to figure out what was going on, but he was focused solely on her shoulder.  
 
On cross-examination, claimant was asked about the discrepancies in her 
testimony then about when the numbness and tingling started, versus her testimony at 
hearing. (Tr., pp. 91-92) Claimant clarified that the pain started right away, and it 
escalated. (Tr., p. 93) She testified as follows: 
 
Q. 
I just want to make sure that we understand here today. Are you saying 
that the numbness and tingling in your right shoulder and right arm started 
immediately after your injury or seven months after your injury? 
 
A. 
The pain started immediately. I started having problems with the 
numbness right away. As I told Dr. Carreau, the tingling – about, I should say, the 
swelling that I felt more. Tingling did start later, sir.”  
 
(Tr., pp. 93-94) However, claimant did not disagree with the medical records that 
indicate she denied numbness and tingling at her appointments with Dr. Carreau 
immediately after the injury. (Tr., pp. 94-95) She reiterated that she just showed him 
where she had pain, which was her shoulder, and he was the one who kept telling her it 
was her shoulder that was injured. (Tr., p. 95) She testified that he focused on her 
shoulder because that was what was hurting, and she did not know that there could be 
something wrong in her neck that could cause the pain to radiate down her arm. (Tr., p. 
96) 
 
 
Claimant disagreed with medical records that indicate she denied numbness and 
tingling in January of 2023. (Tr., pp. 96-97) With respect to records after that date, she 
indicated that she had already told him what was going on, so she did not review it with 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 20 
 
him specifically again. (Tr., p. 98) Rather, when he asked how she was doing, she 
would say “I’m still having the same problems.” (Tr., p. 99)  
 
While I found claimant to be a credible witness overall, she admitted that her 
cancer treatments had affected her memory. (Tr., p. 32) I have difficulty accepting that 
both Dr. Carreau and the physical therapist at Athletico failed to record significant 
symptoms of numbness and tingling over the course of several visits. I find it is more 
likely that claimant’s symptoms progressed the way she stated in her deposition, first 
with pain in her right shoulder, which improved with physical therapy up until Dr. 
Carreau released her from care and placed her at MMI on April 25, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 
15-16) This is further supported by the actions Dr. Carreau took when she returned on 
September 19, 2023, at which time he recorded swelling, numbness, and tingling were 
all present in her right shoulder/right upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 18) He tried another 
shoulder injection, but when that had not helped by her next appointment on October 5, 
2023, and she was then also reporting neck pain, he examined her cervical spine and 
ordered a cervical MRI. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 20-21) The fact that he took these steps 
immediately upon learning about claimant’s numbness and tingling along with neck pain 
suggests those symptoms were not present prior to these visits. Claimant’s deposition 
testimony aligns with the medical records; after she was released from care in April 
2023, she slowly started to develop swelling in her right hand, and eventually also 
experienced numbness and tingling until she was directed to return for medical care in 
September 2023. 
 
Viewing the medical evidence as a whole, combined with claimant’s deposition 
testimony and her testimony at hearing, I find that she has failed to meet her burden to 
prove that the need for her cervical spine surgery in 2024 arose out of and in the course 
of her employment. Both Dr. Klopper and Dr. Carreau provided claimant with extensive 
treatment, and neither has opined that the slip and fall on December 22, 2022 caused or 
substantially contributed to her neck pain, upper extremity radiculopathy, or need for 
surgery. As the treating physicians, I find the opinions expressed by Dr. Carreau and Dr. 
Klopper are entitled to greater weight. 
 
Specifically, after reviewing the medical records, Dr. Klopper noted that 
claimant’s symptoms of nerve root irritation in the neck (pain and numbness radiating to 
the hand) did not come about until a number of months after the fall. (Def. Ex. G, p. 76) 
Further, he explained that the nerve root compression that led to claimant’s surgery 
affects the hand, not the shoulder. The issues with abducting her right arm at the 
shoulder were more consistent with the shoulder injury, which is why there was no 
concern regarding the nerves higher up in her neck. Dr. Bansal’s opinions are based on 
the incorrect assumption that claimant’s right hand swelling, numbness, and tingling 
was present immediately after the slip and fall, which is not consistent with the medical 
records or claimant’s deposition testimony. As claimant has not proven her injury arose 
out of and in the course of her employment, the remaining issues are moot. 
 
 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 21 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).  
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma. The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes of 
nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body. Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence. Injuries that result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable. Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however. Ellingson v. 
Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 
379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974).  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 22 
 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
 
In this case, I found that claimant has not met her burden to prove that the 
condition of her cervical spine that necessitated surgery arose out of and in the course 
of her employment. I accepted the opinions of the treating physicians over those 
provided by the IME physicians. Both treating physicians, Dr. Carreau and Dr. Klopper, 
opined that the slip and fall on December 22, 2022 did not substantially contribute to her 
radicular symptoms and ultimate surgery. While Dr. Carreau made some indications 
that claimant’s shoulder pain could “possibly” be related to her cervical spine, he was 
focused on the herniation at C3-4, which was not where Dr. Klopper operated. 
Additionally, claimant had an epidural steroid injection at C3-4, which did not help her 
symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 29-30; 37) It is well established under Iowa law that a 
possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez, 554 N.W.2d 
at 285. In this case, claimant has not shown a probability that her cervical spine 
condition arose out of and in the course of her employment.  
 
 
Because claimant’s cervical spine condition did not arise out of and in the course 
of her employment, she is not entitled to temporary total disability/healing period 
benefits for the time she was off work for surgery. Additionally, no doctor found any 
permanent impairment related to the right shoulder and knee injuries she sustained 
after the slip and fall. As such, she is not entitled to permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
 
With respect to Dr. Bansal’s IME fee, under Iowa Code section 85.39, an 
employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an examination if the 
injury for which the employee is being examined is determined to be compensable. 
Because claimant’s cervical spine injury is not compensable, she is not entitled to 
reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s fee under section 85.39. All remaining issues are moot.  
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant shall take nothing. 
 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
 
 
 

LEWIS V. SIOUXLAND REGIONAL CANCER CENTER d/b/a JUNE E. NYLEN 
CANCER CENTER 
Page 23 
 
Signed and filed this __8TH __ day of October, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Al Sturgeon   
(via WCES) 
Marshall Tuttle  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be  received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
