Case Number: 5066396
Case Title:  SCHOEN, ALBERT V. REEDER, DUANE
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Schoen Albert-5066396d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ALBERT SCHOEN, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 5066396 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
DUANE REEDER, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
FARM BUREAU PROPERTY & 
  : 
CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY,   : 
 
 
  :    Head Note Nos.:  1100, 1800, 1801, 1803, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
                       1803.1, 2500, 2800, 3000 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Albert Schoen, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Duane Reeder, employer, and Farm Bureau Property 
and Casualty Insurance Company, both as defendants.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on December 11, 2020, via Court Call. The case was considered fully 
submitted on January 8, 2021 upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, Defendants 
Exhibits A-H, and the testimony of claimant and Duane Reeder. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
his employment on September 15, 2017; 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from June 13, 2019, to 
September 6, 2019; 
3. Whether the alleged injury was a cause a permanent disability; 
4. Whether that disability is scheduled member or industrial in nature 
5. The extent of permanent disability, if any, 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Apr-19  15:00:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 2 
6. The commencement date of permanent benefits, if any; 
7. The appropriate rate; 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses (Ex. 
8); 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to an IME under Iowa Code section 85. 39; 
10. Whether there was lack of timely notice pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.23; 
11. Apportionment;   
12. Costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties agree that at the time of the alleged injury, there was an 
employee/employer relationship. They further agree that at the time of the alleged 
injury, claimant was married and entitled to two exemptions. 
While the defendants do not stipulate that claimant is entitled to medical bill 
reimbursement, they will agree that the fees and charges are fair and reasonable and 
that the medical providers would testify to the reasonableness of their fees and/or 
treatment set forth in Exhibit 8 and defendants will not offer contrary evidence. 
Prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid no benefits and defendants are not 
entitled to any credit.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
At the time of the hearing, claimant was a 57 year old person. His educational 
background includes entering the eleventh grade but not completing it. He testified that 
he was not a good student and did not do well in the core subjects of reading and 
writing. He left high school to farm and he has been a farm laborer for most of his 
working life.  
In the early 80s, claimant suffered a serious injury when a large slab of beef fell 
on him. He was advised by a neurosurgeon to not lift anything for two years. Claimant 
abided by that advice and healed however from time to time claimant has suffered 
recurring back pain as a result.  
Claimant began working for defendant employer in 2003. Prior to working for 
defendant employer, claimant was employed as a farm laborer for Doyle Smith from 
1997 to 2003. While working for Mr. Smith, claimant was struck by the hood of a semi 
tractor-trailer and knocked into a silo. He suffered a shattered wrist and loss of some 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 3 
teeth. (JE 1:1) Subsequent surgery fused the right distal radius. (JE 1:3) Mr. Smith did 
not want to pay for the injury and claimant left to work for defendant employer. 
In April 15, 2014, claimant was seen at Unity Point for pain in the left hip area 
after falling from a semi-tractor trailer as well as pain in the right index finger. (JE 2:4) 
Douglas Martin, M.D., treated claimant during that visit and diagnosed claimant with 
significant soft tissue injury in the left hip. (JE 2:5) He recommended an MRI, which 
came back with signs of only minor degenerative changes. (JE 2:8) Dr. Martin 
concluded claimant sustained a significant sprain or strain and sent him to physical 
therapy. (JE 2:8) Dr. Martin further wrote, “because of the length of time since the injury 
has occurred, the prognosis is not as great.” (JE 2:8) By May 19, 2014, claimant had 
improved. (JE 2:12) Dr. Martin wrote,  
Examination done today reveals that this gentleman actually has 
normal flexion and extension capabilities of the left hip today. He 
continues to have problems with internal and external rotation, and 
discomfort over the hip musculature posteriorly is again noted.  His gait 
pattern is much better.  As a matter of fact, you really kind of have to 
watch him to see just a little antalgic gait that he still has left. 
(JE 2:12) Dr. Martin released claimant on June 30, 2014, to regular work with no 
restrictions and finding claimant to be at MMI. (JE 2:16) At this visit, claimant’s range of 
motion was excellent and his gait pattern was normal. Id.  
On or about September 15, 2017 claimant was working in the field with 
defendant employer. He was attempting to attach the hitch. During the process, the 
hitch fell on claimant’s right foot. Claimant testified he thought the pole weighed 100 
pounds. Defendant employer, through Duane Reeder, testified that it was “light.”  Much 
of the defendant employer’s testimony was centered on the weight of the trailer hitch 
and pole in an attempt to discredit the claimant’s testimony. Defendant employer 
claimed that the hitch was light and weighed “only” around 27 pounds. (Ex. G:46) He 
used a neighbor’s scale; however, there was no control model used for the weight such 
as weighing a gallon of milk to show that the scale used was accurate. The pole 
attached to the hitch had two rods of steel. The inner rod could be extended to make the 
pole longer, allowing for more distance between the truck and the trailer. The trailer 
hitch has two short arms that extend from the pole. The two arms have a hole through 
the end where the pin is dropped to secure the pole to the back of the truck. The photos 
show that the bottom of the hitch arm was bent upwards indicating that the force of the 
hitch being dropped on the ground bent the steel. The top of the hitch arm was still 
aligned with the pole. The evidence shows that the weight of the trailer hitch was heavy 
enough to cause injury if dropped on a foot.  
Claimant worked several months following the incident. Duane Reeder testified 
that he did not observe claimant to be limping nor did claimant mention that he was 
injured. Claimant disagrees. He told Mr. Reeder that his foot hurt him and received a 
hostile reply.  

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 4 
Defendants asserted the claimant was not credible during the hearing and 
pointed to a few instances where they allege claimant was inconsistent in his testimony. 
The first was the weight of the trailer pole. While I am not convinced that the pole 
weighed 100 pounds, it does not negate claimant’s credibility that he consistently told 
people that it weighed 100 pounds. That is what he believed based upon his familiarity 
with the trailer hitch and pole. If the pole weighed something less, he was not aware. 
Mr. Reeder’s testimony, however, was that it was “light” even though the pole consisted 
of two steel rods and was heavy enough to cause the bottom arm of the trailer hitch to 
be bent upwards. Even if the trailer hitch was twenty-seven pounds as Mr. Reeder 
testified, it is a considerable amount of weight to fall on a foot.  
Defendants also argue that claimant twisted facts to benefit his case. They assert 
claimant first said that he made Mr. Reeder aware of his injury two to three months after 
the incident but then later changed to say he made Mr. Reeder aware of the injury 
earlier.  
The parties dispute that defendant employer had notice of claimant’s injury and in 
the defendants’ brief, defendants argue that Mr. Reeder was not aware of claimant’s 
injury. The conversation is as follows:  
Schoen testified: 
[Hamilton] Q. Did you tell – did you have a conversation with Mr. 
Reeder that your foot was hurt? 
[Schoen] A. When I got in the pickup after it happened, I said, 
“What did you do that” – “What the F did you do that for?”  And he said, 
“What” And then I said, “You dropped it on my foot,” and he said, “Well 
you didn’t really say anything” and that was it. 
Q.  Did you tell him your foot hurt? 
A. I told him, “What did you do” – I didn’t say it hurt.  I said “What 
did you do that for?” 
Tr. 50:16 – 51:3.  Reeder to a similar extend testified: 
 
[Russell] Q.  Okay.  After this happened, did he mention that he 
was hurt? 
 
[Reeder] A. No. 
 
Q.  Okay. Day of the injury, did he stop working at all? 
 
A. No.  

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 5 
 
Q.  Did he mention it at any time during the day that he was 
injured? 
 
A. No.  
Tr. 143:13/21. 
 
Schoen reports that he did not tell Reeder he injured his foot until 2-
3 months later after the alleged incident.  He testified: 
 
[Hamilton] Q. So after that day, did you have other conversations 
after that day telling him that foot was injured?  
 
[Schoen] A. Yes, a couple months later, yes, about two or three 
months later I said something. 
 
Q. Wait, wait, wait.  Let’s not get too ahead of ourselves.  What did 
you tell him? 
 
A. I said, “You need to turn this over to your insurance company,” 
and he said no.  He wasn’t going to do it.” 
Tr. at 51:4-13 (emphasis added). 
 
Reeder denies that Schoen mentioned anything about a foot injury 
until almost a year later.  Tr. at 144. 
 
[Russell] Q. Did he ever tell you he was injured in 2017? 
 
[Reeder] A. No, did not tell me he was injured. 
 
Q. Did he – when did he mention finally – was it – that he was 
injured? 
 
A. To the best of my knowledge, he mentioned that a year later that 
he was having – his foot was bothering him. 
 
Q. Did you turn it in to work comp at that point? 
 
A. Yes, I turned it in to workmen’s comp when he wanted me to turn 
it in because he said he needed medical attention. 
(Tr. at 144:11-23.) 
The preceding shows how defendant employer was aware that the hitch was 
dropped on claimant’s foot directly after the incident occurred. This is consistent with 
claimant informing Mr. Reeder earlier of a possible injury.  

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 6 
Claimant testified that he believed he saw someone at his family practice clinic 
for the injury but then later acknowledged the medical records did not conform with that 
recollection.  
Claimant testified that defendant employer was reluctant to pay for any injury 
sustained on the job. When claimant hurt his finger in 2011 or 2013, defendant 
employer said “we do not fix fingers or toes.” (Testimony) Claimant has not sought out 
care for the finger and Mr. Reeder testified that while he knew of the injury he presumed 
it was not serious as claimant never asked for care.  
In 2013, claimant fell and injured his left hip. Claimant maintained that Mr. 
Reeder did not want to pay for care, but eventually Mr. Reeder submitted it to his 
insurance company after receipt of a letter from claimant’s attorney. (Ex 1:1) Claimant 
testified that defendant employer was initially reluctant to accept responsibility for the 
injury and said, “if your lawyer sends me another [expletive] letter, you will no longer 
work for me.”  
It is not credible that two steel rods designed to haul loads behind a truck and 
that was heavy enough to cause the bottom arm of the tractor trailer pole to bend 
upward was “light.” Further, Mr. Reeder’s behavior toward injuries was consistent. 
Unless pressed by an attorney, Mr. Reeder did not have any inclination to submit the 
injury of the claimant to insurance. Claimant is a hard worker. He works through pain 
and does not often seek medical treatment. Even after serious injuries, claimant has 
attempted to return to work. He has worked heavy manual labor most of his adult life 
even though he has had a multitude of pain complaints, as defendants point out in their 
brief. During the hearing, claimant withstood a tough cross-examination and did not 
shake or stutter or become overly argumentative. His demeanor was that of a credible 
testifier. Mr. Reeder was more evasive during testimony. Based on the foregoing, it is 
deemed that claimant was more credible than Mr. Reeder. 
Claimant presented to the ER on September 19, 2017, for post-operative 
complaints following an exploratory laparotomy on September 14, 2017.  (JE 3:18-22) 
During this visit, there was no mention of right foot injury.  
Claimant had health insurance and sought out medical care for other issues 
during 2017 and into 2018, however did not seek treatment for his right foot pain until 
August 15, 2018. While defendants’ characterize this as evidence no right foot injury 
occurred on September 15, 2017, it could also be a sign of claimant’s willingness to 
work through pain and not seek care when he could no longer ignore it. Claimant 
returned to work following a surgical procedure on September 14, 2017, for example, 
the day before his work injury.  
On August 15, 2018, claimant presented at Urgent Care with complaints of the 
right foot pain. (JE 4:75) The x-rays were negative but for the 1st MTP joint 
degenerative changes. (JE 4:78) Lindsey M. Stock, PA-C, did not appreciate any injury 
but claimant was insistent that something be done. (JE 4:77) Ms. Stock referred 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 7 
claimant for a foot and ankle evaluation. He was seen on August 27, 2018, by Valerie K. 
Tallerico-Antonopolous, DPM, who determined claimant had an essentially normal 
presentation but for the pain which she felt was out of proportion with the x-ray results. 
(JE 4:80) To address the nerve pain, Dr. Tallerico-Antonopolous increased claimant’s 
Lyrica prescription, which he already took for chronic back pain. (JE 4:81) On 
September 24, 2018, claimant was referred to Dr. Stadsvold for treatment of the nerve 
damage. Dr. Tallerico-Antonopolous felt that the surgery would have limited benefit. (JE 
4:85) Claimant disputed this medical record testifying that he does not recall being told 
the surgery would be unhelpful. 
In the meantime, claimant was being treated for glaucoma. (JE 5:86)  
Claimant was seen on November 8, 2018, by Chad A. Stadsvold, D.O. The 
incident was documented as follows: 
The patient is a 55-year-old male who has had ongoing right foot pain 
since September 2017 when a trailer fell on his right foot.  He has had 
ongoing pain on the top of his foot as well as into his first and second toes 
since that time, preventing him from being able to walk without discomfort.  
With his altered gait, he has gotten increased pain in the left hip region as 
well.  
(JE 3:25) Claimant testified at hearing that he reported to his physicians and medical 
care providers that the pole or tongue of the trailer hitch weighed 100 pounds. In 
addition to the pain in the foot and left hip, claimant described hypersensitivity as well as 
numbness in the top of the foot. (JE 3:25) X-rays from August 2018 revealed moderate 
to severe osteoarthritis of the first MTP joint. (JE 3:28) Dr. Stadsvold was concerned 
that claimant had some damage to the right superficial peroneal nerve and 
recommended further diagnostic testing. (JE 3:28) Dr. Stadsvold also noted that while 
claimant had been off work due to glaucoma surgery, it was advisable to keep him off of 
work specifically due to his foot and ankle issues. (JE 3:29)  
X-rays of the hip taken on December 12, 2018, showed mild to moderate 
degenerative changes in the lumbar spine but no acute or degenerative processes in 
the left hip. (JE 3:36)  Dr. Stadsvold concluded the following: 
IMPRESSION: 
1. Advanced osteoarthritis in the 1st MTP joint. 
2. Chronic appearing fragmentation of the medial sesamoid under the 1st 
metatarsal head, with mild associated bony edema. 
3. Degenerative bony edema at the interface of the 2nd metatarsal base, middle 
cuneiform, and lateral cuneiform. 
4. Moderate peroneus longus tendinopathy, inferior to the ankle joint.  
(JE 3:37) 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 8 
Claimant was seen by Dr. Stadsvold on December 17, 2018, in follow up to the 
MRI. (JE 3:50) Subjectively, claimant had ongoing pain, numbness and hypersensitivity 
on the top of the right foot and left lateral hip pain. (JE 3:50) His gait was antalgic with a 
shorter stride on the right. Id. Claimant walked more on the outer aspect of the right foot 
and exhibited tenderness in the left lateral hip as well as tenderness over the dorsum of 
the right foot into the toes. (JE 3:51) EMG was ordered and Dr. Stadsvold increased 
claimant’s Lyrica prescription to treat the neuropathic pain. (JE 3:51)  
On February 9, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Stadsvold for the complaints with 
the right foot and left hip. (JE 3:69) The NCS/EMG revealed mild right superficial 
peroneal neuropathy. Id. Dr. Stadsvold recommended claimant see Dr. Phistikul, a foot 
and ankle surgeon. Id.  
On February 15, 2019, claimant was seen by Dr. Phistikul. (JE 6:90) Dr. Phistikul 
diagnosed claimant with right foot pain related to the crush injury suffered on September 
15, 2017. (JE 6:90) Dr. Phistikul recommended claimant discuss injection therapy with 
his family doctor but that claimant was not a surgical candidate at this time. (JE 6:90) 
Because of claimant’s ongoing pain, Dr. Phistikul administered a diagnostic injection of 
Lidocaine at the first MPT joint, superficial peroneal nerve medial branch and 
saphenous nerve. The conclusion was that the superficial peroneal nerve block was 
most beneficial as it resulted in a 50 percent reduction of pain. (JE 6:94) Dr. Phistikul 
wrote that the “majority of pain is related to the arthritis and superficial peroneal nerve 
neuritis.” (JE 6:95) After a discussion of options, claimant agreed to surgical 
intervention. Id.  
On June 13, 2019, claimant underwent excision of the superficial peroneal 
neuroma and a first metatarsophalangeal fusion. (JE 3:39) Dr. Stadsvold kept claimant 
off work. (JE 3:41) Claimant began weight bearing on July 22, 2019. (JE 6:102) On 
August 1, 2019, claimant was seen at Tri-State Specialists for an abnormal CT and 
constipation. (JE 6:105) His gait was documented as stable and there were no ongoing 
complaints of pain reported. There was a notation in the surgical history on his foot. (JE 
6:105)  
On March 15, 2019, defendants obtained opinions from Dr. Tallerico-
Antonopolous wherein she opined that claimant’s arthritic changes could be from injury 
but also could be from every day wear and tear and degeneration. (DE B:31) She also 
wrote that “If severe crush injury, must present within days of injury. Because no initial 
presentation it is hard to definitively say his issues were caused by incident as they 
could be non-related and pre-existing as well.” (DE B:32) 
Claimant underwent an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D., on February 19, 2020. (Ex 
4:28) During the examination portion, Dr. Bansal recorded tenderness to palpation over 
the lumbar back with guarding noticed into the left sacroiliac joint, positive Fabre’s test 
on the left, and tenderness to palpation into the sacroiliac joint on the left hip with full 
range of motion. (Ex 4:28) There was mild tenderness to palpation over the distal radial 
aspect and a positive Finkelstein’s test. (Ex 4:28) 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 9 
Dr. Bansal concluded claimant sustained a right foot crush injury as a result of 
the work injury on or about September 15, 2017, and an aggravation of the sacroiliitis 
due to the altered gait. (CE 4:30) Dr. Bansal further opined that as the right foot 
pathology and pain was permanent so is the aggravation to the pre-existing 
degenerative disease in the sacral spine. Id.  
Dr. Bansal assessed a 10 percent lower extremity impairment (4 percent whole 
person) for the right foot and 5 percent whole person impairment to the low back given 
the radicular complaints, loss of range of motion, and guarding. (CE 4:30) He placed 
claimant at MMI as of February 19, 2020. (CE 4:29)  
Dr. Bansal charged $594.00 for the examination and $2,793.00 for the report. 
(CE 4:32)  
Bryan M. Trout, M.D., performed an examination of claimant at the request of the 
defendants. (DE C) His diagnosis was hallux limitus/degenerative arthritis of the right 1st 
metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ) and traumatic neuroma, superficial peroneal nerve 
status post excision. (DE C:33) He opined that it was unlikely that patient’s right foot 
injury caused any permanent damage to the 1st MTPJ but rather traumatic neuroma. 
(DE C:33) The arthrodesis was not related but the neuroma excision was. Id. Dr. Trout 
placed claimant at MMI on July 22, 2019 and assigned a 2 percent whole person 
impairment with no permanent restrictions. (DE C:34) There was no mention of the hip. 
Later, after the defense attorney pointed out that the records previously sent to Dr. Trout 
indicated that claimant did not seek out medical treatment for 11 months. (DE D:35) 
Also attached was an affidavit from Mr. Reeder maintaining claimant made no 
complaints regarding his right foot and that the weight of the trailer was only 30 pounds 
and the falling distance was around 18 inches. (DE D:35) With these documents, Dr. 
Trout revised his opinion to state the neuroma was not related to the work injury. (DE 
D:35)  
On claimant’s application for SSD, he attributes his pain to stomach condition, 
glaucoma, and muscle cramps. (DE A:11) At hearing he testified he did not believe the 
eye problems and stomach condition were debilitating but in the SSD application he 
said that he does not do house or yard work because of limited abilities with sight. (Ex 
A:17)  
Claimant has a lien of $11,475.75 for the medical bills incurred for his foot injury 
and charges of $9,939.00 from Tri-State Specialists. (CE 5)  
Claimant maintains that his average weekly wage was $584.39 with $393.26 as 
the benefit rate. Weeks from July 14, 2017, July 28, 23017, and June 30, 2017 were not 
included in claimant’s calculation as unrepresentative. (CE 7:48) Claimant’s weekly 
wage varied between $420.00 up to $997.50. (CE 7:48-50) On occasion, the weekly 
wage fell below $400.00 such as on February 3, March 31, June 30, July 14, July 28, 
and December 8. The pay during these periods were not consistent with the other 
weeks. Defendants exclude only June 30, 2017, as it was a week claimant was on 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 10 
vacation. For defendants, the rate calculation is $485.77 average weekly wage for a 
benefit rate of $332.66 per week. (DE H:52)  
Claimant has looked for a few jobs since February 15, 2020, including Lowes, 
Home Depot, Wells Enterprises, Menards, Fedex, Seaborg Triumph Foods, among 
others. (CE 6:47)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 11 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
On September 15, 2017, a steel hitch of some significant weight dropped on 
claimant’s foot. He did not seek out immediate medical attention but the facts accepted 
by the undersigned include that claimant had ongoing pain in his right foot that 
worsened as time went on. He eventually sought medical care almost a year after the 
injury occurred. By that time, his nerve pain had become a chronic condition that was 
not likely to be corrected by surgery.  
While there is a large lapse in time between September 15, 2017, when the 
trailer hitch fell on claimant’s foot and August 15, 2018, which is the first date claimant 
sought out medical care for his right foot, his behavior is consistent with someone who 
attempted to work through the pain as he had done in the past. Even though claimant 
had difficulty lifting more than 10 pounds with his right upper extremity for almost a 
decade, he still did heavy manual labor with no official restrictions or accommodations. 
Dr. Phistikul diagnosed claimant with right nerve pain following a crush injury and Dr. 
Bansal opined claimant’s right foot degenerative condition was aggravated by the injury. 
Dr. Trout, the foot surgeon retained by defendants, also initially opined claimant’s 
neuroma was related to the crush injury. Dr. Tallerico-Antonopolous could not rule it out. 
Dr. Trout later changed his opinion based on no new medical evidence but the affidavit 
of Mr. Reeder attesting to claimant’s silence regarding his right foot pain. As discussed 
above, the claimant’s testimony is adopted over that of Mr. Reeder and thus Dr. Trout’s 
revised opinion is based on information that is either inaccurate or not fully proven. The 
greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that claimant developed chronic nerve 
pain as a result of a trailer hitch of some weight, at least 27 pounds, dropping on his 
foot.  
While there were other doctor’s opinions that claimant’s right foot injury was a 
chronic nerve problem, those opinions did not identify an alternate causation theory for 
the chronic nerve issue. Thus based on the expert opinions, the claimant’s right foot 
injury caused subsequent nerve damage resulting in chronic pain.  
That right foot injury caused claimant to walk with an altered gait.  
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a) - (t) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943).  Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936). 
Dr. Stadsvold observed claimant to walk with an antalgic gait with a shorter stride 
on the right. He walked more on the outside of the right foot and exhibited pain in the 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 12 
hip on palpation. Dr. Bansal opined that this antalgic gait was the result of the right foot 
pain and that is consistent with Dr. Stadsvold’s findings. Therefore, it is found claimant 
carried his burden to prove that he sustained a right foot injury on or about September 
15, 2017, when a tractor trailer hitch fell on his right foot resulting in neuritis and a 
sequelae of that right foot injury was an altered gait that caused and/or aggravated 
claimant’s pre-existing degeneration in his left hip and low back.  
A hip injury is generally an injury to the body as a whole and not an injury to the 
lower extremity.  The lower extremity extends to the acetabulum or socket side of the 
hip joint.  For a hip injury to be industrially ratable, disability in the form of actual 
impairment to the body must be present.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 
(Iowa 1986); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Dr. Bansal assigned 5 percent whole person impairment to the low back and 4 
percent whole person for the right foot. Dr. Trout gave an opinion only for the right foot 
and placed the impairment rating at 2 percent.  Claimant is a hard worker who has, in 
the past, shown a strong motivation to return to work. However, given the multitude of 
health issues, many of which are unrelated to the work injury, claimant has filed for SSD 
and shown only a half-hearted attempt to seek new employment. His past work history 
is primarily heavy duty labor which he can no longer perform but not merely due to his 
right foot and hip issues but because of his gastrointestinal and eye issues. He is an 
older worker with no experience in the sedentary to light duty categories of work. 
Defendant employer did not terminate claimant. Claimant choose to quit. Based on the 
foregoing, it is determined claimant has sustained a 25 percent industrial loss.  
Defendants argue that claimant’s recovery is barred by lack of notice.  

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 13 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information, which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that 
it may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense, which the employer must prove 
by a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 
295 N.W. 91 (1940). 
Defendants acknowledge that Mr. Reeder was aware the trailer hitch/pole had 
dropped on claimant’s foot but not that he was injured. There is no requirement that the 
defendant know of the exact injury occurred but rather that there was an incident that 
could have caused an injury. Defendant employer then had an obligation to investigate 
whether an occurrence of an injury resulted from claimant’s work. Defendants did not 
carry their burden to prove that they did not have actual notice of the occurrence of an 
injury.  
As stated above, compensation for industrial benefits begins at the end of 
healing period.  
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
Iowa App 312 N.W.2d 60 (1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
The claimant has not returned to work nor is he medically capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment thus the question is when claimant reached MMI for 
his foot and left hip/low back injuries. Dr. Trout set the date of MMI at July 22, 2019. 
According to the exhibits, his last date of service with Dr. Phistikul was July 22, 2019. 
(See Ex 5:45)  Claimant was still in physical therapy at that point. Dr. Bansal placed 
claimant at MMI as of February 19, 2020. Based on Dr. Bansal’s report and that 
claimant was still attending physical therapy as of July 22, 2019, the date of February 
19, 2020, is adopted as the date claimant reached MMI and thus the commencement 
date of benefits. Claimant seeks temporary benefits from June 13, 2019, to September 
6, 2019. This period of time claimant was still healing and had not yet achieved MMI nor 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 14 
had he returned to work nor was he capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment. Thus, he is entitled to temporary total disability or healing period benefits 
from June 13, 2019, to September 6, 2019.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant seeks reimbursement and payment for medical expenses incurred in 
the diagnosis and treatment of his right foot and left hip/low back. Based on the 
causation finding, claimant is entitled to recover of those medical expenses.  
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment. 
Claimant argues that there are three weeks that are non-representative. 
Defendants excluded June 30, 2017, as it was a vacation week. The exclusion of weeks 
is an argument which benefits claimant and thus it is his burden to prove that those 
weeks should not be counted. Claimant included a handwritten ledger containing the 
amounts paid for the weeks prior to the injury. July 14, 2017, claimant was paid $240.00 
and July 28, 2017, claimant was paid $360.00. Those two amounts do appear to be 
substantially lower than the other weeks and not representative. Thus the claimant’s 
rate calculation is adopted. The weekly benefit rate is $393.26. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement of the examination performed by Dr. Bansal.  
Iowa Code section 85.39 requires reimbursement for an IME and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses “[i]f an evaluation of permanent disability has been 
made by a physician retained by the employer and the employee believes this 
evaluation to be too low.”  Iowa Code § 85.39.     
Dr. Tallerico-Antonopolous provided opinions that did not confirm or deny the 
causation between claimant’s injury and claimant’s right foot issues. The commissioner 
has held that there is a “distinct” difference between evaluations of permanent 
impairment and evaluations to determine causation.  See Reh v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File 
No. 5053428 (Appeal Mar. 26, 2018). Thus the provisions of Iowa Code section 85.39 

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 15 
are not triggered and claimant is not entitled to recovery of Dr. Bansal’s fee and 
examination pursuant to 85.39. However, claimant can recover the cost of obtaining the 
report under Rule 876 IAC 4.33. 876 IAC 4.33.  
Defendants asserted apportionment in the hearing report but this was not briefed. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(7) states:  
An employer is fully liable for compensating only that portion of an 
employee’s disability that arises out of and in the course of the employee’s 
employment with the employer and that relates to the injury that serves as 
the basis for the employee’s claim for compensation under this chapter, or 
chapter 85A, 85B, or 86.  An employer is not liable for compensating an 
employee’s preexisting disability that arose out of and in the course of 
employment from a prior injury with the employer, to the extent that the 
employee’s preexisting disability has already been compensated under 
this chapter, or chapter 85A, 85B, or 86.  An employer is not liable for 
compensating an employee’s preexisting disability that arose out of and in 
the course of employment with a different employer or from causes 
unrelated to employment.  
Claimant did not appear to be compensated for pre-existing conditions and thus 
any apportionment argument does not have sufficient evidence to support a reduction. 
There is no evidence in the record of previous settlements or payments.  
Claimant seeks an assessment of costs. As he is the prevailing party, the costs 
will be awarded. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED:  
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred twenty-five (125) weeks of benefits 
commencing on February 19, 2020, at the stipulated rate of three hundred ninety-three 
and 26/100 dollars ($393.26).  
Claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from June 13, 2019, to September 6, 
2019.  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits, including but not limited to the 
underpayment of the weekly rate, in a lump sum together with interest.  All interest on 
past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 
2018).  

SCHOEN V. DUANE REEDER 
Page 16 
Defendants shall pay directly to the medical providers, reimburse claimant for 
any out-of-pocket expenses, and hold claimant harmless for all medical expenses 
itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 and 8.  
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33, defendants shall pay claimant’s costs of the 
arbitration proceeding as well as the report cost of Dr. Bansal.  
Signed and filed this _19th _ day of April, 2021. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Steve Hamilton (via WCES) 
James Russell (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
