Case Number: 1655940.03
Case Title:  ROTH-JASPER, DEBRA V. KWIK TRIP, INC. D/B/A KWIK STAR, INC./2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Roth-Jasper Debra-1655940.03d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DEBRA ROTH-JASPER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
              File No.  1655940.03 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     
 
 
  : 
 
    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
    
 
 
  :                 
KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a 
  : 
          ARBITRATION DECISION 
KWIK STAR, INC.,  
  : 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ZURICH INSURANCE,  
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:   1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
        1402.60, 1801, 1803, 
 
 
  : 
  
 
        1803.1, 2501, 2701, 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
        2907, 3202 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA,         : 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants.   
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Debra Roth-Jasper, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Kwik Trip, Inc. 
d/b/a Kwik Star, Inc., as the employer and Zurich Insurance, as the insurance carrier 
and Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  This case came before the undersigned for an 
arbitration hearing on March 20, 2024.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, this case was heard via a Zoom videoconference.   
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 12, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, 7 and 8, the Employer’s Exhibits A through E as well as Second Injury Fund 
Exhibits AA through DD.  The employer objected to Claimant’s Exhibit 6 as untimely.  
Ultimately, Claimant’s Exhibit 6, pages 39 through 61 and 65 through 68 were admitted 
into the record.  Claimant’s Exhibit 6, pages 62 through 64 were excluded and are not 
part of this evidentiary record.   
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the 
hearing.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Sep-27  10:54:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on May 16, 
2024.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
her employment on May 21, 2018, including disputes about whether 
claimant’s bilateral arm injuries, shoulder injury, and/or neck injury arose 
out of and in the course of claimant’s employment on the alleged date of 
injury. 
2. 
Whether the alleged work injury caused temporary disability and, if so, the 
extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary total, or healing period, 
benefits, including a claim for a running healing period. 
3. 
Whether the alleged work injury caused permanent disability and, if so, 
whether the injury should be compensated as a scheduled member injury 
or with industrial disability benefits. 
4. 
If permanent partial disability is owed, the extent of claimant’s entitlement 
to permanent partial disability benefits. 
5. 
The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to payment or reimbursement for past medical 
expenses. 
7. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for medical mileage 
expenses. 
8. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation fees. 
9. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care into the future, 
including a request for orthopaedic evaluation for a right ulnar neuropathy 
and right shoulder impingement. 
10. 
Whether claimant proved she sustained a first qualifying injury against the 
Second Injury Fund. 
11. 
If claimant proved a first qualifying injury, the functional loss, if any, 
claimant sustained as a result of that injury. 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
12. 
Whether claimant’s alleged work injury is a qualifying second injury 
against the Second Injury Fund. 
13. 
The extent of permanent functional disability caused by the qualifying 
second injury, if any. 
14. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to Second Injury Fund benefits, if any. 
15. 
The Second Injury Fund’s entitlement to a credit, if any. 
16. 
The commencement date for Second Injury Fund benefits, if any. 
17. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Debra Roth-Jasper, claimant, is a 68-year-old woman, who resides in Dubuque, 
Iowa.  Ms. Roth-Jasper is a high school graduate with no post-graduate education.  She 
has worked various jobs since high school, including on a food buffet line, shipping, 
printing, as a supervisor at a printing company, in customer service in a butcher shop, 
as an assistant food service leader and subsequently as a food service leader at Kwik 
Star prior to the alleged date of injury. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper began her employment at Kwik Star in 2013.  She worked as an 
assistant food service leader from 2013 until 2018.  In 2018, claimant was promoted to 
the food service leader.  In this position, she cooked, wrapped sandwiches, loaded food 
racks in the store, and prepared orders from customers.  She described her job duties 
as involving repetitive motion to open oven doors and wrap sandwiches. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper alleges she sustained a work injury as a result of her work 
activities on May 21, 2018.  Claimant has a history of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome in 
2014, including surgical intervention on both wrists.  She testified she had ongoing 
symptoms in her hands since 2014 and worsening through 2018.  Ms. Roth-Jasper 
explained that she had pain in the 5 to 6 out of 10 range prior to 2018, as well as 
occasional numbness and tingling in her hands prior to 2018.  However, she testified 
that she performed all normal job functions prior to 2018 and did not have tremors in her 
hands prior to 2018. 
Claimant sought medical treatment and was referred to and sought care through 
an orthopaedic surgeon, Ryan P. Cloos, D.O. in October 2018.  Dr. Cloos was the 
surgeon that performed bilateral carpal tunnel releases on claimant in 2014.  Dr. Cloos 
recommended a repeat EMG on claimant’s arms.  After receipt of the EMG results, Dr. 
Cloos diagnosed claimant with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome again in 2018. 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
Defendants scheduled claimant to be evaluated by another orthopaedic surgeon, 
Tyson Cobb, M.D., on February 25, 2019.  (Joint Exhibit 4, pp.51-53)  Dr. Cobb 
diagnosed claimant with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and recommended 
endoscopic surgical intervention on both wrists.  Although he disagreed with the surgical 
approach recommended by Dr. Cloos, Dr. Cobb did concur that the need for bilateral 
carpal tunnel surgery was related to claimant’s work at Kwik Star. 
Claimant returned to Dr. Cloos for further treatment.  Dr. Cloos performed a right 
endoscopic carpal tunnel release on November 11, 2014 and then a left endoscopic 
carpal tunnel release on November 25, 2014.  (Joint Ex. 12, pp. 126-129)  After these 
surgeries, claimant’s symptoms did not totally resolve.  Dr. Cloos ultimately released 
claimant at maximum medical improvement on October 21, 2019, and released claimant 
to return to work without restrictions.   
Dr. Cloos assigned 24 percent permanent impairment for claimant’s carpal tunnel 
syndrome.  However, his rating is not clear whether it applies to one arm, both arms, or 
is somehow a combination of permanent impairment for both carpal tunnel conditions.  
While I find Dr. Cloos’ opinion regarding causation and his opinion regarding maximum 
medical improvement convincing as the treating surgeon that treated claimant both 
before and after the alleged 2018 injury, I do not find Dr. Cloos’ opinion pertaining to 
permanent impairment to be clear or convincing. 
Following claimant’s release by Dr. Cloos, defendants obtained an independent 
medical evaluation performed by Tyson Cobb, M.D. on February 17, 2020.  Dr. Cobb 
opined that claimant qualifies for a zero percent permanent impairment.  Instead, Dr. 
Cobb opined that claimant’s ongoing symptoms, and any related permanent 
impairment, are the result of thoracic outlet syndrome.  Dr. Cobb further opines that the 
thoracic outlet syndrome is not work related. 
Claimant obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by Mark C. 
Taylor, M.D., on July 20, 2020.  Dr. Taylor diagnosed claimant with bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome and opined that the carpal tunnel syndrome is causally related to her 
work at Kwik Star.  Dr. Taylor opined that claimant achieved maximum medical 
improvement for the bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome on January 16, 2020.  Pursuant to 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, he assigned 
10 percent permanent functional impairment for each upper extremity related to 
claimant’s bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  He combined those ratings to assign a 12 
percent functional impairment of the body as a whole. 
Dr. Taylor’s diagnoses and causation opinion is similar to those of Dr. Cloos.  I 
accepted Dr. Taylor’s causation opinion and find that claimant has achieved maximum 
medical improvement (MMI), though I accept Dr. Cloos’ MMI date as most accurate.  I 
find Dr. Taylor’s permanent impairment ratings as convincing and find that claimant 
proved she has ten percent permanent impairment of each arm following treatment for 
the 2018 bilateral carpal tunnel symptoms. 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
Ms. Roth-Jasper sought additional orthopaedic care from Tobias Mann, M.D., on 
July 27, 2021.  Dr. Mann noted at that time that claimant was reporting significant 
tremors in her hands.  He also noted that testing was negative for thoracic outlet 
syndrome at his evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 7, pp. 75-76)  Dr. Mann explained to claimant 
that she needed some additional work-up for her hands but opined, “I do not think that 
this is related to her prior carpal tunnel surgeries.”  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 76)  He 
recommended against further work-up of the cervical spine and suggested that a repeat 
EMG could be helpful to determine if there was persistent or recurrent compression of 
the median nerve demonstrating the need for a third carpal tunnel surgery on either or 
both hands.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 76)  I find Dr. Mann’s opinions somewhat convincing.  He 
identifies tremors in claimant’s hands that appear to be new symptoms after MMI was 
achieved and after release by Dr. Cloos and evaluation by Dr. Taylor.  I accept Dr. 
Mann’s opinion that these symptoms are not related to the prior carpal tunnel surgeries. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper sought and obtained a second independent medical evaluation 
performed by Robin Sassman, M.D., on December 4, 2023.  Dr. Sassman diagnosed 
claimant with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, right ulnar neuropathy, right shoulder 
impingement syndrome, as well as cervicalgia.  Dr. Sassman further opined that 
claimant’s work activities at Kwik Star were a substantial factor in causing her bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome as well as her right ulnar neuropathy.  Dr. Sassman concluded 
that claimant’s work activities were a substantial factor in causing an aggravation of 
claimant’s right shoulder impingement and in the degenerative disc disease in 
claimant’s cervical spine. 
Dr. Sassman opined that claimant was not yet at maximum medical 
improvement.  She recommended additional treatment for claimant’s neck, right 
shoulder impingement, as well as treatment for her right ulnar neuropathy. 
Nevertheless, Dr. Sassman offered a permanent impairment rating for the 
various conditions diagnosed should further treatment not be provided or sought.  
Specifically, Dr. Sassman opined that claimant sustained 24 percent permanent 
functional impairment to the left upper extremity (14 percent of the body as a whole), 38 
percent impairment of the right upper extremity (23 percent of the body as a whole), and 
5 percent of the whole body related to claimant’s neck condition.  Dr. Sassman further 
opined that claimant had 10 percent permanent functional impairment of each arm prior 
to the 2018 injuries as a result of the prior bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. 
The Second Injury Fund sought its own medical opinion via a record review and 
report prepared by Joseph Chen, M.D.  Dr. Chen concluded that claimant’s condition is 
actually an idiopathic polyneuropathy and that none of claimant’s conditions result in a 
work-related permanent impairment. 
The employer had Dr. Mann review the opinions offered by Dr. Chen.  Without 
re-evaluating claimant, Dr. Mann concurred that claimant’s condition is a 
polyneuropathy and is not related to work.  Dr. Mann noted that claimant underwent the 
EMG he recommended.  He further pointed out that claimant’s EMG results are not 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
consistent with a compressive neuropathy.  Therefore, he concurs with Dr. Chen that it 
is more likely claimant’s ongoing conditions are an idiopathic polyneuropathy, unrelated 
and not caused by work. 
Ultimately, I find the causation opinions of Dr. Cloos, Dr. Cobb, and Dr. Taylor 
pertaining to claimant’s bilateral carpal tunnel to be convincing in this record.  Claimant 
credibly testified that her symptoms worsened between 2014 and 2018.  She submitted 
to additional surgical intervention on both wrists, and I find that the bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome diagnosed in 2018 is causally related to claimant’s employment.  
However, her condition stabilized after surgery and I find that she achieved maximum 
medical improvement on October 21, 2019, when released to return to work without 
restrictions by Dr. Cloos.  I accept Dr. Taylor’s causation opinion pertaining to the 
bilateral carpal tunnel as well as his assignment of a 10 percent permanent functional 
impairment of each upper extremity as of his evaluation on July 20, 2020. 
Claimant subsequently continued working and developed additional symptoms.  
However, as noted by Dr. Chen and Dr. Mann, the repeat EMG objectively 
demonstrated a polyneuropathy, as opposed to a compression neuropathy at the 
median nerve (carpal tunnel).  I find that Dr. Cloos appropriately treated the bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome surgically and that claimant achieved MMI from those surgeries 
on October 21, 2019.  I accept the opinions of Dr. Chen and Dr. Mann to explain the 
subsequent development of symptoms and find that claimant failed to prove the 
subsequent symptoms and conditions are causally related to her employment with Kwik 
Star.  Dr. Sassman is the only physician to specifically causally related claimant’s neck, 
shoulder and ulnar nerve issues to work either directly or via a material aggravation.  
Even claimant’s initial independent medical evaluator, Dr. Taylor, does not make this 
leap.   
Claimant’s diagnoses changed between the evaluation she sought with Dr. 
Taylor and the subsequent evaluation she sought with Dr. Sassman.  The changes in 
her symptoms and diagnoses during that period of time are not well explained in this 
record.  Dr. Taylor’s evaluation and findings appear much more similar to the treating 
physicians and the diagnoses appear to change by the time Dr. Sassman evaluates 
claimant.  I reject any causation opinions by Dr. Sassman that assert claimant sustained 
a neck injury, a shoulder injury, or an ulnar neuropathy as a result of work activities.  I 
further reject any medical opinions that suggest claimant’s work activities were a 
material aggravating factor for her neck, shoulder, or ulnar neuropathy conditions. I also 
reject any diagnoses of thoracic outlet syndrome.  
Claimant put forth the initial independent medical evaluation performed by Dr. 
Taylor.  I find the permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. Taylor to be most 
convincing in this record.  Ms. Roth-Jasper clearly has some residual effects from 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and Dr. Taylor’s evaluation appears reasonable and 
sound.  Therefore, I find that claimant proved a 10 percent permanent functional 
impairment of each upper extremity after the 2018 surgeries.   

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
However, I also note that Dr. Sassman offered an unrebutted opinion that 
claimant had a 10 percent permanent impairment of each arm that pre-existed the 2018 
injury dates.  The Second Injury Fund challenged the accuracy of Dr. Sassman’s rating.  
However, no other physician specifically considered whether claimant had residual 
permanent functional impairment after the 2014 bilateral carpal tunnel surgeries.  Given 
that no other physician specifically considered whether there was a pre-existing 
permanent impairment from the 2014 surgeries, I am inclined to accept Dr. Sassman’s 
assessment about claimant’s pre-existing impairment.   
Therefore, I find claimant proved, via Dr. Sassman’s unrebutted opinion, that she 
had a 10 percent permanent impairment in each arm that pre-existed her 2018 work 
related bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  However, I do not find the remainder of Dr. 
Sassman’s opinion convincing in this case.  Therefore, I find that claimant also proved, 
via Dr. Taylor’s opinion, that she had a 10 percent permanent impairment of each arm 
after treatment for the 2018 bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  In other words, I find that 
claimant failed to prove a change in her permanent functional impairment as a result of 
the 2018 work injury.  She proved she had a 10 percent permanent impairment of each 
arm prior to the 2018 work injury and that she still has a 10 percent permanent 
impairment of each arm after the 2018 work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa App. 1996). 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369,374-75,  112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
I found the opinions of Dr. Cloos, Dr. Cobb, and Dr. Taylor credible on the issue 
of whether claimant’s bilateral carpal tunnel symptoms in 2018 are causally related to 
claimant’s work activities at Kwik Star.  Having found that claimant’s bilateral carpal 
tunnel symptoms and condition in 2018 are related to her work activities, I find that 
claimant proved she sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of her 
employment on May 21, 2018.  Specifically, I conclude that claimant proved she 
sustained bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. 
On the other hand, I found the opinions of Dr. Mann and Dr. Chen are most 
credible on the claimant’s claims for ulnar neuropathy, neck injury, and/or shoulder 
impingement syndrome.  I found that claimant failed to prove these conditions were 
caused, or materially aggravated, by her work activities at Kwik Star.  Therefore, I 
conclude claimant failed to prove her ulnar neuropathy, neck injury, and/or shoulder 
impingement injury claims arose out of and in the course of her employment. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper asserted a claim for temporary disability, or running healing 
period, benefits.  When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of 
recuperation from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is 
entitled to temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.33(1) (2015).  Those benefits are payable until the employee 
has returned to work or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar to 
the work performed at the time of injury.  Id.  
In the hearing report, claimant clarified that “Claimant does not seek past 
temporary benefits.  However, if it is determined Claimant is not at MMI, Claimant seeks 
running HP.”  Having found that Ms. Roth-Jasper achieved maximum medical 
improvement, I conclude claimant is not entitled to any temporary total disability, or 
running healing period, benefits.  
Ms. Roth-Jasper also asserts a claim for permanent partial disability benefits.  As 
the moving party, claimant bears the burden of proof to establish any claim for 
permanent disability.  Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial 
disability is compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 
85.34(2)(u).  In this case, I rejected claimant’s claim for injuries to her neck, lunar 
neuropathy, and/or shoulder impingement.  The remaining injuries, which I found were 
caused by claimant’s work activities, involve bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  These 
injuries involve only claimant’s arms.  Arm injuries are considered “scheduled” injuries 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m). 
The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is 
entitled is determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to 
the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf 
Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 
1998).  Benefits for permanent partial disability of two members caused by a single 
accident is a scheduled benefit under section 85.34(2)(t); the degree of disability must 
be computed on a functional basis with a maximum benefit entitlement of 500 weeks.  
Simbro v. DeLong's Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 1983). 
However, in this instance, I found that claimant proved she had a ten percent 
permanent functional impairment of each arm both before and after the 2018 injuries.  In 
other words, claimant did not prove any additional permanent functional disability as a 
result of the 2018 work injury.  I conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to any 
permanent disability benefits as a result of the 2018 bilateral carpal tunnel syndromes. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper asserts a claim for past medical expenses and medical mileage.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, and/or hospital services and 
supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa 
Code section 85.27.  However, claimant bears the burden to establish that an alleged 
injury is causally related to or materially aggravated by, and compensable under Iowa’s 
workers’ compensation law, before medical benefits are owed. 
In her post-hearing brief, claimant clarifies and limits her post medical benefit 
claim.  Specifically, she asserts entitlement to payment or reimbursement for medical 
charges related to a visit at Finley Pain Clinic on December 23, 2019.  (Claimant’s Post-

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
Hearing Brief, page 39)  The corresponding medical record is contained at Joint Exhibit 
3, pages 44 through 47.   
Timothy J. Miller, M.D., evaluated claimant at the Finley Pain Clinic on December 
23, 2019.  At that visit, Dr. Miller provided a cervical epidural steroid injection with x-ray 
guidance.  The diagnosis for which claimant was evaluated and treated on that date 
was “Cervical disc disorder with bilateral radicular pain right.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 44)  
Having found that claimant failed to prove her neck condition was causally related to, or 
materially aggravated by, her work activities at Kwik Star, I conclude claimant failed to 
prove entitlement to payment or reimbursement for the December 23, 2019 medical 
charges.  Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Claimant also asserted a claim for reimbursement of medical mileage expenses 
and outlined that claim in Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  Claimant seeks medical mileage for the 
December 23, 2019 evaluation noted above.  Given my conclusion that claimant failed 
to prove the December 23, 2019 evaluation and treatment are compensable, I conclude 
claimant failed to establish entitlement to medical mileage for that treatment as well. 
In addition, claimant seeks reimbursement for her independent medical 
evaluation with Dr. Sassman on November 30, 2023.  However, as will be discussed 
below, claimant withdrew her claim for reimbursement of that evaluation pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39.  Therefore, I conclude claimant cannot receive medical 
mileage reimbursement to attend Dr. Sassman’s independent medical evaluation if that 
evaluation is not reimbursed under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
The remaining medical mileage claims sought by Ms. Roth-Jasper are for 
treatment at Medical Associates on November 18, 2022, December 8, 2022, January 
27, 2023, and February 2, 2023.  The evaluation on November 18, 2022 was an 
orthopaedic evaluation.  Although there is mention of her neck symptoms as well as 
shoulder symptoms, the primary complaint expressed was symptoms in claimant’s 
bilateral wrists for her prior carpal tunnel releases.  Although the treating surgeon noted 
concerns that claimant’s symptoms were peripheral, I conclude these complaints were 
reasonable to be evaluated as part of her bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and referral 
for further orthopaedic hand evaluation and repeat EMG was made during this 
evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 10, pp. 94-98)  I conclude claimant’s request for medical mileage 
of the November 18, 2022 of 8 miles is appropriate and owed. 
The December 8, 2022 evaluation provided treatment for claimant’s neck and 
right shoulder.  (Joint Ex. 10, pp. 99-102)  Having found claimant failed to prove those 
are compensable, I similarly conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to medical 
mileage reimbursement for that evaluation date. 
Claimant’s January 27, 2023 treatment was for administration of a repeat EMG.  I 
find this was necessary to investigate claimant’s ongoing arm symptoms and determine 
whether the ongoing symptoms were related to bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome or 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
some other causes.  I conclude the medical mileage (8 miles) for the January 27, 2023 
is reasonable and compensable. 
Finally, with respect to medical mileage, claimant asserts mileage for treatment 
on February 2, 2023.  Once again, the evaluation performed on February 2, 2023 was 
for symptoms in claimant’s bilateral upper extremities and potentially related to her 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  This treatment was necessary to determine ongoing 
causation of claimant’s symptoms and is compensable.  Claimant proved entitlement to 
medical mileage for 8 miles related to this evaluation.  Therefore, I conclude claimant 
established entitlement to reimbursement for 24 medical mileages that have not yet 
been paid by defendants.  Claimant’s entitlement for these 24 medical miles is $15.00.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 8, p. 80) 
In the hearing report, claimant asserted a claim for reimbursement of an 
independent medical evaluation.  In her post-hearing brief, claimant asserts in a 
footnote, “Claimant is not [sic] longer seeking reimbursement of an IME but does seek 
to recoup the report portion of the IME from Dr. Sassman as a cost.”  Given this 
concession by claimant in her post-hearing brief, the issue of reimbursement of an 
independent medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 is no longer in 
dispute and any such claim is denied based on this concession. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper also asserted a claim for alternate medical care and specifically 
seeks an order directing defendants to provide an orthopaedic evaluation for right ulnar 
neuropathy and right shoulder impingement.  Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in 
relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
Ultimately, claimant bears the burden to establish a causal connection between 
the condition sought to be treated and claimant’s work before defendants are obligated 
to provide medical care for the condition.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  In this case, I 
found that claimant failed to prove a causal connection, or material aggravation, 
between claimant’s work activities and her alleged ulnar neuropathy and/or shoulder 
impingement syndrome.  Therefore, I conclude claimant failed to prove defendants are 
obligated to provide care for these conditions.  I conclude the alternate medical care 
claim should, therefore, be denied.  Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Claimant also seeks an award of benefits against the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa.  Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789, 792 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, 
Lawyer, Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 471 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355, 358 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300, 304 (Iowa 1970). 
In this case, I found that claimant proved a first qualifying injury to the bilateral 
arms in 2014.  Those injuries resulted in 10 percent permanent functional impairment of 
each arm.  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved a first qualifying injury. 
However, I conclude claimant failed to prove a second qualifying injury.  In fact, 
claimant ultimately produced two independent medical evaluations that ultimately 
proved claimant had a 10 percent permanent functional impairment of each arm before 
the 2018 injury as well as the same 10 percent permanent functional impairment after 
the 2018 injuries.  I conclude claimant failed to prove permanent disability specifically 
related to and caused by the second injury in 2018.  Ultimately, I conclude claimant 
failed to prove a second qualifying injury in 2018 and failed to prove entitlement to 
Second Injury Fund benefits. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  
I concluded that claimant proved a compensable bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome injury 
in 2018.  Therefore, it is appropriate to assess costs in some amount. 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
Ms. Roth-Jasper seeks assessment of two filing fees.  I conclude that 
assessment of one filing fee ($103.00) is reasonable and appropriate.  876 IAC 4.33(7). 
Ms. Roth-Jasper seeks reimbursement for the court reporter fees associated with 
her deposition.  I did not find inclusion of claimant’s deposition transcript helpful or 
necessary.  Rather, it was likely a violation of Iowa Code section 17A.14(1) as inclusion 
of duplicative evidence.  Nevertheless, defendants introduced the deposition as 
Defendants’ Exhibit E.  It was reasonable for claimant to secure a copy of that transcript 
given that it would be used as an exhibit.  I conclude claimant’s expense totaling 
$127.50 should be reimbursed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
Claimant also seeks assessment of her functional capacity evaluation fee as a 
cost.  I did not find the FCE to be necessary or helpful in this case, given that claimant’s 
injuries were determined to be only scheduled and not the cause of permanent 
disability.  I decline to assess any portion of the FCE expense. 
Ms. Roth-Jasper also seeks assessment of the report fee of Dr. Sassman as a 
cost.  Indeed, expert medical reports can be assessed as a cost.  Des Moines Area 
Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 2015).  In this 
instance, the only portion of Dr. Sassman’s opinion I accepted dealt with her 
assignment of permanent impairment following the 2014 injuries related to the alleged 
first qualifying injury for the Second Injury Fund.  That opinion did nothing to prove 
claimant’s asserted permanent disability against the employer and insurance carrier.  In 
fact, Dr. Sassman’s assignment of permanent functional impairment pre-existing the 
2018 work injury actually disproved claimant’s claim for permanent disability against the 
employer.  I conclude it would not be appropriate to assess any portion of Dr. 
Sassman’s report fees as a cost under these circumstances. 
In total, I conclude it is appropriate to assess costs against the employer and 
insurance carrier totaling $230.50.  All other costs claimed are denied. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes no additional weekly benefits from the employer and insurance 
carrier. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s past medical 
mileage totaling fifteen and 00/100 dollars ($15.00). 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s costs totaling two 
hundred thirty and 50/100 dollars ($230.50). 
Claimant takes nothing from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 

ROTH-JASPER V. KWIK TRIP, INC. d/b/a KWIK STAR, INC./SECOND INJURY FUND 
OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) 
as required by this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___27th __ day of September, 2024. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Zeke McCartney  
 
(via WCES) 
Abigail Wenninghoff  
(via WCES) 
Jonathan Bergman   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers ’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal  
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
