Case Number: 20700736.01
Case Title:  LOEW, JUSTIN V. MENARD, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Supreme Court
Source:      Loew, Justin-20700736.01.Supreme Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF IOWA 
 
No. 22–1894 
 
Submitted November 16, 2023—Filed February 9, 2024 
 
 
JUSTIN LOEW, 
 
 
Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
MENARD, INC. and XL INSURANCE AMERICA, 
 
 
Appellees. 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Samantha 
Gronewald, Judge. 
 
A workers’ compensation claimant appeals the district court’s order 
denying his petition for judicial review of agency decision denying his claim for 
workers’ compensation benefits. DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT REVERSED AND 
REMANDED WITH INSTRUCTIONS. 
 
McDonald, J., delivered the opinion of the court, in which all participating 
justices joined. May, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.  
 
Paul Thune of Thune Law Firm, West Des Moines, for appellant. 
 
Kent Smith and Rachael D. Neff (until withdrawal) of Smith Mills Law, P.C., 
Cedar Rapids, for appellees. 
 
 

 
2 
  
MCDONALD, Justice. 
Justin Loew suffered two lower back injuries in the course of his 
employment with Menard, Inc. With respect to the first injury, Loew filed a 
petition for workers’ compensation benefits, and the commissioner found the 
injury caused 20% functional impairment to Loew’s lower back. Loew received 
compensation for that injury based on a 30% reduction in his earning capacity. 
With respect to the second, later injury, the commissioner found the injury 
caused an 8% functional impairment to Loew’s lower back, increasing his 
functional impairment from 20–28%. Based on statute, Loew was entitled to 
compensation for this new injury based “upon [his] functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to [his] earning capacity.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v) (2018). The commissioner concluded, however, that Menard was 
not required to pay compensation in this case. The commissioner reasoned 
Menard was entitled to an offsetting credit because the 30% reduction in Loew’s 
earning capacity was greater than the 28% functional impairment to Loew’s 
back. The commissioner erred in crediting Menard in this case for its prior 
payment. Compensation based on loss of earning capacity and compensation 
based on functional impairment are incommensurables; offsetting one against 
the other is like determining “whether a particular line is longer than a particular 
rock is heavy.” Bendix Autolite Corp. v. Midwesco Enters., Inc., 486 U.S. 888, 897 
(1988) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment).  
I. 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation system dates to 1913. See 1913 Iowa Acts 
ch. 147; Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 672, 676 (Iowa 2015). The 
principles and purposes of the workers’ compensation system are well 
understood. See Baker, 872 N.W.2d at 676. Generally, the workers’ 
compensation system rests on the policy judgment “that the disability of a 

 
3 
  
work[er] resulting from an injury arising out of and in the course of his [or her] 
employment is a loss that should be borne by the industry itself . . . and not 
suffered alone by the work[er] or the employer.” Id. (alterations and omission in 
original) (quoting Tunnicliff v. Bettendorf, 214 N.W. 516, 517–18 (Iowa 1927)). 
The system imposes a series of tradeoffs on employers and employees. “In the 
grand bargain removing workers’ compensation matters from the civil justice 
system, employers receive immunity from potentially large tort lawsuits . . . on 
the condition that they pay compensation benefits for injuries arising out of and 
in the course of employment without regard to fault.” Id. at 676–77. Under this 
system, employers have an “obligation to pay compensation benefits in the 
correct amount promptly when they are owed to injured employees.” Id. at 678. 
To that end, it is “a rule of statutory interpretation deeply embedded throughout 
our caselaw” that “[w]e liberally construe workers’ compensation statutes in 
claimants’ favor to effectuate the statute’s humanitarian and beneficent 
purpose.” Id. 
Under Iowa law, “[e]very employer . . . shall provide, secure, and pay 
compensation according to the [Code] for any and all personal injuries sustained 
by an employee arising out of and in the course of the employment.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). Compensation for an injury resulting in any permanent disability 
“shall be payable to an employee” pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34. 
Compensation for an injury resulting in a permanent partial disability, 
specifically, is governed by section 85.34(2). When an employee suffers a 
permanent partial disability, the employee’s “compensation shall be based upon 
the extent of the disability and upon the basis of eighty percent per week of the 
employee’s average spendable weekly earnings.” Id. § 85.34(2). “For all cases of 
permanent partial disability[,] compensation shall be paid” in one of two ways. 
Id. 

 
4 
  
First, in certain cases, compensation for permanent partial disability shall 
be based on functional impairment to the injured body part and limited to the 
percentage loss of the physiological capacity of the injured body part based on a 
set number of weeks. See id. § 85.34(2)(a)–(v); Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 
N.W.2d 662, 667 (Iowa 2022); Second Inj. Fund of Iowa v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 
543, 547 (Iowa 1995). In these cases, the “extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(x). Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)–(u) lists different body parts and the 
corresponding weeks of compensation that must be paid for an impairment to 
the scheduled body part. To illustrate, section 85.34(2)(a) provides that for the 
loss of a thumb, an employee is entitled to compensation for sixty weeks. Id. 
§ 85.34(2)(a). If an employee suffered a work injury resulting in a 10% functional 
impairment to the thumb, the employee would be entitled to six weeks’ 
compensation (10% of sixty weeks). Permanent partial disabilities compensated 
pursuant to paragraphs (a)–(u) are referred to as scheduled injuries.  
Second, in “all cases of permanent partial disability other than those . . . 
described or referred to in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’ . . . , the compensation shall 
be paid” based on “the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability.” Id. 
§ 85.34(2)(v). Determining an injured employee’s compensation based on the 
employee’s reduction in earning capacity is known as the industrial method. See 
Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 14–15 (Iowa 1993) (stating the 
industrial method measures “the loss to the employee’s earning capacity”). 
Functional impairment to the body is only one of many factors considered in 
measuring an employee’s reduction in earning capacity. See Sherman v. Pella 

 
5 
  
Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 1998). “Measuring the employee’s loss of 
earning capacity requires the commissioner to consider the employee’s 
functional impairment, age, education, work experience, and adaptability to 
retraining, to the extent any of these factors affect the employee’s prospects for 
relocation in the job market.” Id. Our caselaw calls a permanent partial disability 
compensated on the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity an “industrial 
disability.” See id. at 320–21 (“[U]nscheduled injuries are compensated by 
determining the employee’s industrial disability. One arrives at industrial 
disability by determining the loss to the employee’s earning capacity.”); Second 
Inj. Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994) (“Industrial 
disability goes beyond body impairment and measures the extent to which the 
injury impairs the employee’s earning capacity.”). 
Until 2017, all nonscheduled injuries were compensated using the 
industrial method. In 2017, the general assembly changed the method for 
determining compensation for nonscheduled injuries. 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 
(codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(u) (2018)). When an employee suffers a 
nonscheduled injury that results in a permanent partial disability and does not 
return to work or does not return to work at the same or greater compensation, 
the employee’s compensation is determined by the industrial method based on 
the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity. See id. When an employee 
suffers a nonscheduled injury that results in a permanent partial disability, 
returns to work after the injury, and receives at least the same compensation, 
the “employee shall be compensated” for the injury “based only upon the 
employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation 
to the employee’s earning capacity.” Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). 
When an employee suffers from a second injury with the same employer 
resulting in a new disability, the Code makes sure that the employer pays 

 
6 
  
compensation only for the second injury resulting in a disability and does not 
pay compensation for the first injury twice. Iowa Code § 85.34(7). 
Section 85.34(7) provides that an “employer is not liable for compensating an 
employee’s preexisting disability that arose out of and in the course of 
employment from a prior injury with the employer, to the extent that the 
employee’s preexisting disability has already been compensated.” Id. The 
legislature’s stated purpose in enacting section 85.34(7) was to “prevent all 
double recoveries and all double reductions in workers’ compensation benefits 
for permanent partial disability.” 2004 Iowa Acts 1st Extraordinary Sess. 
ch. 1001, § 20. “The general assembly intend[ed] that an employer shall fully 
compensate all of an injured employee’s disability that is caused by work-related 
injuries with the employer without compensating the same disability more than 
once.” Id.  
II. 
With that background, we turn to the facts of this case. Loew has worked 
for Menard, a home improvement store, since 2008. In March 2015, Loew 
sustained a lower back injury arising out of and in the course of his employment 
while unloading patio chairs from the back of a truck. He underwent therapy, 
work hardening, and two surgeries to try and resolve the pain and other 
symptoms associated with the injury.  
In January 2017, Loew filed a petition for workers’ compensation benefits 
against Menard and its insurance carrier, XL Insurance America, for his 2015 
lower back injury. Loew suffered a 20% functional impairment to his lower back. 
Because this was a nonscheduled injury, the commissioner calculated Loew’s 
compensation using the industrial method under a prior version of the law. See 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(u) (2015). After considering all the relevant factors, 
including, but not limited to Loew’s functional impairment, the commissioner 

 
7 
  
found Loew suffered a 30% reduction in earning capacity and was entitled to 
compensation for the same.  
In July and August of 2020, Loew filed two new petitions for workers’ 
compensation benefits for new injuries arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Menard. In the petitions, Loew alleged he suffered an injury to 
his lower back on August 13, 2018, and sustained a cumulative injury to his 
lower back, right leg, and right foot on March 13, 2019. The petitions were 
consolidated. The parties agreed that the above-discussed 2017 amendments to 
section 85.34(2)(v) were applicable. Pursuant to this provision, the parties 
stipulated that “[i]f the alleged injury is found to be a cause of permanent 
disability, Loew [was] only entitled to recover the functional impairment rating 
since he returned to work at the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings.”  
After the arbitration hearing, the deputy commissioner found that Loew 
sustained a new injury to his lumbar spine on August 13, 2018. The deputy 
commissioner found the injury caused an 8% permanent functional impairment 
to Loew’s lower back, increasing his functional impairment from 20% to 28%. 
The deputy commissioner concluded, however, that Loew was not entitled to 
compensation 
for 
his 
new 
permanent 
partial 
disability. 
Relying 
on 
section 85.34(7), deputy the commissioner reasoned: 
This case involves a new injury Loew sustained to his lumber spine 
. . . while working for Menards. Under the 2017 changes to the 
statute, Loew is only entitled to functional loss in this case because 
he remains employed by Menards and he is earning greater wages 
. . . . Loew’s total functional loss for his combined injuries while 
working for Mendards is 28 percent, which is less than the prior 30 
percent award he received . . . following the 2015 work injury. Under 
the plain meaning of Iowa Code section 85.34(7), Menards is entitled 
to a credit for the prior award and Loew is entitled to no additional 
benefits for the 2018 work injury at this time. 

 
8 
  
Loew filed an intra-agency appeal. The commissioner affirmed the “finding 
that claimant sustained permanent functional impairment of eight percent of the 
body as a whole as a result of the August 13, 2018, work injury.” The 
commissioner affirmed that Menard was entitled to a credit. The commissioner 
reasoned “that because claimant was awarded 30 percent industrial disability 
for the 2015 work injury, and because claimant’s total functional impairment for 
the 2015 and 2018 injuries is 28 percent, . . . [the] defendants are entitled to a 
credit for the prior 30 percent award.” Thus, according to the commissioner, 
Loew was “not entitled to receive any additional benefits for the eight percent 
functional impairment sustained by claimant as a result of the August 13, 2018, 
work injury.” 
Loew filed a petition for judicial review of the commissioner’s decision. He 
argued that the commissioner erred in crediting Menard for the 30% industrial 
disability payment. In Loew’s view, section 85.34(7) did not apply here because 
he did not seek compensation for a preexisting disability. Instead, he sought 
compensation only for a new permanent partial disability, to wit, the 8% increase 
in functional impairment caused by his new injury. Further, Loew argued, the 
commissioner’s application of section 85.34(7) did not make sense here. The 
commissioner 
compared 
incommensurables: 
Loew’s 
prior 
injury 
was 
compensated in apples of reduced earning capacity, but his current injury was 
to be compensated in oranges of increased functional impairment. The parties 
also stipulated that compensation was to be based on functional impairment 
rating. The district court rejected Loew’s arguments and affirmed the 
commissioner’s decision.  
III. 
“An individual adversely affected by an action of the workers’ 
compensation commissioner is entitled to judicial review under the Iowa 

 
9 
  
Administrative Procedures Act (IAPA).” Coffey v. Mid Seven Transp. Co., 831 
N.W.2d 81, 88 (Iowa 2013). Iowa Code section 17A.19(10) “governs judicial review 
of administrative agency decisions.” Id. Our review of the commissioner’s 
interpretation of statutes is contingent. If “the legislature clearly vested the 
agency with the authority to interpret the statute at issue,” we give deference to 
the agency’s interpretation and will reverse the agency’s decision only when its 
interpretation is “irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.” NextEra Energy 
Res. LLC v. Iowa Utils. Bd., 815 N.W.2d 30, 36–37 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Doe v. 
Iowa Dep’t of Hum. Servs., 786 N.W.2d 853, 857 (Iowa 2010)). If the legislature 
did not clearly vest the agency with interpretive authority over the statute at 
issue, we review the agency’s decision for the correction of errors at law. Id. at 37. 
We have previously concluded the legislature has not vested the workers’ 
compensation commissioner with interpretive authority regarding Iowa Code 
chapter 85. Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1, 4–5 (Iowa 2012). Therefore, 
we “review the commissioner’s interpretation of Iowa Code chapter 85 for 
correction of errors at law instead of deferring to the agency’s interpretation.” 
Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 243 (Iowa 2018).  
We first address Loew’s entitlement to compensation under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v) (2018). Section 85.34(2)(v) provides two methods for 
calculating compensation for a nonscheduled permanent partial disability. 
Compensation shall be paid using the industrial method based on “the reduction 
in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability.” Id. However, when 
an employee returns to work at the “same or greater salary, wages, or earnings 
than the employee received at the time of the injury,” then “the employee shall 
be compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting 
from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity.” Id. Here, 
Loew suffered a nonscheduled injury to his lower back, and he returned to work 

 
10 
  
at the same or greater compensation. Because Loew returned to work at the 
same or greater compensation, he was entitled to compensation “based only 
upon [his] functional impairment resulting from the injury.” Id. The 
commissioner found the August 13, 2018 work injury caused an 8% permanent 
functional impairment to his lower back. Pursuant to the plain language of the 
statute, Loew “shall be compensated” for the additional 8% functional 
impairment “resulting from the injury.” Id. That equates to forty weeks’ 
compensation (8% of 500 weeks).  
We conclude the commissioner erred in interpreting section 85.34(7) to 
preclude compensation for this new permanent partial disability. The statute 
does not establish a credit system where an employer gets to avoid paying for a 
new disability. Rather, the statutory text limits an employer’s liability for 
preexisting disabilities: the employer “is not liable for compensating an 
employee’s preexisting disability” but only “to the extent that the employee’s 
preexisting disability has already been compensated under this chapter.” Id. 
§ 85.34(7). Loew does not seek to hold Menard liable for a preexisting disability. 
Instead, Loew seeks to hold Menard liable for a new permanent partial disability: 
his work injury of August 2018 that resulted in an 8% functional impairment to 
his lumbar spine. See Warren Props. v. Stewart, 864 N.W.2d 307, 320 (Iowa 
2015) (“A new or additional permanent impairment must be established for an 
impairment to be the sole basis of a new award.”); Reeves v. Plymouth Cnty. Solid 
Waste, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n No. 21006846.02, 2023 WL 6953980, at 
*28 (Oct. 16, 2023) (concluding that employer is liable only for the increased 
functional impairment). Loew has not been compensated for this permanent 
partial disability. Menard is thus liable for the same. The commissioner erred in 
concluding otherwise. 

 
11 
  
Our interpretation of the statute is consistent with the general assembly’s 
stated purpose in enacting section 85.34(7). The purpose of section 85.34(7) was 
to “prevent all double recoveries and all double reductions in workers’ 
compensation benefits for permanent partial disability.” 2004 Iowa Acts 1st 
Extraordinary Sess. ch. 1001, § 20. This case is not a double recovery case. Loew 
suffered an injury in 2015, resulting in a 20% functional impairment to his lower 
back and a permanent partial disability. The commissioner found Loew suffered 
a new injury in August 2018, resulting in a new permanent partial disability, 
and Loew has not been compensated for his new permanent partial disability. 
There is no risk of double recovery here. 
Our conclusion that Iowa Code section 85.34(7) does not preclude 
compensation here is bolstered by another consideration: the offset of a 30% 
industrial disability makes no sense under the circumstances presented. Loew’s 
prior permanent partial disability was compensated based on the reduction in 
his earning capacity, but his new permanent partial disability must be 
compensated based on his loss of functional impairment. These are 
incommensurable, and it makes no logical sense to use one award to offset the 
other. If Loew had sought compensation for his preexisting functional disability 
by seeking to be compensated for more than an 8% functional impairment, then 
section 85.34(7) would apply to limit Loew’s compensation for just an 8% 
functional impairment.  
The workers’ compensation commissioner reached a similar conclusion in 
an analogous case. Prior to 2017, injuries to the shoulder were categorized as 
nonscheduled and based on the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity. 
See Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 667. In 2017, the legislature changed the law and 
made shoulder injuries scheduled member injuries compensated based on loss 
of functional impairment. In Rife v. P.M. Lattner Manufacturing Co., a claimant 

 
12 
  
suffered a shoulder injury under the prior law and was compensated using the 
industrial method, and he then suffered a subsequent shoulder injury to be 
compensated based on loss of functional impairment. Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm’n No. 1652412.02, 2022 WL 265661, at *2 (Jan. 21, 2022). The employer 
claimed it was entitled to credit for payment of the prior permanent partial 
disability. Id. The commissioner rejected that argument, concluding that 
offsetting compensation based on functional impairment by a prior payment 
based on a reduction in earning capacity was comparing apples to oranges. Id. 
We quote the commissioner’s decision at length: 
Not only is there no mechanism in the statute for apportioning 
past compensation for industrial disability against compensation for 
a scheduled member, . . . but the statute, as amended, does not 
support such an apportionment. . . .  
Because claimant’s prior shoulder injury occurred before the 
legislature’s 2017 overhaul of chapter 85, it was not compensated 
as a scheduled member. Instead, claimant’s pre-existing disability 
was compensated under former Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (now 
subsection (2)(v)), which is the section for unscheduled losses that 
provides compensation based on a reduction in earning capacity. 
In determining a claimant’s reduction of earning capacity, 
functional impairment is an element to be considered, but 
consideration must also be given to the injured employee’s age, 
education, qualifications, experience, motivation, loss of earnings, 
severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage 
in employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer’s 
offer of work or failure to so offer. Before the 2017 amendments, this 
agency stated in countless decisions over several decades that 
“[t]here are no weighting guidelines that indicate how each of the 
industrial disability factors is to be considered.”  
In this case, the parties agreed upon a settlement for 
claimant’s prior right shoulder injury. While part of the settlement 
was certainly for claimant’s functional impairment, the agreed-upon 
compensation exceeded what would have been payable for 
claimant’s functional impairment alone. In other words, the parties 
considered other industrial disability factors when arriving at their 
settlement. 

 
13 
  
Claimant’s current right shoulder injury, however, is a 
scheduled member under the newly added Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n). Claimant’s compensation under this section is limited 
only to the extent of loss or permanent impairment of the shoulder 
itself. . . . 
Thus, if defendants in this case were entitled to a credit for the 
entirety of their settlement, which was for industrial disability, 
against claimant’s current scheduled member injury, they would 
receive an unfair excess credit for considerations and factors that are 
not applicable to claimant’s current injury. Put differently, their credit 
would be for apples against an award for oranges. 
I agree with the deputy commissioner that defendants could 
arguably be entitled to a credit based solely upon the functional 
impairment attributable to claimant’s preexisting shoulder injury—a 
credit for oranges against an award for oranges. 
Id. at *1–*2 (alteration in original) (emphasis added) (citations omitted).  
The commissioner’s interpretation of § 85.34(7) set forth in Rife was 
correct, and the same reasoning applies in this case. As the commissioner 
explained in Rife, the application of the apportionment statute under these 
circumstances could result in the employer receiving an excess credit. In 
addition, application of the apportionment statute under these circumstances 
could also result in the employer receiving insufficient credit. “A claimant may 
suffer a functional disability but have no industrial disability if the functional 
disability does not impede his ability to perform the duties of his employment.” 
Whiddon v. S. Concrete Pumping, LLC, 114 So. 3d 18, 22 (Miss. Ct. App. 2013). 
A claimant’s industrial disability can thus be lower than the claimant’s 
functional impairment. See Cowell v. All-American, Inc., 308 N.W.2d 92, 95–96 
(Iowa 1981) (holding that it was error to hold as a matter of law that industrial 
disability had to be greater than or equal to functional impairment); 15 John 
Lawyer & James R. Lawyer, Iowa Practice Series Workers’ Compensation § 13:6, 
at 175 (2022–2023 ed. 2022) (“There is a common misconception that industrial 
disability is greater than functional impairment and is an add-on, i.e., something 

 
14 
  
to be examined on top of functional impairment, but such is not the case. 
Industrial disability can be equal to, less than, or greater than functional 
impairment.” (footnotes omitted)). Imagine if Loew suffered a 20% functional 
impairment due to his 2015 lower back injury but was found to have only a 10% 
loss of earning capacity. Under Menard’s interpretation of the statute, would 
Loew now be entitled to 18% permanent partial disability benefits? We do not 
think so. Either case—excess liability or insufficient liability—demonstrates the 
error in the commissioner’s decision to interpret section 85.34(7) to require a 
credit for incommensurables rather than as a statute that merely precludes 
double liability for a permanent partial disability.  
IV. 
For these reasons, we reverse the judgment of the district court and 
remand this case with instructions to remand this matter to the workers’ 
compensation commissioner for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
DISTRICT 
COURT 
JUDGMENT 
REVERSED 
AND 
REMANDED 
WITH 
INSTRUCTIONS. 
All justices concur except May, J., who takes no part. 
