Case Number: 23700104.01
Case Title:  WESTERN, TODD V. CITY OF DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Western Todd - 23700104.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TODD WESTERN, 
  : 
File Nos. 23700104.01, 23006903.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
     D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :         
CITY OF DES MOINES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
          1803, 2501, 2502, 2701, 2907                           
_____________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Todd Western, claimant, filed two petitions in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendant, City of Des Moines, as the self-insured 
employer.  The case proceeded to an arbitration hearing on August 6, 2024, via Zoom 
conference call.   
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the arbitration hearing.  On the hearing 
report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All those stipulations were accepted 
and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual or legal issues 
relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this decision.  The 
parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 3, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through H.  All exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record without objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of 
the arbitration hearing. However, the parties requested the opportunity to file post-
hearing briefs.  Their request was granted, and the parties filed their briefs on 
September 16, 2024.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on 
that date. 
ISSUES 
In File No. 23006903.01, involving the alleged February 28, 2022, injury date, the 
parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on February 28, 2022. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jan-28  13:56:24     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
3. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care. 
6. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
In File No. 23700104.01, involving the alleged September 28, 2022, injury date, 
the parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant proved an injury to his neck arising out of and in the course 
of his employment on September 28, 2022. 
2. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
3. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if 
permanent disability is awarded for the right arm. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care. 
6. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Todd Western, claimant, is a 66-year-old man.  He is a high school graduate and 
attended one year of community college, but did not obtain an advanced degree.  He 
began his employment at Firestone and worked there for five to six years before 
accepting a position with the City of Des Moines. 
Mr. Western began his employment with the City of Des Moines in 1983 and 
retired from his employment in 2023.  During his 40-year career with the City of Des 
Moines, Mr. Western worked as an equipment operator and subsequently as a heavy 
equipment operator.  A copy of claimant’s job description is included as Defendant’s 
Exhibit A.  However, claimant testified that the formal job description does not 
encompass all his duties as a heavy equipment operator.   

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 3 
 
Claimant described his employment as “heavy duty” and involved climbing 
ladders numerous times and walking on uneven ground.  Claimant testified that the 
City’s equipment was substandard and that he would get “beat up” while operating the 
equipment.  During the winter, Claimant described working 12-hour shifts plowing snow.  
He also described repetitive motion with his hands when operating the various pieces of 
equipment.   
Claimant’s initial injury claim is for a neck and right arm injury occurring on 
February 28, 2022.  Mr. Western initially experienced symptoms of right wrist pain with 
numbness in the third finger.  He sought his first medical care on March 9, 2022, telling 
the physician at that time that his symptoms first appeared the week of February 28, 
2022, without a specific or traumatic injury. 
Claimant was referred for an EMG and subsequently diagnosed with severe right 
carpal tunnel.  Claimant’s nurse practitioner noted that claimant’s employment could be 
a contributing factor to claimant’s EMG findings.   
Claimant’s right arm symptoms and neck symptoms continued, and defendants 
had claimant evaluated by an occupational medicine physician, Larry Studt, M.D., on 
March 7, 2023.  Dr. Studt opined that claimant’s symptoms could be caused by either 
carpal tunnel syndrome or from his neck.  However, Dr. Studt concluded that the more 
likely generator of claimant’s symptoms was the carpal tunnel syndrome because of the 
severe axonal loss of the median nerve demonstrated in the EMG.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 12) 
Dr. Studt contemplated whether claimant’s neck and carpal tunnel syndrome 
were work related.  In his March 7, 2023, office note, Dr. Studt notes claimant’s 
symptoms could emanate from his neck.  However, he notes that claimant had 
degenerative changes in his neck that were thought to be not work related.  He, instead, 
attributed claimant’s symptoms to the right carpal tunnel syndrome, maintained work 
restrictions for claimant, and recommended orthopaedic referral. 
Claimant testified that he never had an injury to his neck prior to February 28, 
2022, nor had he sought medical treatment for neck symptoms prior to that date. 
Nevertheless, he testified to having difficulties with sleep, needing to sleep in a recliner 
and getting up every two hours due to neck symptoms.  He describes his neck 
symptoms as the part of his body that continues to give him the most problems.  Yet, he 
has declined any surgical intervention for his neck.  
Due to the ongoing symptoms in his hand and neck, orthopaedic hand specialist, 
Benjamine Paulson, M.D, at Iowa Ortho evaluated claimant on referral from Dr. Studt.  
Dr. Paulson opined that at least some of claimant’s symptoms were coming from his 
carpal tunnel syndrome and recommended surgical release of the median nerve at the 
wrist.  However, when asked to consider causation, Dr. Paulson opined that the carpal 
tunnel syndrome was not related to claimant’s work for the City of Des Moines.  
Specifically, Dr. Paulson referenced the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and 
Injury Causation, Second Edition, which describes the development of carpal tunnel 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 4 
 
syndrome as a multifactorial issue.  Dr. Paulson opined that “hav[ing] diabetes, having a 
BMI of 56.6, and being of the age of 64 are all listed as having strong evidence for 
development of carpal tunnel syndrome” by the applicable Guides.  Therefore, Dr. 
Paulson concluded, “I do not believe his work, which would involve machine use and 
joystick use would be the forces needed listed on Table 9-21 to be a contributing factor 
for his development of carpal tunnel.”  (Defendant’s Ex. D, p. 8) 
Claimant countered with an independent medical evaluation performed by Brian 
Crites, M.D., a board-certified orthopaedic surgeon.  Dr. Crites evaluated the claimant’s 
neck and right arm.  Dr. Crites acknowledged that diabetes and morbid obesity are 
contributing factors to the development of carpal tunnel syndrome.  However, he 
opined: 
Repetitive hand motions are a known cause of carpal tunnel syndrome.  
This is why bracing is a mainstay of treatment.  If repetitive motions were 
not a significant contributing cause, then immobilization with a brace 
would not be effective as a treatment.  It is my opinion that the repetitive 
hand control manipulation and the repetitive vibrations during the 
operation of heavy equipment performed by Mr. Western was a significant 
contributing causal factor in his right carpal tunnel syndrome.  I agree that 
the etiology of carpal tunnel syndrome is multifactorial, and that diabetes 
and morbid obesity are contributing factors.  But just because those two 
factors contributed does not mean that the repetitive hand movements 
required by Todd’s work did not also contribute.  A single factor need not 
be the sole or even primary factor to be work related.  It just needs to be a 
significant factor.  It is my opinion that the work performed by Todd 
Western for the City of Des Moines was a significant contributing causal 
factor for his carpal tunnel syndrome. 
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 7-8) 
With respect to the carpal tunnel syndrome, I understand the opinions expressed 
by Dr. Paulson and acknowledge that diabetes and morbid obesity may have 
contributed to claimant’s development of right carpal tunnel syndrome.  However, other 
factors also exist that can and likely did contribute to claimant’s development of carpal 
tunnel syndrome.  I find the opinions of Dr. Crites to be thorough, credible, and 
convincing.  I accept his analysis and find that claimant proved his work activities, 
including repetitive hand movements and repetitive vibrations, were a significant factor 
in the development of his right carpal tunnel syndrome.  
Dr. Crites assigns a two percent permanent functional impairment to claimant’s 
right carpal tunnel syndrome.  This impairment rating is offered pursuant to the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 
8)  I find this impairment rating to be convincing and accurate.  Therefore, I find claimant 
proved a two percent permanent functional impairment of his right arm as a result of his 
right carpal tunnel syndrome caused by his work activities with the City of Des Moines.  

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 5 
 
Claimant testified that he submitted to carpal tunnel surgery in November 2023.  
There are no medical records or operative reports to confirm or refute this claim.  Given 
that this is the only evidence available in this record, I find that claimant submitted to 
carpal tunnel release surgery in November 2023.   
Dr. Crites opines that claimant obtained maximum medical improvement six 
months after that carpal tunnel surgery.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 9)  Accordingly, I find that 
Mr. Western achieved maximum medical improvement on the last day of May 2024 
pursuant to the opinions of Dr. Crites. 
With respect to claimant’s alleged neck injury, claimant’s nurse practitioner 
explained to him on February 28, 2022, that “the degenerative changes are not work 
related, and that he should follow up with his primary care provider to see if they 
recommend further treatment for his cervical findings.”  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 8)  Dr. Studt 
indicates on March 1, 2022, that claimant’s cervical degenerative changes are “thought 
to be not work related.”  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 12)  Nurse Swift followed up with a formal report 
on April 21, 2022.  She specifically opines, “Mr. Western’s cervical issues found on the 
cervical MRI are a result of a personal condition and not related to his work.  
Degenerative changes occur due to wear and tear over time.  Mr. Western has not 
indicated any report of cervical injury during his treatment.”  (Defendant’s Ex. C, p. 7)   
Dr. Crites also addressed the cervical spine issue.  Dr. Crites noted that the 
claimant’s neck was asymptomatic prior to February 28, 2022.  He also acknowledged 
that claimant’s cervical spondylosis was pre-existing.  However, Dr. Crites concluded, 
“the repetitive operation of heavy equipment which caused bouncing/jolting and required 
frequent head/neck turning was a significant causal factor in the cumulative material 
aggravation of his pre-existing cervical spondylosis resulting in radiculopathy.”  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 8) 
Defendant responded to Dr. Crites’ report by seeking an independent medical 
evaluation of their own.  Specifically, Trevor R. Schmitz, M.D., evaluated claimant on 
June 28, 2024.  Dr. Schmitz opined: 
His cervical issues are not related to his work for the City of Des Moines.  
He does not have any significant complaints of cervical issues following 
the reported work activities.  Mr. Western endorses to me, he has a 
longstanding history of neck pain.  He also has significant degenerative 
changes throughout his cervical spine.  His neck pain and cervical disc 
degeneration are much more related to his underlying personal health 
condition, which is cervical disc degeneration and his long standing history 
of neck pain, more so than any work activities for the City of Des Moines. 
(Defendant’s Ex. H, p. 21) 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Schmitz also considered whether the underlying cervical issues were 
materially aggravated or lit-up by claimant’s work duties at the City of Des Moines.  He 
specifically opines: 
He did not have any significant evidence of acute inflammation or 
structural injury on his MRI, which would in any way suggest that he lit up 
his neck.  Rather his current symptoms are related to his chronic 
longstanding history of neck pain and his cervical degenerative changes. 
(Defendant’s Ex. H, p. 21) 
Considering the competing medical opinions, I note some concerns regarding the 
claimant’s testimony in relation to those opinions.  Claimant testified that he was hit in 
the head several times by a window in a backhoe while working for the City of Des 
Moines.  This fact is not mentioned or considered by any of the medical professionals.  
This certainly could be considered a traumatic injury prior to February 28, 2022, but is 
not discussed or contemplated by any of the medical experts. 
Although claimant testified he had no prior neck injuries, he later mentioned the 
window issues noted above.  Claimant also testified at the time of hearing that he 
required Tylenol even before the February 28, 2022, date of injury because of 
symptoms.  I found Mr. Western to be a very pleasant and credible witness in this 
respect.  He is clearly a long-time, loyal employee of the City of Des Moines.  I believe 
that he was likely struck in the head prior to February 28, 2022, and that he also 
required over-the-counter medications due to symptoms, including in his neck, prior to 
February 28, 2022.   
Unfortunately, claimant’s independent medical evaluator assumed claimant was 
asymptomatic prior to February 28, 2022.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 8)  This is not an 
accurate history or understanding.  By contrast, Dr. Schmitz recorded a history from 
claimant of long-standing neck symptoms.  (Defendant’s Ex. H, p. 21)   
Dr. Schmitz’s opinion appears to have a history that is consistent with claimant’s 
credible hearing testimony about pre-existing neck symptoms.  I find the opinions of Dr. 
Schmitz to be the most thorough, accurate, credible, and convincing medical opinions in 
this record.  Therefore, I find that claimant failed to prove his alleged neck injury was 
caused by, or materially aggravated or lit up, by his work activities at the City of Des 
Moines. 
Mr. Western also asserts a claim for a work-related, right shoulder injury 
occurring on September 28, 2022.  The City of Des Moines concedes claimant 
sustained a right shoulder injury that arose out of and in the course of his employment.  
(Hearing Report)  However, the parties submitted a dispute about the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability arising from the September 28, 2022, right 
shoulder injury. 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 7 
 
Following the September 28, 2022, right shoulder injury, claimant obtained 
treatment on October 7, 2022.  Larry Studt, M.D., evaluated claimant on the date of 
injury and recommended an MRI of the right shoulder.  That MRI occurred on October 
21, 2022.  Dr. Studt reevaluated claimant on October 25, 2022 and noted ongoing right 
shoulder symptoms.  After reviewing the MRI report, Dr. Studt recommended 
orthopaedic evaluation. 
Defendants authorized orthopaedic evaluation at Iowa Ortho.  On November 1, 
2022, Justin Khoriaty, M.D., performed that orthopaedic evaluation.  Dr. Khoriaty noted 
the MRI demonstrates issues with claimant’s rotator cuff as well as a biceps tendon tear 
and subluxation.  Dr. Khoriaty recommended surgical intervention and claimant 
consented to surgery.  (Joint Ex. 3, pp. 27-30)  Dr. Khoriaty took claimant to surgery on 
January 20, 2023, and performed a right biceps tenotomy, subacromial decompression, 
and extensive debridement of the right shoulder.   (Joint Ex. 4, pp. 31-34) 
Following appropriate post-operative care, on May 22, 2023, Dr. Khoriaty 
performed a four-month follow-up and recorded that claimant reported his pain was well 
controlled and that he was “doing very well.”  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 44)  Dr. Khoriaty declared 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of May 22, 2023, and released claimant to 
activities as tolerated with no formal or permanent work restrictions noted.  (Joint Ex. 4, 
p. 46)  In a June 7, 2023, report, Dr. Khoriaty opined that claimant sustained a two 
percent permanent impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of the September 
28, 2022, right shoulder injury.  (Defendant’s Ex. E, p. 10) 
Claimant responded to the opinions of Dr. Khoriaty by asking his independent 
medical evaluator to evaluate his right shoulder.  Dr. Crites evaluated claimant’s right 
shoulder and identified 12 percent permanent impairment of the right upper extremity, or 
7 percent of the whole person, as a result of claimant’s September 28, 2022, right 
shoulder injury.  Dr. Crites documented his findings as to claimant’s ranges of motion 
and strength in the right shoulder.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)   
Dr. Crites’ impairment rating differs from Dr. Khoriaty in two main respects.  First, 
Dr. Crites’ range of motion measurements were significantly less than those 
documented by Dr. Khoriaty at the point of maximum medical improvement. (Compare 
Joint Ex. 4, p. 45; Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 6 and Defendant’s Ex. F, p. 11)   Dr. Khoriaty 
documented 160 degrees of abduction, while Dr. Crites measured claimant’s abduction 
at 90 degrees.  Dr. Khoriaty measured abduction at 140 degrees, while Dr. Crites 
documented abduction of 45 degrees.  Similarly, Dr. Khoriaty measured 80 degrees of 
external rotation, but Dr. Crites identified only 50 degrees of external rotation.  Claimant 
demonstrated 80 degrees of internal rotation when evaluated by Dr. Khoriaty on May 
22, 2023, but only demonstrated 30 degrees of internal rotation when evaluated by Dr. 
Crites on May 31, 2024. (Joint Ex. 4, p. 45; Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 6; Defendant’s Ex. F, p. 
11) 
The second main difference between Dr. Khoriaty and Dr. Crites’ impairment 
ratings is the fact that Dr. Crites awards a 5 percent permanent impairment of the right 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 8 
 
upper extremity for biceps tenotomy.  Dr. Khoriaty addresses this difference in a 
supplemental report dated June 11, 2024.  In response, Dr. Khoriaty acknowledges that 
“the biceps is a strong supinator and that is its primary function, which is a turning of the 
palm upwards.”  (Defendant’s Ex. F, p. 11)  However, Dr. Khoriaty explains that the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, does not provide 
a permanent impairment for this loss of strength.  Specifically, an impairment rating is 
not offered for this condition because loss of strength is a subjective evaluation.  
Therefore, Dr. Khoriaty notes, “I disagree with Dr. Crites’ 5% impairment rating because 
I feel it goes against the spirit of the AMA Guides to Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, 5th Edition, as he is just arbitrarily assigning this number.”  (Defendant’s Ex. 
F, pp. 11-12)   
Dr. Crites acknowledges, “There are no ratings included in the AMA Guides for 
biceps tendon pathology.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 9)  However, he opines that the AMA 
Guides permit the use of clinical judgment when specific ratings are not provided.  
Using that clinical judgment, Dr. Crites opines that the biceps muscle is a major 
structure of the arm and that the Popeye deformity of the biceps and the reduced 
strength should result in assignment of permanent impairment.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Reviewing the opinions and impairment ratings offered by Dr. Khoriaty and Dr. 
Crites, I note that Dr. Khoriaty is the treating surgeon and had an opportunity to 
evaluate claimant pre-surgically, intraoperatively, post-operatively and to see claimant’s 
progress of symptoms, range of motion, and strength.  Dr. Khoriaty recorded specific 
ranges of motion at the time of maximum medical improvement and his permanent 
impairment rating based on those measurements is convincing. 
Claimant clearly had a significant reduction in range of motion in his right 
shoulder between the MMI declaration offered by Dr. Khoriaty and the evaluation 
performed by Dr. Crites.  No explanation is offered for that reduced range of motion.  
However, Dr. Khoriaty points out that a physical therapist recorded ranges of motion 
quite similar to those documented by Dr. Khoriaty at the time of MMI.  
Ultimately, I find that Dr. Khoriaty is well-informed and applies the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, accurately based on his 
evaluations and treatment of claimant.  While Dr. Crites provides a detailed report and 
examination findings, I find the permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. Khoriaty to 
be more convincing and credible in this case.  Therefore, I find claimant proved a two 
percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of the 
September 28, 2022, right shoulder injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute in this case is whether claimant has proven his neck and/or 
right carpal tunnel syndrome conditions are causally related to, or arose out of and in 
the course of, his employment with the City of Des Moines on or about February 28, 
2022.   

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 9 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
I ultimately accepted the medical opinion of Dr. Crites and found that claimant 
proved his right carpal tunnel syndrome is causally related to his work activities with the 
City of Des Moines.  Therefore, I find the alleged right carpal tunnel syndrome arises out 
of and in the course of claimant’s employment. 
On the other hand, I accepted the medical opinion of Dr. Schmitz as the most 
credible and convincing opinion pertaining to the alleged neck injury.  Dr. Schmitz 
opined that claimant’s neck condition is not related to or materially aggravated by his 
work activities for the City of Des Moines.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant failed to 
prove he sustained a neck injury that arises out of and in the course of his employment. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).   

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 10 
 
With respect to the February 28, 2022 injury date, I concluded claimant proved a 
right carpal tunnel syndrome, which is an injury confined to the right arm.  The right arm 
is a scheduled member for which injuries are compensated pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(m).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Dr. Crites offered a two percent permanent functional impairment of the right 
upper extremity pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.  I found that impairment rating to be credible and found that 
claimant proved a two percent permanent functional loss of the right arm as a result of 
the February 28, 2022, injury. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m), the arm is a scheduled member 
injury and compensation for the arm is based upon a 250-week schedule.  When 
disability is less than total in a scheduled member, benefits are awarded proportional 
based on the percentage of permanent functional impairment to the maximum number 
of allowable weeks for the scheduled member.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  Using 
the maximum 250-week schedule, a 2 percent permanent functional impairment of the 
arm results in an entitlement of 5 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(m), (w).  Given that the neck injury was determined to not have 
arisen out of and in the course of employment, no additional benefits are awarded for 
that injury. 
The parties disputed the applicable date when permanent partial disability 
benefits should commence in the February 28, 2022 injury claim.  Permanent disability 
benefits commence “when it is medically indicated that maximum medical improvement 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 11 
 
from the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(2).   
The parties did not introduce surgical records for claimant’s carpal tunnel surgery 
or introduce good evidence to establish precisely when that occurred.  Therefore, I 
accepted Mr. Western’s testimony and found that he submitted to carpal tunnel surgery 
in November 2023.  Without specific information on the date of surgery, I found that 
claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on May 31, 2024.  Therefore, I 
conclude that permanent partial disability benefits for the February 28, 2022, injury 
commence on June 1, 2024.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
Mr. Western also seeks an award of permanent disability for his right shoulder 
injury occurring on September 28, 2022.  Defendants stipulated that claimant sustained 
a right shoulder injury.  Since 2017, shoulder injuries are compensated as scheduled 
member injuries.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
Two competing impairment ratings were introduced into this record.  I ultimately 
accepted the impairment rating of the treating surgeon, Dr. Khoriaty, as the most 
convincing and applicable impairment rating.  Therefore, I found that claimant proved a 
two percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of 
his right shoulder injury. 
Shoulder injuries are compensated on a 400-week schedule.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n).  Two percent of 400 weeks is equivalent to 8 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits.  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved entitlement to 8 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits for the September 28, 2022, injury.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n), (w).  The parties stipulated that permanent partial disability benefits 
for the right shoulder should commence on May 22, 2023. 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement of his independent medical evaluation 
expense in both files.  Realistically, claimant obtained one independent medical 
evaluation and can only recover those expenses once, even though alleged in both 
files.  Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice if claimant ultimately proves the 
injury for which the examination occurs is compensable.  Section 85.39 also establishes 
pre-requisites that require an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
Iowa Code § 85.39(2).  The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the 
employee attending the subsequent examination.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 12 
 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
Claimant must also establish the reasonableness of the independent medical 
evaluation fees.  MidAmerican Construction, L.L.C. v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 852 (Iowa 
2024).  Claimant did not introduce Dr. Crites’ billing for his independent medical 
evaluation as an exhibit or attach it to the hearing report.  No evidence was introduced 
to demonstrate the reasonableness of the independent medical evaluation fee.  
Therefore, it is not possible to ascertain the expense or charges of that evaluation or 
determine whether those fees are reasonable and typical for the location of Dr. Crites’ 
evaluation without additional evidence.  I conclude claimant failed to establish 
entitlement to reimbursement of his independent medical evaluation fee in either file.  
Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
The parties submitted a dispute about claimant’s assertion of alternate medical 
care in both files.  Neither party briefed the issue.  It is not apparent what additional 
treatment is required, who or what treatment is being sought, or the reason and basis 
for a claim of alternate medical care.    
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
In this scenario, I cannot find that the treatment offered by defendants is 
unreasonable or that alternate care should be awarded.  That being said, claimant 
remains entitled to statutory benefits, including future medical care for the conditions 
that are determined to be causally related and arising out of and in the course of 
employment so long as the care sought remains causally related to the work injuries.  
Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of his costs related to this case.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of this agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  Having 
awarded claimant permanent partial disability benefits in each file, I conclude it is 
appropriate to assess claimant’s costs.  Mr. Western submitted his requested costs in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 3.  He seeks assessment of his filing fees for both files totaling 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 13 
 
$231.75. (Claimant’s Ex. 3)  These are reasonable and permissible costs pursuant to 
876 IAC 4.33(7).  I conclude defendants should be ordered to reimburse claimant’s 
costs in the amount of $231.75. 
ORDER 
In File No. 23006903.01 (2/28/22 DOI): 
Defendant shall pay claimant five (5) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on June 1, 2024. 
Weekly benefits shall be paid to claimant at the stipulated rate of nine hundred 
forty-four and 31/100 dollars ($944.31) per week. 
In File No. 23700104.01 (9/28/22 DOI): 
Defendant shall pay claimant eight (8) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on May 22, 2023. 
Weekly benefits shall be paid to claimant at the stipulated rate of nine hundred 
forty-four and 31/100 dollars ($944.31) per week. 
In both files: 
Claimant remains entitled to future medical care for the conditions found to have 
arisen out of and in the course of employment in this decision so long as the future care 
remains causally related to the work injuries. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs for both files in the cumulative 
amount of two hundred thirty-one and 75/100 dollars ($231.75). 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for benefits paid to date. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits, if any, in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 11.7.   
 
 

WESTERN V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 14 
 
Signed and filed this __28th __ day of January, 2025. 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Christopher Spaulding  
(via WCES) 
Reagan Peterson   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
