Case Number: 19000117.01
Case Title:  ROBERTS, AMANDA V. LINN COUNTY, IA
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Roberts, Amanda-19000117.01.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR LINN COUNTY 
 
LINN COUNTY, IOWA, 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
Petitioner, 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
No. CVCV101813 
v. 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
RULING 
AMANDA ROBERTS, 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
Respondent.  
 
 
) 
 
 
On this date, the above-captioned matter came before the undersigned for ruling on 
Petitioner’s March 10, 2023 Petition for Judicial Review. Having considered the case file, 
applicable law, and written arguments of counsel, the Court hereby enters the following ruling. 
 
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 
 
Petitioner Linn County, Iowa (“Linn County”) petitions the Court for judicial review of a 
final agency action taken by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
(“Commissioner”). The Court summarizes the factual allegations below. 
 
Respondent Amanda Roberts (“Roberts”) became a registered nurse in June 2012. She 
worked as a corrections nurse in State and county correctional centers from approximately 
September 2012 to April 2020, starting at the Iowa Medical and Classification Center. In 
September 2017, Roberts began working at the Linn County Correctional Center (“LCCC”). Her 
duties included evaluating inmates at booking as needed, performing physical and other medical 
examinations, collecting and testing samples (or directing them to the appropriate facility for 
testing), and administering medication. She was also responsible for responding to emergencies 
and assessing injuries when fights broke out.  
 
On June 5, 2019, Roberts was assaulted by an inmate at the LCCC while attempting to 
administer his medication. The inmate, who was occupying a dry cell, flung a milk carton 
containing an unidentified bodily fluid. Roberts described the fluid as being thicker and more 
viscous than water. “[I]t stuck to my skin all over my face and my neck, and I have no idea what 
the fluid was.” Hr’g Tr. 37:20–38:14. The fluid entered her left eye and mouth. She further 
described the fluid as “kind of tast[ing] like you would expect a Porta Potti to smell . . . . Very, 
very foul.” Id. After the assault, Roberts did not immediately wash her face. While she was 
concerned that prolonged exposure to the unknown bodily fluid could give her an infection, she 
“wanted to make sure that the County had the ability to collect whatever they needed to collect to 
aid in prosecuting this individual.” Hr’g Tr. 93:10–17. She testified that no one at LCCC 
instructed her to wash her face, and she does not recall whether she asked anyone if she should 
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 8

2 
 
wash her face, given the stress of the situation. Before she could receive medical treatment, 
Roberts and the on-call sergeant spoke with several individuals to obtain authorization for the 
postexposure workup. Roberts estimates that roughly an hour and a half to two and a half hours 
had passed between the time of the assault and the time she arrived at UnityPoint Health – St. 
Luke’s Hospital (“UnityPoint”) for the workup. UnityPoint drew samples to test for blood borne 
pathogens, including HIV and Hepatitis C. At this initial visit, Cindy Hanawalt, MD PhD 
imposed a work restriction barring Roberts from having contact with inmates at LCCC until 
reevaluation. 
 
Roberts continued receiving follow-up treatment at UnityPoint over the ensuing months. 
On June 24, 2019, Jane Fischer, MD approved Roberts’s request to work part-time at LCCC, for 
a maximum of four hours per day. However, Roberts alleges that upon her return to work, she 
was mistreated by LCCC staff. She testified that her supervisor would no longer speak with her 
and would only communicate with her through sticky notes. Roberts further testified that other 
employees isolated and harassed her, causing her to feel unsafe working in a correctional facility, 
and she stated that another corrections nurse called her Sally Sensitive. Major Pete Wilson 
investigated two incidents of alleged harassment, but concluded there was no evidence of 
misconduct directed at Roberts. 
 
On July 3, 2019, Roberts informed Shirley Pospisil, MD (“Dr. Pospisil”) that “sh[e] has 
tried to go back to work however she has been bearing the brunt of jokes while at work. This is 
causing quite a bit of stress. She is doing very poorly including being sick to her stomach.” JE1–
11. Dr. Pospisil noted that Roberts was showing symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder 
(“PTSD”) and removed her from work duty. Around this time, Roberts also began attending 
counseling with Leonarda Decker (“Decker”) through her husband’s employee assistance 
program. Roberts received treatment and medication management from Sarah von Harz, MD and 
Adam Woods, MD (“Dr. Woods”) starting in July and August 2019, respectively. On August 16, 
2019, Dr. Woods diagnosed Roberts with adjustment disorder, generalized anxiety disorder 
(“GAD”) and ADHD.1 Dr. Woods also gave a provisional diagnosis of PTSD, which he later 
formally diagnosed. Dr. Woods continued to regularly assess Roberts at least until November 3, 
2021. Decker provided a PTSD diagnosis in therapy progress notes dated February 6, 2021 
through May 14, 2021, the latter being Decker’s most recent progress note in the record. 
 
At the request of Linn County Risk Management, Philip Ascheman, PhD (“Dr. 
Ascheman”) completed a psychological evaluation of Roberts on August 26, 2019. Dr. 
Ascheman agreed with Dr. Woods’s provisional diagnosis of PTSD, but he believed Roberts’s 
“symptoms may be better attributed to a diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder With Mixed Anxiety 
and Depressed Mood” or to “a pre-existing Generalized Anxiety Disorder.” Emp.’s Ex. A, at 5. 
He further concluded that Roberts’s “presentation suggests that anger at her employer and 
coworkers is likely to be a major component of her presentation, and may be more limiting than 
her other psychological symptoms.” Id.  
                                                 
1 Roberts was diagnosed with ADHD in her childhood and she was already receiving treatment for this diagnosis. 
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 8

3 
 
Roberts also continued to be regularly reevaluated by Dr. Pospisil. On January 27, 2020, 
Dr. Pospisil took Roberts off work at least until her follow-up appointment on March 30, 2020. 
On March 10, 2020, Roberts underwent a second psychological evaluation by Dr. Ascheman. Dr. 
Ascheman opined that the ongoing and severe nature of Roberts’s symptoms was attributable to 
her “perceived mistreatment by coworkers and being embarrassed” rather than to PTSD caused 
by the assault she experienced on June 5, 2019. Id. at 14–15. “Overall, it is my opinion that the 
patient’s initial presentation was consistent with Adjustment Disorder with Anxiety and 
Depressed Mood, but would now be subsumed under Generalized Anxiety Disorder, which 
appears to be a pre-existing condition.” Id. at 14. Dr. Ascheman further concluded that it was 
“not appropriate for [Roberts to] return to work at her current place of employment, and that 
additional treatment will not result in that outcome.” Id. at 15. 
 
Linn County terminated Roberts’s employment on April 1, 2020. Thereafter, Roberts 
filed a claim with the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner (“Commissioner”) seeking 
temporary and permanent total disability benefits, as well as reimbursement for past medical 
expenses. During the pendency of the administrative proceedings, Roberts underwent another 
mental health evaluation performed by Catalina Ressler, PhD (“Dr. Ressler”). Dr. Ressler gave 
Roberts a primary diagnosis of chronic PTSD with dissociative features, and found that 
Roberts’s limitations caused by her PTSD prevent her from rejoining the workforce. Dr. Ressler 
further concluded that with additional treatment, Roberts may eventually be able to rejoin the 
workforce in a limited capacity.  
 
An arbitration hearing was held before Deputy Commissioner William Grell (“Deputy 
Grell”) on April 13, 2022. Deputy Grell issued an arbitration decision on October 6, 2022 
holding that Roberts had proved her permanent total disability claim under the traditional 
analysis as well as under the odd-lot doctrine. Deputy Grell found “the opinions of Dr. Woods 
and Ms. Decker to be the most credible and convincing,” considering that each “provided 
claimant treatment and evaluated her on multiple occasions,” and that each was well-qualified to 
opine on Roberts’s diagnoses, symptoms, and causation. Arb. Decision 6. He gave little weight 
to Dr. Ascheman’s opinion, reasoning that  
 
Dr. Ascheman provides no explanation why claimant continues to have symptoms 
that were not present prior to her work injury. Claimant was not obtaining ongoing 
psychological or psychiatric treatment for Generalized Anxiety Disorder prior to 
this work event. Yet, she was fully functioning as a correctional nurse. She 
experienced prior traumatic events and incidents but did not require psychological 
or psychiatric treatment until after this work event with the liquid to her face. Again, 
Dr. Ascheman provides no explanation why these symptoms or treatment have been 
ongoing since the work incident if they were the result of a pre-existing condition . 
. . . 
 
Nevertheless, Dr. Ascheman opines that claimant is not fit for duty and cannot 
return to work as a correctional nurse. He further opines that further treatment is 
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 8

4 
 
not likely or expected to enable claimant to return to work in the Linn County Jail 
setting. Yet, Dr. Ascheman recommends no further treatment and no formal mental 
health restrictions. I do not find Dr. Ascheman’s opinions to be consistent, logical, 
or credible on this record. 
 
. . . Claimant required no treatment before that date [of the injury] and was capable 
of full-time work as a registered nurse in the correctional system. Her abilities and 
her mental health have clearly changed, or been materially and substantially 
aggravated, since the work incident. Therefore, I do not find the opinions of Dr. 
Ascheman to be convincing in this case. 
 
Id. at 7–8. To the extent it supported Dr. Woods’s and Decker’s opinions, Deputy Grell accepted 
Dr. Pospisil’s causation opinion. He also accepted portions of Dr. Ressler’s opinion. Deputy 
Grell concluded “that [Roberts] has proven she is at MMI [maximum medical improvement] and 
that her PTSD is permanent in the sense that it is not anticipated to significantly improve in the 
immediate or foreseeable future without additional treatment.” Id. at 6. He awarded Roberts 
temporary total disability benefits from March 24, 2020 through May 20, 2021 and permanent 
total disability benefits from May 21, 2021 for as long as Roberts remains permanently disabled.  
 
Linn County appealed Deputy Grell’s arbitration decision to Commissioner Joseph 
Cortese II (“Commissioner Cortese”). Upon performing a de novo review of the record, 
Commissioner Cortese issued an appeal decision on February 8, 2023, affirming Deputy Grell’s 
analysis, findings, and conclusions. Linn County commenced the instant action on March 10, 
2023. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Linn County brings this action in district court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A.19. 
“Except as expressly provided otherwise by another statute referring to this chapter by name, the 
judicial review provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive means by which a person or party 
who is aggrieved or adversely affected by agency action may seek judicial review of such agency 
action.” Iowa Code § 17A.19 (2023). “The burden of demonstrating the required prejudice and 
the invalidity of agency action is on the party asserting invalidity.” Id. § 17A.19(8)(a). The 
Petition appears to request relief under subsection 10, paragraphs (c), (f), (h), (i), (l), and (n). 
Linn County’s written arguments, however, only cite paragraphs (f), (i), and (n). Therefore, the 
Court limits its review to these three paragraphs.  
 
The court may affirm the agency action or remand to the agency for further 
proceedings. The court shall reverse, modify, or grant other appropriate relief from 
agency action, equitable or legal and including declaratory relief, if it determines 
that substantial rights of the person seeking judicial relief have been prejudiced 
because the agency action is any of the following: 
. . .  
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 8

5 
 
(f) Based upon a determination of fact clearly vested by a provision of law in 
the discretion of the agency that is not supported by substantial evidence in 
the record before the court when that record is viewed as a whole. For 
purposes of this paragraph, the following terms have the following 
meanings: 
 
(1) “Substantial evidence” means the quantity and quality of evidence 
that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and 
reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the 
consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact are 
understood to be serious and of great importance. 
. . .  
 
(i) The product of reasoning that is so illogical as to render it wholly irrational. 
. . .  
 
(n) Otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion. 
 
Id. § 17A.19(10). “In making the determinations required by subsection 10, paragraphs ‘a’ 
through ‘n’, the court shall . . . give appropriate deference to the view of the agency with respect 
to particular matters that have been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency.” 
Id. § 17A.19(11)(c). 
 
“Our review of decisions by the industrial commissioner is on error, not de novo.” St. 
Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 649 (Iowa 2000). However, our review is also “fairly 
intensive” and “we view the record as a whole, which includes a consideration of evidence 
supporting the challenged finding as well as evidence detracting from it.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. 
Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844–45 (Iowa 2011); Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 
N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012). “Evidence is not insubstantial merely because different 
conclusions may be drawn from the evidence.” Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 845. “Evidence is 
substantial if a reasonable mind would accept it as adequate to reach the given conclusion.” 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 649. 
 
Under Iowa Code chapter 17A, expert credibility determinations are generally outside the 
scope of the Court’s review of administrative decisions. “Ultimately, . . . the determination of 
whether to accept or reject an expert opinion is within the ‘peculiar province’ of the 
commissioner.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011). 
“The commissioner is free to accept or reject an expert’s opinion in whole or in part, particularly 
when relying on a conflicting expert opinion.” Id. at 850. Courts do not interfere with the 
commissioner’s rejection of expert testimony unless the rejection was arbitrary or unreasonable. 
Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911–12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
 
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 8

6 
 
Making a determination as to whether evidence “trumps” other evidence or whether 
one piece of evidence is “qualitatively weaker” than another piece of evidence is 
not an assessment for the district court or the court of appeals to make when it 
conducts a substantial evidence review of an agency decision. It is the 
commissioner’s duty as the trier of fact to determine the credibility of the witnesses, 
weigh the evidence, and decide the facts in issue. The reviewing court only 
determines whether substantial evidence supports a finding “according to those 
witnesses whom the [commissioner] believed.” Consequently, both the district 
court and the court of appeals improperly weighed the evidence to overrule the 
commissioner’s findings. 
 
Arndt v. City of Le Claire, 728 N.W.2d 389, 394–95 (Iowa 2007) (quoting Tim O’Neill 
Chevrolet, Inc. v. Forristall, 551 N.W.2d 661, 614 (Iowa 1996)) (emphasis and alteration in 
original). “The courts, in their appellate capacity, ‘are not at liberty to accept contradictory 
opinions of other experts in order to reject the finding of the commissioner.’” Pease, 807 N.W.2d 
at 850 (quoting Dille v. Plainview Coal Co., 250 N.W. 607, 615 (Iowa 1933)).  
 
Linn County argues that Deputy Grell and Commissioner Cortese erred in “not find[ing] 
Dr. Ascheman’s opinions to be consistent, logical, or credible” and in giving more weight to the 
opinions of Dr. Woods and Decker. Pet.’s Br. 8–9; Arb. Decision 6–8. Linn County further 
argues that Roberts, Dr. Woods, and Dr. Ressler are not credible witnesses. Linn County 
concludes that the Commission’s determinations as to the expert opinions are illogical, arbitrary, 
and unreasonable, and if the Court were to reject those determinations, the Commission’s 
findings would not be supported by substantial evidence. 
 
In light of the foregoing authority, the Court cannot disturb the Commission’s credibility 
determinations and weighing of expert opinions while conducting a substantial evidence review. 
Arndt, 728 N.W.2d at 394–95. Deputy Grell clearly and thoroughly articulated his rationale for 
giving little weight to Dr. Ascheman’s opinions. The Court finds his determination to be well 
reasoned. On appeal, Linn County argues that contrary to Deputy Grell’s finding, Dr. Ascheman 
did provide an explanation for Roberts’s ongoing symptoms that were not present prior to the 
assault: Dr. Ascheman opined that Roberts’s “ongoing symptoms are caused by her perceptions 
about her coworkers and her employment.” Pet.’s Br. 11; Emp.’s Ex. A, at 15. However, Dr. 
Ascheman did not clearly identify the cause of the perceptions, at most suggesting a causal 
relationship with pre-existing GAD. He failed to explain how a pre-existing condition, alone, 
could cause the perceptions and resulting symptoms to develop in the aftermath of the assault, 
considering that in the past, Roberts did not suffer symptoms requiring psychological or 
psychiatric treatment after experiencing traumatic events.2 And even assuming a causal 
relationship existed between pre-existing GAD, the perceptions, and the symptoms, this would 
not preclude Roberts from recovering permanent total disability benefits. “[O]ur law has 
                                                 
2 Roberts testified that during her career as a corrections nurse, she was assaulted on numerous occasions and 
responded to suicides and attempted suicides, but she did not experience lasting symptoms after being exposed to 
those traumatic incidents. 
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 8

7 
 
recognized the distinction between preexisting conditions and preexisting disability. Full 
compensation is allowed for the result of workplace activities aggravating a preexisting 
condition.” Floyd v. Quaker Oats, 646 N.W.2d 105, 110 (Iowa 2002). Even if the Court were to 
set aside the highly deferential standard and perform a de novo review, the Court would reach 
the same conclusions as the Commission. 
 
The Court is not persuaded that the Commission made an arbitrary or unreasonable 
decision with respect to expert opinions that would justify disturbing the decision or reversing 
the final agency action. Poula, 516 N.W.2d at 912. The Court finds that substantial evidence 
supports Deputy Grell and Commissioner Cortese’s findings according to the witnesses whom 
they believed. Arndt, 728 N.W.2d at 395. Those witnesses have consistently attributed Roberts’s 
symptoms to PTSD caused by the June 5, 2019 assault. Therefore, the Court affirms the 
Commission’s decision in its entirety. 
 
RULING 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that Linn County’s March 10, 2023 Petition for 
Judicial Review is DISMISSED. Any outstanding court costs are assessed to Linn County. This 
matter is deemed closed and finalized. 
 
Clerk to notify. 
 
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 8

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV101813
LINN COUNTY, IOWA VS AMANDA ROBERTS
Type:
DISMISSED PER COURT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2023-08-25 15:49:02
E-FILED                    CVCV101813 - 2023 AUG 25 03:49 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 8
