Case Number: 24000665.01
Case Title:  SANSORES-MEDRANO, KIMBERLY V. ZOETIS, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Sansores-Medrano Kimberly-24000665.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
KIMBERLY SANSORES-MEDRANO, 
No. 24000665.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
ZOETIS, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
AIU INSURANCE CO., 
Headnote: 2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C ASE . 
On November 15, 2024, Kimberly Sansores-Medrano applied for alternate care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48. The 
petition concerning application for alternate care is an agency form, on which Paragraph 
1 includes a blank for the employer’s address and Paragraph 2 a blank for the 
insurance carrier’s address. Sansores-Medrano filled in the address blank for each 
paragraph. Amy L. Auringer, a staff person at the firm of claimant’s counsel, completed 
the “Proof of Service” section of the form, averring that she mailed a copy of the 
completed petition by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the address for 
Zoetis provided in Paragraph 1. 
In addition to complying with the requirement to serve the employer, Sansores-
Medrano also sent the petition to AIU via certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested. 
Sansores-Medrano filed proof that the U.S. Postal Service completed service to both 
defendants successfully. Sansores-Medrano filed a copy of the receipt for Zoetis, dated 
November 19, 2024, and the same for AIU, dated November 18, 2024. 
The original notice portion of the agency form informs the named defendants that 
the claimant has filed a petition with the agency. It also states in pertinent part:  
You may file an answer, but it is not necessary due to time constraints. If 
no answer is filed, you will be required to provide a response at a hearing. 
Failure to participate may impact your rights and responsibilities under 
Iowa Code section 85.27. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-26  16:35:58     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SANSORES-MEDRANO V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
The agency scheduled a telephone alternate care hearing and sent notice to the 
parties. The notice identified November 26, 2024, as the date of hearing and 10:30 a.m. 
central time as the hearing’s start time. The notice also states in pertinent part, “You 
must be prepared to present your case at the time of hearing. Failure to participate may 
impact your rights and responsibilities under Iowa workers’ compensation law.” Further, 
it warns that the parties must provide a phone number for the agency to call in order to 
participate in the hearing and the agency “will not be able to call you for the hearing if 
you do not provide a phone number.” Under “Information for Employer/Insurance 
Carrier,” the notice states, “If you do not file a written answer, you will be required to 
respond on the record to the allegations in the claimant’s petition.” 
With the enactment of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, “‘It was the purpose 
of the legislature to create a tribunal to do rough justice—speedy, summary, informal, 
untechnical.’” Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130, 133 (Iowa 2003) 
(quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 191 Iowa 845, 847, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921)). Under 
Iowa Code section 10A.302, the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC) “is 
responsible for the administration of the laws of this state relating to workers’ 
compensation”. Iowa Code section 10A.310(1)(a) empowers the commissioner by 
expressly including in its list of duties the power to “adopt and enforce rules necessary 
to implement” Iowa’s workers’ compensation statutes, including Iowa Code chapter 85, 
which contains section 85.27.  
To that end, the commissioner promulgated rules governing contested case 
proceedings that are codified in chapter 876—4 of the Iowa Administrative Code. Rule 
876—4.35 states that the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure (IRCP) “shall govern the 
contested case proceedings before the workers’ compensation commissioner unless 
the provisions are in conflict with” the administrative rules adopted by the commissioner 
or a provision of an Iowa workers’ compensation statute or the Iowa Administrative 
Procedure Act (IAPA), Iowa Code chapter 17A. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.6 identifies Form 100C, Original Notice 
and Petition Concerning Application for Alternate Care, as within its purview. Rule 
876—4.8(1) provides in pertinent part: 
No action shall be taken by the workers’ compensation commissioner on 
any contested case against an adverse party unless the adverse party has 
answered or unless it can be shown by proper proof that the adverse party 
has been properly served. The original notice and petition if required by 
876—4.6(85,86,17A) shall be accompanied by proof that the petitioner 
has deposited copies of such documents with the U.S. post office for 
delivery by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the respondent or 
has submitted such copies to a proper person for delivery of personal 
service as in civil actions. 
In the current case, Sansores-Medrano complied with the rule by using the 
agency form when initiating this case. The form includes a proof of service section, 
which Sansores-Medrano completed before filing. The record before the agency shows 

SANSORES-MEDRANO V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Sansores-Medrano complied with rules 876—4.6 and 4.8(1) with respect to use of the 
agency petition form, service of the petition, and proof of service. In addition to 
complying with agency rules, claimant’s counsel also sent a copy of the petition by 
certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, to AIU. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(8) provides, “After being served with an 
application for alternate care, the employer shall file an appearance o[r] answer as soon 
as practicable before the time of the hearing.” Nobody appeared on behalf of the 
defendants in this case before the hearing. The defendants did not file an answer, 
either. Therefore, the defendants failed to comply with the requirements of rule 876— 
4.48(8). 
The failure to appear or file an answer, as required by rule 876—4.48(8), raises 
the question of whether entry of default would be appropriate in this case. The IRCP 
provisions governing default require notice of intent to file written application for default. 
See IRCP 1.972(2)–(3). A party may not serve such notice until after an adverse party 
has failed to file a motion or answer within a reasonable time of service of the petition. 
IRCP 1.972(1). Under the IRCP, a party may not apply for entry of default until after ten 
days have passed from the date of mailing notice of intent to file the written application 
for default. See id. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) requires the agency to issue a written decision on an 
application for alternate care within ten business days of the filing of the petition if the 
agency holds a telephone hearing and within fourteen business days if it holds an in-
person hearing. And under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(8), the 
defendant(s) must file an appearance or answer “as soon as practicable before the time 
of the hearing.” The statutory requirement to issue a decision after the telephone 
hearing and within ten business days of the date on which the petition was filed 
combines with the agency rule giving the defendants until the scheduled hearing start 
time to file an answer generates a conflict with the IRCP provisions on default. It is 
practically impossible to give notice of intent to file written application for default after 
the other party fails to file a pleading if the other party has the right to do so up until the 
start time of the hearing. Further, it is impossible to file such notice, wait ten days, and 
then apply for entry of default before the statutory deadline by which the agency must 
issue a decision. Due to this conflict, the IRCP provisions on default do not govern in 
alternate care proceedings before the agency under Iowa Administrative Code rule 
876—4.35. 
The agency scheduled the case for a telephone alternate care hearing to be held 
on November 26, 2024, and issued notice on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) to Sansores-Medrano and to the defendants via U.S. Mail at the 
addresses identified in the petition. Because nobody appeared on behalf of the 
defendants and the defendants did not answer the petition, there was no representative 
identified or phone number to call for the defendants to participate in the hearing. The 
defendants made no other known attempt to contact the agency regarding the hearing. 

SANSORES-MEDRANO V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
The defendants’ failure to comply with provisions of Iowa Administrative Code 
rules 876—4.48(8) and (12) arguably implicates rule 876—4.36, which governs 
compliance with agency rules and provides: 
If any party to a contested case or an attorney representing such party 
shall fail to comply with these rules or any order of a deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner or the workers’ compensation commissioner, 
the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner may impose sanctions which may include 
dismissing the action without prejudice, excluding or limiting evidence, 
assessing costs or expenses, and closing the record in whole or in part to 
further activity by the party. 
Despite the defendants’ failure to comply with two administrative rules, Sansores-
Medrano did not move for sanctions and this decision does not address sanctions. 
At the scheduled hearing time, the undersigned telephoned claimant’s counsel, 
who stated Sansores-Medrano was prepared to proceed to hearing. However, because 
the defendants did not participate, Sansores-Medrano elected to file a motion to waive 
the evidentiary hearing and submit the case on the written record, which was 
unresisted. The undersigned issued a ruling granting the motion, admitting claimant’s 
exhibit into evidence, and closing the record in this case. 
II.  
ISSU E . 
The issue under consideration is whether Sansores-Medrano is entitled to 
alternate care in the form of continued care with Dr. Rene Recinos for her bilateral arms 
and hands. 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The administrative record consists of: 
 Petition; 
 Proof of service documents; 
 Notice of Hearing; and 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 1. 
After careful consideration of the administrative record, the undersigned enters the 
following findings of fact. 
Sansores-Medrano sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment with Zoetis on August 23, 2023, to both of her arms and hands. The 
defendants refused to provide care for the injuries to Sansores-Medrano’s arms and 
hands. Specifically, Sarah Fuller, an in-house nurse employed by Zoetis, has obstructed 

SANSORES-MEDRANO V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Sansores-Medrano’s ability to receive care under Iowa Code section 85.27 by avoiding 
her—refusing to respond to emails, text messages, or phone calls. When Sansores-
Medrano requested contact information for AIU, Fuller falsely told her it would be 
“illegal” for her to do so.  
Because of this refusal, Sansores-Medrano was compelled to seek care on her 
own with Dr. Rene Recinos. On October 18, 2024, claimant’s counsel sent a letter 
requesting that the defendants provide care and authorize Dr. Recinos as Sansores-
Medrano’s treating physician. The defendants did not respond to the request, so 
Sansores-Medrano initiated this contested case proceeding by filing a petition 
concerning application for alternate care on November 15, 2024. Nobody appeared on 
behalf of the defendants in this case and they did not file an answer. 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude the 
defendants’ refusal to provide care to Sansores-Medrano for the work injury to her arms 
and hands is reasonable. Rather, the weight of the evidence shows that the defendants 
have failed to provide care with a physician for the injury for over a year. Further, Fuller 
actively interfered with Sansores-Medrano’s ability to receive care for the work injury to 
her arms and hands. This unreasonable failure led Sansores-Medrano to take the 
reasonable and necessary step of seeking care on her own with Dr. Recinos. 
After claimant’s counsel sent a letter to the defendants on October 16, 2024, 
informing them of the issues Sansores-Medrano has had obtaining care and how those 
issues compelled her to establish a doctor-patient relationship with Dr. Recinos, the 
defendants took no action. After Sansores-Medrano filed the petition concerning 
application for alternate care and served it on the defendants, they took no action. 
Under the record before the agency, it is more likely than not the defendants have 
unreasonably abandoned care for Sansores-Medrano’s work injury to the arms and 
hands. In response to their abandonment, Sansores-Medrano took the reasonable and 
necessary step to get care on her own with Dr. Recinos. Therefore, her request that Dr. 
Recinos be authorized as the treating physician for the work injury to her arms and 
hands is reasonable. 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish care related to an 
employee’s a work injury. Such care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(4). The legislature saw fit to pair this responsibility with the right to choose care. 
Id.; see also Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
“If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee harmless for 
the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no longer 
authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in authorization.” 
Id.; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 771 (Iowa 2016). 
However, an employer’s right to choose care is not absolute under the statute. 
See id.; Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 769. An employee dissatisfied with employer-

SANSORES-MEDRANO V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
furnished care (or lack thereof) has the right to seek an alternative. See id.; see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. A dissatisfied employee must first share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer. Id.; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). If the parties cannot reach an agreement on 
care, the employee may apply to the commissioner for alternate care. Id.; see also Iowa 
Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. And after an informal hearing, “the commissioner may, upon 
. . . reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
The dispositive question in an alternate care case is whether the employer-
furnished care is reasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995). “Reasonableness, of course, is a question of fact.” Reynolds, 562 at 436 (citing 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123). As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the 
employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care in question is 
unreasonable. Id. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to satisfy the employee’s 
burden of proof. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
As found above, Sansores-Medrano has satisfied her burden of proof in this 
case. The evidence shows it is more likely than not that the defendants have 
abandoned care for the work injury to her arms and hands by refusing to take the 
necessary steps to arrange for care, refusing to communicate with her about her need 
for care, and failing to participate in this contested case proceeding. The defendants’ 
abandonment of care constitutes a failure to promptly offer care that is reasonably 
suited to treat Sansores-Medrano’s work injury to the arms and hands. The defendants 
have therefore surrendered their right to control care for Sansores-Medrano’s work 
injury to the arms and hands under Iowa Code section 85.27. Sansores-Medrano is free 
to choose providers to treat her injured arms and hands and the defendants must hold 
her harmless for any and all reasonable care relating to the work injury to those body 
parts—including, but not limited to, care by Dr. Recinos. 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The applications for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) Sansores-Medrano may pursue reasonable care for the work injury to her 
arms and hands with providers of her choosing—including, but not limited to, 
Dr. Recinos. 
 
3) The defendants shall promptly take any and all action necessary for 
Sansores-Medrano to promptly receive care with her chosen providers and 
hold Sansores-Medrano harmless for the costs of such reasonable care. 
 
4) Failure to comply with this decision may result in sanctions under Iowa 
Administrative Code 876—4.36. 

SANSORES-MEDRANO V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
The Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order delegating 
authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the undersigned, to 
issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. That order is attached to 
the notice of hearing issued in this case. Due to the order of delegation, there is no 
intra-agency appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial review in an 
appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 26th day of November, 2024. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Benjamin R. Roth, Attorney for Claimant 
Served via certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested: 
Zoetis, Inc. 
2000 Rockford Rd 
Charles City, IA 50616-9101 
 
AIU Insurance Co. 
1271 Ave of the Americas, Fl 37 
New York, NY 10020-1304 
 
 
