Case Number: 23700547.01
Case Title:  LEVENDUSKY, TRACY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Levendusky Tracy - 23700547.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
TRACY LEVENDUSKY, 
No. 23700547.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
A TO Z DRYING, INC., 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ACCIDENT FUND GENERAL 
INSURANCE CO., 
Headnotes:  1108.50 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
Claimant Tracy Levendusky seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer A to Z Drying, Inc. (A to Z) and insurance carrier Accident Fund 
General Insurance Co. (Accident Fund). The undersigned presided over an arbitration 
hearing on July 10, 2024. Levendusky participated personally and through attorney 
MaKayla J. Augustine. The defendants participated by and through attorney Andrew 
Portis. Nicholas Halbach served as the representative for A to Z. After full submission of 
the case, Laura Ostrander appeared on behalf of the defendants and Portis withdrew. 
Levendusky alleges he developed testicular cancer in the form of pure seminoma 
due to exposure to insecticide while working at A to Z. Levendusky’s coworker Daniel 
Bell developed the same type of cancer close in time and has initiated his own case 
before the agency, Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner No. 23001758.01. The 
two men received care from some of the same providers and expert witnesses 
considered both men’s conditions when opining on each case. While there is a degree 
of crossover between the two cases with respect to some facts, this decision is focused 
on Levendusky’s case. 
II.  
ISSU ES  
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Apr-30  09:47:17     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 2 
 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) Did Levendusky sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with A to Z? 
2) Did Levendusky give timely notice of the alleged injury? 
3) Is Levendusky entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or healing period 
(HP) benefits? 
4) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
5) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded? 
6) Is Levendusky entitled to payment of medical expenses? 
7) Is Levendusky entitled to alternate care? 
8) Is Levendusky entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
9) Is Levendusky entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Levendusky and A to Z 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Levendusky’s gross earnings were one thousand one hundred eleven 
and 33/100 dollars ($1,111.33) per week. 
b) Levendusky was single. 
c) Levendusky was entitled to one exemption. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 3 
 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
The evidentiary record in this case consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 13; 
 Defendants’ Exhibits B, C, and E; 
 Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE4;1 and 
 Hearing testimony by Levendusky and Halbach. 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs—
excluding any assertions based on documents or webpages not in evidence—the 
undersigned makes the following findings of fact. 
Levendusky has no family history of testicular cancer. (Hearing Transcript, pp. 
52–53) After his high school graduation, he attended the University of Minnesota from 
which he graduated in 1991 with a degree in mortuary sciences. (Hr’g Tr. p. 22) 
Levendusky worked as a funeral director from 1991 through 2012. (Hr’g Tr. p. 22) 
A to Z is a business specializing in insecticides. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 69–70) In April 
2014, A to Z hired Levendusky to work for the corporation. (Hr’g Tr. p. 41) Levendusky 
worked primarily as a formulations operator and driver. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 23–24) Before the 
date of hearing, A to Z also assigned Levendusky to work packaging and running a 
dryer on an as needed basis. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 23–24)  
The majority of Levendusky’s job duties with A to Z involved working on the 
formulations of the insecticides DiPel, which is powder-based, and the bacteria-based 
VectoBac and Foray. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 23–24) On occasion from 2015 through 2022, A to Z 
assigned Levendusky the task of formulating Mimic 2LV (Mimic) and participating in 
post-formulation cleanup. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 29, 32, 42–43) Levendusky testified that between 
2015 and the alleged injury date, he worked on the formulation of Mimic 10 to 15 times. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 30) 
Mimic kills moths by targeting their reproductive organs. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29; Ex. 4, p. 
10) The active ingredient in Mimic is Tebufenozide. (Hr’g Tr. p. 30; Ex. 4, p. 11) 
Tebufenozide is a sticky white powder, which made the Mimic formulation process in 
which Levendusky participated messy. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29–30) Tebufenozide would stick to 
pretty much everything in the room where Mimic was formulated—including the floor, 
walls, ceiling, forklift, pallets, and workers. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 31–32) When working on Mimic 
formulation, the sticky white power of Tebufenozide was unavoidable, causing workers 
such as Levendusky to regularly come into contact with it while performing job duties 
when they were not wearing protective gear. (Hr’g Tr. p. 33) 
                                                 
1 After the hearing and before the deadline for post-hearing briefs, the parties moved to reopen 
the record in order to include a supplemental joint exhibit, JE4, and the undersigned granted the motion. 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Some of Levensky’s coworkers in maintenance warned him about the 
Tebufenozide. (Hrg’ Tr. p. 32) At one point, Levendusky voiced concern to Halbach and 
his assistant, Skyler. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) He requested cleanup of the forklift, which A to Z 
performed. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) 
But it was not just the Tebufenozide to which Levendusky was exposed at A to Z. 
After formulation, Mimic is a liquid. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 32, 44) A to Z stored it in open totes that 
were not sealed before destroying it. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 47, 58–59) This arrangement caused 
the presence in ESD of vapors from Mimic. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 58–59) And on at least one 
occasion, Mimic leaked so that it was all over the floor in ESD and even seeped into the 
walls of ESD. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) 
On May 13, 2022, Levendusky noticed that his left testicle was larger than his 
right. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 24–25) Concerned, Levendusky scheduled an appointment at 
Mitchell County Regional Health Center St. Ansgar Clinic, where Callie White, ARNP, 
examined him. (Ex. JE 1, p. 1) After White’s examination and an ultrasound, she 
referred Levendusky to Christopher Adams, M.D., a urologist. (Ex. JE1, p. 4) 
Dr. Adams examined Levendusky and ordered CT scans of his abdomen, pelvis, 
and chest. (Ex. JE 1, pp. 5–6) He then diagnosed Levendusky with a left testicular mass 
suggestive of malignancy. (Ex. JE1, p. 5; Ex. JE2, p. 37) On May 24, 2025, Dr. Adams 
performed surgery to remove Levendusky’s left testicle. (Ex. JE2, pp. 37–39) After 
pathology testing, Levendusky was diagnosed with stage II, pure seminoma of the left 
testicle and referred to Mercy Medical Center – North Iowa for possible further 
treatment. (Ex. JE2, pp. 44–46) 
Levendusky was prescribed four cycles of Cisplatin/VP16. (Ex. JE2, pp. 44–46) 
Levendusky had a venous access port implanted in his chest for the chemotherapy. (Ex. 
JE2, pp. 52–54) Levendusky underwent chemotherapy treatment for five consecutive 
days every twenty-one days. (Ex. JE2, pp. 49–68) On August 26, 2022, Levendusky 
completed chemotherapy and has been in remission since. (Ex. JE2, pp. 68, 74–96) 
Nonetheless, Levendusky has had to follow up periodically to ensure the cancer has not 
returned and will continue to do so for two to three years. (Ex. JE2, p. 96) 
The chemotherapy caused Levendusky to develop severe peripheral neuropathy 
that is particularly bad in his feet. (Ex. JE1, p. 9; Ex. 7, p. 36) Moreover, he has 
developed fatigue, tinnitus, and cold intolerance. (Ex. JE1, p. 30; JE3, p. 97; Hr’g Tr. p. 
40) After experiencing side effects from Gabapentin and Cymbalta, he has tried an 
alternative approach of natural supplements, electrical stimulation, and a foot massager. 
(Ex. JE3, p. 97; Hr’g Tr. p. 35) 
A to Z uses Safety Data Sheets (SDS) when determining what personal 
protective equipment (PPE) its employees wear when handling a specific chemical as 
well as the procedures to follow when handling and disposing of it. (Hr’g Tr. p. 73) At 
hearing, during direct examination on how A to Z uses an SDS in its operation, defense 
counsel (Q) and Harbach (A) engaged in the following exchange: 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Q.     And how influential is the SDS when designing a safety program or 
protocol or something like that? 
A.      It’s everything, really. We do extensive training on that, and so much of 
the worldwide, they call it global harmonized system, is based on what’s provided 
on the SDS, so it’s ultimately incredibly important. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 73) 
The record is devoid of any evidence regarding the development of an SDS. 
What entity creates an SDS for a chemical? What is the process used? How long is an 
SDS in effect? What is the process for reviewing an SDS? When was the 
experimentation on mice or rats performed to determine whether a chemical increases 
the risk of cancer? None of this information is in the evidentiary record. But it is outlined 
with federal regulations promulgated by the federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), which provide a useful backdrop to the fighting issues in this 
case. 
Among the occupational safety and health standards adopted by OSHA are 
regulations governing hazard communication. See 29 CFR § 1910.1200. OSHA 
promulgated these rules “to ensure that the hazards of all chemicals produced or 
imported are classified, and that information concerning the classified hazards is 
transmitted to employers and employees” with the intent to impose standards 
“consistent with the provisions of the United Nations Globally Harmonized System of 
Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS).” Id., at § 1910.1200(a)(1). “The 
transmittal of information is to be accomplished by means of comprehensive hazard 
communication programs, which are to include container labeling and other forms of 
warning, safety data sheets and employee training.” Id. The standard “is intended to 
address comprehensively the issue of classifying the potential hazards of chemicals, 
and communicating information concerning hazards and appropriate protective 
measures to employees, and to preempt any legislative or regulatory enactments of a 
state, or political subdivision of a state, pertaining to” hazard communication. Id., at § 
1910.1200(a)(2). 
The hazard communication standard “requires chemical manufacturers or 
importers to classify the hazards of chemicals which they produce or import, and all 
employers to provide information to their employees about the hazardous chemicals to 
which they are exposed, by means of a hazard communication program, labels and 
other forms of warning, safety data sheets, and information and training.” Id., § 
1910.1200(b)(1). As well, it “requires distributors to transmit the required information to 
employers.” Id. The hazard communication standard “applies to any chemical which is 
known to be present in the workplace in such a manner that employees may be 
exposed under normal conditions of use or in a foreseeable emergency.” Id., § 
1910.1200(b)(2). 
Under 29 CFR section 1910.1200(c)(iii), “Safety data sheet (SDS) means written 
or printed material concerning a hazardous chemical that is prepared in accordance 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 6 
 
with paragraph (g) of this section.” Section 1910.1200(g)(1) provides, “Chemical 
manufacturers and importers shall obtain or develop a safety data sheet for each 
hazardous chemical they produce or import. Employers shall have a safety data sheet 
in the workplace for each hazardous chemical which they use.” Each SDS must be in 
English.” Id., at § 1910.1200(g)(2). The regulations set forth the section titles and 
numbering that must be used in each SDS. Id., at §§ 1910.1200(g)(2)(i)–(xvi). 
The chemical manufacturer, importer or employer preparing the safety 
data sheet shall ensure that the information provided accurately reflects 
the scientific evidence used in making the hazard classification. If the 
chemical manufacturer, importer or employer preparing the safety data 
sheet becomes newly aware of any significant information regarding the 
hazards of a chemical, or ways to protect against the hazards, this new 
information shall be added to the safety data sheet within three months. If 
the chemical is not currently being produced or imported, the chemical 
manufacturer or importer shall add the information to the safety data sheet 
before the chemical is introduced into the workplace again. 
Id., at § 1910.1200(g)(5). 
Appendix D to section 1910.1200 identifies the mandatory contents of SDSs and 
states, “While each section of the SDS must contain all of the specified information, 
preparers of safety data sheets are not required to present the information in any 
particular order within each section. If no relevant information is found for any given 
subheading within a section, the SDS shall clearly indicate that no applicable 
information is available. Sections 12–15 may be included in the SDS, but are not 
mandatory.” 
Pertinent to this case are the portions of “Table D.1—Minimum Information for an 
SDS” that address carcinogens. Under the table, Section 11 must contain certain 
toxicological information. And section 11(f) must provide “[w]hether the hazardous 
chemical is listed in the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens 
(latest edition) or has been found to be a potential carcinogen in the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs (latest edition), or by OSHA.” 
The SDS for Tebufenozide and the one for Mimic section 2.2 includes the hazard 
statement, “May cause damage to organs (Blood system, liver, kidney) through 
prolonged or repeated exposure” and, “Very toxic to aquatic life with long lasting 
effects.” (Ex. 4, p. 11; Ex. 5, p. 24) The precautionary statement under section 2.3 of the 
Mimic SDS advises: 
Do not breathe mist/vapors/spray 
Wash hands and face thoroughly after handling 
Do not eat, drink or smoke when using this product 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Avoid release to the environment 
(Ex. 4, p. 11) The Tebufenozide SDS advises not to breathe dust and avoid release to 
the environment. (Ex. 5, p. 24) 
Section 11 of each SDS contains toxicological information in accordance with 
Table D.1 of 29 CFR 1910.1200. Under the subheading “Carcinogenicity – Active 
Ingredient,” the Mimic SDS states: 
Negative (rat) 
Negative (mouse) 
NTP: not listed 
IARC Monograph: not listed 
ACGIH Regulated: not listed 
Tebufenozide and glycerin did not cause cancer in laboratory animals. 
(Ex. 4, p. 16) Similarly, the Tebufenozide SDS states under the subheading, 
“Carcinogenicity,” that it was negative for rat and mouse and not listed in the NTP, IARC 
Monograph, or ACGIH Regulated. (Ex. 5, p. 28) 
The weight of the evidence establishes that the SDSs for Tebufenozide and 
Mimic comply with applicable OSHA regulations and therefore the United Nations 
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS). There 
is no indication in the record that either Tebufenozide or Mimic have ever been listed as 
a potential carcinogen in the NTP Report on Carcinogens, the IARC Monograph, or by 
OSHA. Rather, the evidence shows it is more likely than not that neither Tebufenozide 
nor Mimic has been identified as a potential carcinogen by the NTP, IARC, or OSHA. 
This fact is compelling because it shows it is more likely than not that the international 
community has not discovered a link between cancer and Tebufenozide or Mimic that is 
strong enough to merit NTP, IARC, or OSHA identifying either as a potential 
carcinogen. 
Against this backdrop stand the expert opinions on causation. 
On November 21, 2023, claimant’s counsel spoke with Dr. Adams about 
Levendusky’s cancer. (Ex. 6, p. 32) After their conversation, claimant’s counsel wrote a 
letter dated November 21, 2023, summarizing Dr. Adams’s opinions and sent it to Dr. 
Adams with the request that he review the letter and sign it if it accurately reflected the 
same. (Ex. 6, pp. 32–33) The letter documents that claimant’s counsel provided Dr. 
Adams with the SDSs for Mimic and Tebufenozide and he reviewed them prior to their 
conversation. (Ex. 6, p. 32) With respect to the SDSs, the letter states: 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Having had the opportunity to review the SDS, you are aware that the 
SDS for Mimic 2LV contains a hazard statement asserting the potential for 
Mimic 2LV to cause damage to organs (blood system, liver, kidney) 
through prolonged or repeated exposure, and that Mimic 2LV’s active 
ingredient is Tebufenozide, which is a known endocrine disrupting 
chemical. 
(Ex. 6, p. 32) However, the letter makes no reference to the fact that the SDSs state 
that neither NTP, IARC, or OSHA have identified either Tebufenozide or Mimic as a 
potential carcinogen. (Ex. 6, pp. 32–33) The letter goes on to state in pertinent part: 
With regard to testicular cancer, you explained that it is “very rare” and 
that, having two individuals at the same place of employment like A to Z 
Drying—which employs approximately 150–200 people—diagnosed with 
the same testicular cancer, would be “exceedingly rare” and not 
something that you would expect. Consequently, you confirmed that you 
believe that Mr. Levendusky’s exposure to mimic 2LV while working at A 
to Z Drying more likely than not (51% or greater) represented a substantial 
causal, contributing, or aggravating factor in the development of his left 
testicular cancer with which he was diagnosed following an ultrasound on 
5/20/2022. 
(Ex. 6, p. 32) On December 1, 2023, Dr. Adams signed the letter, indicating that he 
agreed its substance matched his opinions. (Ex. 6, p. 33) 
Thus, Dr. Adams does not explain the significance, if any, of Tebufenozide 
causing endocrine disruption to his opinion on causation. Nor does he address how 
Mimic’s ability to damage the blood system, liver, or kidneys through prolonged or 
repeated exposure impacted his causation opinion. The letter also does not contain any 
rationale for Dr. Adams discounting the SDSs’ statements that neither Tebufenozide nor 
Mimic has been identified as a potential carcinogen by NTP, IARC, or OSHA with 
respect to the causation question. In contrast, the letter directly states that the basis of 
Dr. Adams’s opinion on causation is based on the fact that both Levendusky and Bell 
contracted the same type of testicular cancer close in time while working for A to Z. 
Claimant’s counsel also arranged for Paul Conte, M.D., to conduct an IME of 
Levendusky on January 11, 2024, including a records review of 499 pages and an in-
person examination of Levendusky. (Ex. 7, p. 34) Based on the information gleaned 
from the IME, Dr. Conte authored an IME report dated February 11, 2024, containing 
information regarding Levendusky’s medical history, in-person examination, and 
opinions. (Ex. 7) 
In response to the question of whether the work Levendusky performed at A to Z 
or the environment to which he was exposed while working there was a substantial 
causal, contributing, or aggravating factor in causing his cancer, Dr. Conte opined: 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Malignant seminoma is a relatively rare malignancy, and thus it is an 
unusual occurrence that he would have a testicular seminoma, and it 
raises the issue of whether exposure at work contributed to this. Mr. 
Levendusky did have exposure to dust and chemicals as part of his work 
at A to Z, specifically the gypsy moth endocrine disrupting compound 
tebufenozide which does have the ability to cause damage to the blood 
system, the liver, and the kidney based on its MDS [sic] statement. It has 
been evaluated for toxicity to mammalian and fish and other vertebrates, 
and the toxicity is less so than it is for the targeted organism, the gypsy 
moth. However, other organohalide compounds such as pesticides and 
solvents have been known to cause increased risk for seminoma. The 
main endocrine disruptors that have been found to cause increased risk of 
testicular cancer in the literature are phthalates which are plasticizers in 
packaging and other industrial processes. Also polychlorinated biphenyls 
which were used as dielectric fluid, plasticizers and flame retardants. In 
addition, pesticides including organochlorine-containing compounds have 
all been shown to have endocrine disrupting abilities and have increased 
risk for testicular cancer. Mr. Levendusky’s 14-year career at A to Z Drying 
with his exposures on a daily basis to the different pesticides and 
compounds more likely than not served as a substantial causal factor, or 
was a cumulative risk factor in his testicular cancer. Furthermore, I agree 
with the opinions of Dr. Adams, as Mr. Levendusky’s treating Urologist, on 
work related occupational exposure. 
(Ex. 7, pp. 37–38) Dr. Conte further elaborated: 
As I stated in my earlier responses, seminomas are relatively unusual 
malignancies in a man of his age. Mr. Levendusky’s position at A to Z 
Drying is the only known risk factor for this testicular malignancy, and 
given that there is another case in the same factory which has a 
population of only 200 individuals makes this more likely than not a risk 
factor for developing seminoma that was higher than the general 
population. 
(Ex. 7, p. 38) 
As with Dr. Adams, Dr. Conte does not expressly identify a causal link between 
Mimic or Tebufenozide and Levendusky’s cancer. Instead, Dr. Conte notes that the 
toxicity for both is less for mammals and other vertebrates than it is for the gypsy moth. 
Dr. Conte’s opinion, as articulated in his IME report, does not support the findings of a 
causal link between Mimic or Tebufenozide and Levendusky’s testicular cancer. 
Dr. Conte’s opinion discusses other possible causes. He discusses how “other 
organohalide compounds such as pesticides and solvents have been known to cause 
increased risk for seminoma” and that “[t]he main endocrine disruptors that have been 
found to cause increased risk of testicular cancer in the literature are phthalates which 
are plasticizers in packaging and other industrial process” as well as “polychlorinated 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 10 
 
biphenyls which were used as dielectric fluid, plasticizers and flame retardants” and 
“pesticides including organochlorine-containing compounds.” (Ex. 7, p. 38; Ex. 11, pp. 
62–63) But there is insufficient evidence from which to conclude that Levendusky was 
exposed to organhalide compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls, or organochlorine-
containing compounds during his time at A to Z. The record contains only evidence that 
he worked primarily on DiPel, VectoBac, and Foray—in addition to occasionally working 
with Tebufenozide and Mimic—and there is no indication that any of them have been 
identified as a potential carcinogen by NTP, IARC, or OSHA. 
On March 23, 2023, Dr. Erlich signed a letter indicated that he agreed with the 
following with respect to Bell’s cancer: 
Bell worked as a chemical engineer at A to Z Drying. You had also been 
provided with a copy of the Safety Data Sheet (SDS) for Mimic 2LV 
Insecticide. Having had the opportunity to review that SDS, you are aware 
that this chemical contains a Hazard Identification for “Specific Target 
Organ Toxicity (Repeated Exposure),” and that it is hazardous to aquatic 
life (Page 1 of 14). The SDS for the chemical also contains a Hazard 
Statement that it: “May cause damage to organs (Blood system, liver, 
kidney) through prolonged or repeated exposure” and further cautions to 
“not breathe mist/vapors/spray” and “[a]void release to the environment.” 
(page 2 [o]f 14). Finally, the chemical’s active ingredient, Tebufenozide, is 
a known endocrine disrupting chemical. 
With further regard to the above, you are aware that studies have shown 
prevalence and risk in humans of developing testicular dysfunction or 
cancer in areas with distinct exposure to pesticides, which have endocrine 
disrupting properties. Moreover, occupational exposure to pesticides have 
been identified as a major trigger of the development of cancer, causing 
intoxication in the individuals who manipulate them through either 
inhalation, ingestion, or dermal contact. Stated plainly, you explained that 
the endocrine system is a stem of glands; that testicles are glands; and 
that pesticides like mimic can affect the health and function of the testicle 
(i.e., male gonads). 
Based on the foregoing, you believe it is more likely than not (51% or 
greater) that Mr. Bell’s exposure to Mimic 2LV Insecticide while working at 
A to Z Drying resulted in the development of his Stage IIC seminoma 
testicular cancer. 
(Ex. 9, p. 43) On April 15, 2023, Dr. Adams signed a letter authored by Bell’s attorney in 
which he expressed his agreement with the contents of the letter signed by Dr. Erlich. 
(Ex. 10, pp. 45–46) 
 Defense counsel arranged for Paul Gellhaus, M.D., to perform a review of 
Levendusky’s records and issue a report. (Ex. B, pp. 3–4) Dr. Gellhaus provided his 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 11 
 
opinion in a report dated February 26, 2024. (Ex. B, pp. 3–6)[1] On causation, Dr. 
Gellhaus opined: 
To the nearest degree of medical certainty, the alleged employment related 
exposure to Mimic 2LV (Tebufenozide) Insecticide did not cause his testicular 
seminoma. This opinion is based on several factors: 
 Mimic 2LV is not a known testicular carcinogenic agent per SDS. 
 It was reported the he wore proper protective equipment include [sic] PPE 
per nonmedical documentation. 
 No other symptoms/signs of exposure from pesticides per medical 
records. 
 Testicular cancer is uncommon (1/250) in the general population, but its 
highest prevalence is in 20-40 year old [sic] but can happen at any age. 
Also it is most common in white men which I assume describes the 
majority of workforce in the place of employment given the race 
background to the general population in Iowa (~90% white). 
 While having two men develop this cancer in the same work place is 
unlikely it would not be described as “exceedingly rare” given the age, 
gender, race under the above mentioned assumptions. 
(Ex. B, pp. 4–5, Report pp. 2–3) 
After reviewing the letter signed by Dr. Erlich, Dr. Gellhaus expanded on his 
causation opinion in pertinent part as follows: 
□ While what is stated about other organohalide is true, Mimic 2LV 
(tebufenozide), which is specifically being claimed to be the cause, is 
not a known testicular carcinogenic agent per SDS. 
□ Additionally, it was reported that he wore proper protective equipment 
include [sic] PPE per non-medical documentation. This should have 
ameliorated or significantly reduced his exposure risk. 
□ Also, if he had this exposure (chronically or acutely), it would be 
expected to have other problems such as testicular endocrine 
dysfunction or other known problems as he listed “blood system, the 
liver and the kidney based on its MDS statement.” 
 Dr. Conte reported in his Independent Medical Examination that “<Mr. 
Levendusky> had a normal active sexual life with his girlfriend and there 
was no injury that occurred on a personal level that made him suspect 
anything was wrong.” This suggests no testicular dysfunction had resulted. 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 Furthermore, no other symptoms/signs of exposure from pesticides per 
the medical records reviewed. 
 In other words, his testicular seminoma was the only problem to occur and 
not the collection of problems that would occur with exposure. This cancer 
occurrence was isolated and did not have any other medical issues to 
support this claim. 
(Ex. C, p. 3) 
The record shows that Levendusky typically wore PPE while handling 
Tebufenozide during the formulation of Mimic, but that he did not always wear PPE—
especially after the formulation. Thus, Dr. Gellhaus has an incorrect understanding of 
Levendusky’s use of PPE while handling Tebufenozide and Mimic. But Dr. Gellhaus 
does have an accurate understanding of the SDSs. None of the causation opinions from 
Dr. Erlich, Dr. Adams, or Dr. Conte discuss the fact that the SDSs state neither 
Tebufenozide nor Mimic have been identified as a potential carcinogen by NTP, IARC, 
or OSHA. Further, Dr. Gellhaus makes the uncontroverted assertion that Levendusky 
did not experience any signs or symptoms of potential pesticide exposure, which would 
be atypical if pesticide exposure was a causal factor in the development of his cancer. 
Because Dr. Erlich, Dr. Adams, and Dr. Conte’s opinions do not address the fact 
that the SDSs for Tebufenozide and Mimic state they have not been identified as a 
possible carcinogen by NTP, IARC, or OSHA, or the lack of other signs or symptoms of 
pesticide exposure, their opinions are unpersuasive. Dr. Gellhaus’s opinion, which 
reflects a more complete understanding of the SDSs on whether Tebufenozide or Mimic 
is a possible carcinogen and Levendusky’s lack of signs or symptoms of pesticide 
exposure, is more persuasive. Levendusky has failed to meet his burden of proof. There 
is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Levendusky’s work at A 
to Z was a causal factor in his development of testicular cancer. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
The legislature enacted the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 85, for injuries arising out of and in the course of employment. It passed the 
Iowa Occupational Disease Law, Iowa Code chapter 85A, to govern occupational 
diseases. Both statutory schemes are enforced by the agency. See Iowa Code § 86.8. 
The laws present an either-or proposition for compensation. See IBP, Inc. v. 
Burress, 779 N.W.2d 210, 214 (Iowa 2010). The statutory definition of “injury” or 
“personal injury” under chapter 85 excludes occupational diseases under chapter 85A. 
Iowa Code § 85.61(4)(b). Section 85A.8 defines “occupational disease” as follows: 
Occupational diseases shall be only those diseases which arise out of and 
in the course of the employee’s employment. Such diseases shall have a 
direct causal connection with the employment and must have followed as 
a natural incident thereto from injurious exposure occasioned by the 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 13 
 
nature of the employment. Such disease must be incidental to the 
character of the business, occupation or process in which the employee 
was employed and not independent of the employment. Such disease 
need not have been foreseen or expected but after its contraction it must 
appear to have had its origin in a risk connected with the employment and 
to have resulted from that source as an incident and rational 
consequence. A disease which follows from a hazard to which an 
employee has or would have been equally exposed outside of said 
occupation is not compensable as an occupational disease. 
Iowa Code § 85A.8. 
With respect to this definition, the Iowa Supreme Court has held, “The term 
‘exposure’ indicates a passive relationship between the worker and his work 
environment rather than an event or occurrence, or series of occurrences, which 
constitute injury under the Worker's Compensation Act.” Burress, 779 N.W.2d at 215 
(quoting Noble v. Lamoni Prods., 512 N.W.2d 290, 295 (Iowa 1994). 
“[A]n ‘injury’ is distinguished from a ‘disease’ by virtue of the fact that an 
injury has its origin in a specific identifiable trauma or physical occurrence 
or, in the case of repetitive trauma, a series of such occurrences. A 
disease, on the other hand, originates from a source that is neither 
traumatic nor physical....” 
Id. at 215 (quoting Noble, 512 N.W.2d at 295). 
Despite the differences in applicability, both chapter 85 and 85A include the 
express textual requirement that, in order to be compensable under the law, an 
employee’s injury, condition, or disease must arise: 
1) Out of the claimant’s employment; and 
 
2) In the course of the claimant’s employment. Iowa Code §§ 85.3(1), 85A.8; 
see also St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); 
Burress, 779 N.W.2d at 214.  
 “‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 
169, 174 (Iowa 2007) (quoting Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 
1996)). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an injury to be deemed 
compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this case, the parties 
dispute whether the injury arose out of employment. 
A disease arises out of employment if there is a causal connection between it 
and the employment. Iowa Code § 85A.8. “‘In other words, the injury must not have 
coincidentally occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to 
the working environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 
174. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). “When one speaks of an event “arising out 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 14 
 
of employment,” the initiative, the moving force, is something other than the 
employment; the employment is thought of more as a condition out of which the event 
arises than as the force producing the event in affirmative fashion.” Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 
710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s 
Workers’ Compensation Law (2005) § 3.06, at 3-7 to 3-8 (emphasis in original)). 
“Medical causation presents a question of fact.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. 
Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2011). The answer to this question lies “‘essentially 
within the domain of expert testimony.’” Id. at 845 (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire. & 
Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency may accept or reject an 
expert opinion in whole or in part. Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 
560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 752 
(Iowa 2002)). In doing so, the agency “has the duty to determine the credibility of the 
witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and 
circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
The agency determines the weight to give an expert opinion based on consideration of: 
1) “[T]he accuracy of the facts relied upon by the expert,” Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d 
at 560 (quoting Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752); 
 
2) “[T]he completeness of the premise given the expert,” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d 
at 853; and 
3) “[O]ther surrounding circumstances,” id. 
Medical causation disputes can take two forms under Iowa workers’ 
compensation law. One is whether the injury arises out of an actual risk of the 
claimant’s employment. See Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 85–86 (Iowa 
2018); see also Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173–74 (Iowa 2007); Meyer 
v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006); Almquist v. Shenandoah Nurseries, 254 
N.W. 35 (Iowa 1934). The other is whether the injury caused a compensable disability. 
See Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 560 (quoting Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752). In this 
case, the parties dispute medical causation—specifically, whether Bell’s testicular 
cancer arose out of his employment with A to Z. 
 “A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary.” Frye v. 
Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa App. 1997) (citing Schofield v. 
White, 250 Iowa 571, 95 N.W.2d 40 (Iowa 1959) and Holmes v. Bruce Motor Freight, 
Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). The claimant must prove by a preponderance 
of the evidence that the employment in question was a substantial factor in bringing 
about the injury or condition alleged in the petition. See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 64 (Iowa 1981). To be a substantial factor, employment need 
only be one cause—not the only cause—of the alleged injury or condition. See id. 
As found above, Levendusky has failed to meet his burden of proof on causation. Dr. 
Gellhaus’s expert opinion is most persuasive because he accurately recites the 
contents of the SDSs for Tebufenozide and Mimic on whether the ATP, IARC, or OSHA 

LEVENDUSKY V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 15 
 
has identified them as possible carcinogens. There is an insufficient basis in the 
evidence from which to find a causal link between Levendusky’s employment at A to Z 
and his testicular cancer. Because Levendusky has failed to prove by a preponderance 
of the evidence that his cancer and sequela neuropathy arose out of and in the course 
of his employment with A to Z, this decision does not address the other disputed issues. 
VI.  
OR D ER  
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Levendusky shall take nothing more from this case. 
2) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this 30th day of April, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
MaKayla J. Augustine, Attorney for Claimant 
Laura Ostrander, Attorney for Defendants 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
