Case Number: 1665619.01
Case Title:  HOLUB, DARRELL V. JMS TRANSPORTATION INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Holub Darrell-1665619.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DARRELL FRANCES HOLUB, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
         File No. 1665619.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC., 
  : 
     ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACUITY MUTUAL INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.: 1108.50, 1402.40,  
Insurance Carrier,    
 
  
  : 
1803.1, 2501, 2907, 3001, 4000.2
 
Defendants.    
 
 
  : 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Darrell Frances Holub, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from JMS Transportation Company, Inc., employer and Acuity, 
insurance carrier, as defendants.  Hearing was held via Zoom videoconference on 
November 1, 2023.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Darrell Holub and Makenzie Kimm were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-6, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-L.  Defendants’ Exhibit L was offered during the hearing; 
claimant objected and requested time to file a written objection.  Claimant filed his 
written objection and also requested he be allowed to offer additional exhibits, 
specifically Claimant’s Exhibit 3, pages 12-16.  Defendants did not object to the 
inclusion of claimant’s additional exhibits.  On November 16, 2023 the undersigned 
issued a ruling overruling the objection and defendants’ admitting Exhibit L and 
Claimant’s Exhibit 3, pages 12-16. All other exhibits were received without objection.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on December 11, 2023, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Apr-15  13:01:48     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. The nature and extent of permanent partial disability benefits claimant is 
entitled to as the result of the stipulated May 12, 2018 work injury. 
 
2. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
3. The appropriate weekly workers’ compensation rate. 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of past medical expenses. 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to additional medical care. 
 
6. Whether penalty benefits are appropriate in this case. 
 
7. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 The parties stipulated that claimant, Darrell Frances Holub (“Holub”), sustained 
an injury that arose out of and in the course of his employment with JMS Transportation 
Company, Inc. (“JMS”) on May 12, 2018.  The parties agree that the injury resulted in 
permanent disability.  The central dispute in this case is the nature and extent of 
permanent disability he sustained as the result of the work injury.  Holub contends he 
sustained injuries to his cervical spine, right upper extremity, and left upper extremity.  
Holub contends that his injuries should be compensated on an industrial disability basis.  
Defendants stipulate that Holub sustained an injury to his right shoulder.  Defendants 
contend the injury is confined to a scheduled shoulder injury. 
 
 Holub was 65 years old at the time of hearing.  He began working part-time for 
JMS in May 2017.  (Hearing Transcript, page 45)  Holub worked as a truck driver 
shuttling products from one place to the other.  He worked at JMS on the weekends, 
and he typically worked approximately 20 hours per week.  (Tr. p. 45; Defendants’ 
Exhibit K, page 78, depo pp. 35-36)  When Holub was hired by JMS he was also 
working full-time at Rescar fixing railcars.  He testified his Rescar job required a lot of 
physical work including climbing in and around railcars.  (Tr. pp. 45-46)  In addition to 
working full-time at Rescar and part-time at JMS, Holub also worked part-time at 
College Community School District (“CCSD”) driving school bus.  He estimated that he 
worked 10-15 hour per week, usually afternoons, for CCSD.  (Tr. pp. 45-46)  JMS 
terminated Holub on December 18, 2018.  (Tr. pp. 46-47)  After his termination from 
JMS he continued to work his full-time job at Rescar and his part-time bus-driving job.  

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 3 
 
(Tr. p. 47)  Holub did not miss any time from work at Rescar or College Community 
School District due to his work injury.  (Tr. pp. 52-53)   
At the time of the hearing, Holub was still working full-time at Rescar.  He was no 
longer working part-time for CCSD because he was hired by Marion School District as a 
bus driver.  His job at Marion School District was part-time.  His job at Marion involved 
driving bus and also performing some maintenance work.  He worked 10 to 15 hours 
per week.  (Tr. pp. 47-48)  At the time of hearing Holub worked approximately 80 hours 
per week; 40 at Rescar and 40 plus at IDS Trucking.  (Tr. pp. 48-49) 
 
  On the date of the injury, Saturday, May 12, 2018, Holub got out of his truck to 
unhook his truck, slipped on the steps, and fell backwards.  It was a cold rainy day and 
the steps of his truck were icy.  He fell back on his right side with his right arm sticking 
back behind him.  (Tr. p. 12)  He felt pain in his right wrist and shoulder.  Holub crawled 
back to the truck and then went about his work for the day.  (Tr. pp. 12-13)  That same 
day Holub phoned the on-call person at JMS to report that he fell and thought he had 
hurt his right shoulder and possibly his wrist.  (Tr. pp. 49-50)   
On Monday, Holub went to Makenzie Kimm, the human resource manager, and 
completed an injury report.  He told her that he wanted to report the injury in case his 
shoulder started to hurt in three months.  (Tr. p. 85)  According to Kimm, Holub reported 
he was getting out of the truck and then he stepped on a rock which caused him to fall 
and he landed on his right shoulder.  (Tr. p. 85)  Holub testified that he was asked if he 
wanted any medical treatment; he told them he would probably be fine, but he would let 
them know in a couple days.  (Def. Ex. K, depo pp. 40-41)  Kimm testified that she 
asked Holub if he needed medical care.  He stated he did not because his shoulders did 
not hurt any longer, but he would let her know if they did hurt in the next three months.  
(Tr. p. 85)  
 
On May 15, 2018 Holub saw Sean R. Dunkle, D.C. at Care Chiropractic, P.C.  
Holub had been treating with Dr. Dunkle since at least October 2017.  On May 15, 
Holub reported frequent burning and diffuse discomfort in the low back.  He rated his 
intensity of discomfort as a 7.  Holub stated he had been having issues between the 
shoulder blades and right hip.  He had been wearing a brace over his left hand because 
he “whacked it” over the winter.  According to Holub, the doctors thought it might be 
tendonitis that had not had time to heal.  His right hip had been bothering him the last 5-
10 days.  (Joint Exhibit 5, pp. 135-37)     
 
On May 23, 2018, Holub contacted Kimm and requested medical care for his 
right shoulder.  (Tr. pp. 51, 86)  Kimm advised him that she would contact the workers’ 
compensation carrier and they would advise Holub about an appointment.  (Tr. p. 86)   
 
The defendants directed Holub to the Work Well Clinic at St. Luke’s for treatment 
of his right shoulder.  (Tr. p. 51)  On May 25, 2018, he saw Megan Hart-Fernandez, 
DNP.  Holub reported that he was getting out of his semi on May 5, 2018 and slipped on 
the wet ground causing him to catch himself with his right arm extended.  He also 
injured his right ankle and knee as he struck and twisted them on the ground, but those 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 4 
 
symptoms had since resolved.  Initially he had right wrist and thumb pain but that too 
had resolved.  Holub had a history of 2 prior right rotator cuff surgeries.  He described 
his current pain which extended down the bicep as deep and aching.  He noted the pain 
was familiar to the pain he previously experienced.  He rated his pain as 3 out of 10. 
The assessment was right shoulder pain, with concerns for internal derangement.  An 
MRI was ordered.  Holub was given a prescription for a stronger dose of naproxen and 
Lortab and told to return after the MRI.  (JE2, pp. 21-23)   
 
On May 31, 2018, Holub underwent an MRI arthrogram of his right shoulder.  
The impression was focal tendinopathy and minimal subcentimeter partial-thickness 
tearing involving the supraspinatus tendon at its insertion, but with no evidence of high-
grade or full-thickness rotator cuff tendon tear and presumed tenodesis changes within 
the long head biceps tendon with no labral tear.  (JE1, pp. 12-13) 
 
Also on May 31, 2018, Holub returned to see his chiropractor, Dr. Dunkle.  He 
reported right low back pain, right hip pain, intermittent tightness in the neck.  The notes 
stated he had another MRI of the right shoulder today after hurting it a month ago when 
he fell landing on it with his arm outstretched backwards.  (JE5, pp. 138-139)   
 
Holub saw David P. Hart, M.D. at Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa (PCI) on June 25, 
2018.  Dr. Hart noted that Holub was well known to him because he had performed a 
left arthroscopic SLAP repair and distal clavicle resection on the left shoulder in 2015.  
Additionally, another PCI doctor, Dr. Fabiano, had performed an open procedure on the 
right shoulder along with a biceps tenotomy in 2001 and a second procedure in 2004.  
At the June 25, 2018 appointment Holub was accompanied by Ruth Ann Neidert, RN, a 
nurse case manager.  He was there to see Dr. Hart for right greater than left shoulder 
pain, new work injury on May 5, 2018.  Holub was injured when he slipped getting into a 
truck and his left hand was up above him before he sustained a traction injury to the left 
shoulder and then fell with the right arm behind him striking the ground.  He had pain 
anteriorly radiating into the biceps and the lateral proximal arm which was slowly 
improving.  His left shoulder felt different and was still painful, just not as concerning to 
him as his right shoulder.  The MRI of the right shoulder showed no rotator cuff tear.  Dr. 
Hart’s assessment was right shoulder strain status post biceps tenotomy and left 
shoulder strain status post SLAP repair.  There was no mention of neck pain.  Dr. Hart 
stated, “[i]t does not appear that he has sustained any significant structural damage to 
the right shoulder based on the MRI scan.”  (JE3, p. 65)  He encouraged Holub to 
continue naproxen and he referred him to physical therapy.  Dr. Hart advised Holub he 
could follow up with him or the occupational medicine doctor on an as-needed basis.  
Holub was to continue to work without restrictions.  (JE3, pp. 63-66)          
 
Holub attended physical therapy at Athletico on June 29, 2018.  He presented 
with right shoulder pain.  Initially he had left shoulder pain but that had subsided.  Holub 
was to attend therapy 3 times per week for 4 weeks.  (JE4, pp. 115-117)  On July 25, 
2018, the therapist reported to Dr. Hart that Holub rated his overall improvement at 75 
percent.  The therapist recommended additional therapy.  (JE4, pp. 121-123)    

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
On August 3, 2018, Holub returned to the Work Well Clinic and saw DNP Hart-
Fernandez.  An MRI arthrogram of his right shoulder was performed on May 31, 2018.  
Holub was referred to orthopedics due to positive findings and his past history of 2 right 
shoulder surgeries.  DNP Hart-Fernandez ordered physical therapy.  She noted Dr. Hart 
had injected Holub’s right shoulder.   (JE2, pp. 24-26) 
 
On August 15, 2018, Holub was discharged from therapy.  He had continued 
range of motion deficits, limited by pain, and weakness in the left [sic] shoulder.  Holub 
was discharged to a home exercise program.  (JE4, pp. 124-125) 
Holub saw Dr. Hart on September 28, 2018.  He had attended 12 sessions of 
physical therapy.  He reported that the injection Dr. Hart gave him helped but not as 
much as he wanted.  Holub continued to have intermittent right shoulder symptoms.  He 
was working without restrictions and was doing fairly well during the day while at work.  
After sitting he felt grinding in the shoulder.  Holub felt that he plateaued and was not 
making much improvement.  Holub had full range of motion of his neck.  Dr. Hart’s 
assessment was primary osteoarthritis of right shoulder.  Dr. Hart felt Holub’s symptoms 
were primarily related to his osteoarthritis.  Regarding the May 5, 2018 work injury, Dr. 
Hart placed Holub at maximum medical improvement (MMI).  No further treatment was 
needed and no work restrictions.  Holub testified that Dr. Hart told him his right shoulder 
symptoms were due to his preexisting osteoarthritis.  (JE3, pp. 72-74; Tr. p. 58)  
The appointment on September 28, 2018 was the last time the defendants 
authorized Holub to treat with Dr. Hart for the work injury.  Holub did not request any 
additional treatment through workers’ compensation after September 28, 2018, because 
he did not think he could do that under workers’ compensation.  (Tr. p. 60)  I find the last 
time Holub received treatment that was authorized by the defendants for his work injury 
was on September 28, 2018.     
 
On November 27, 2018, Dr. Hart assigned 2 percent impairment of the right 
upper extremity.  Dr. Hart cited the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides, using the range of 
motion model.  He reiterated that there were no restrictions placed on his activities.  (JE 
3, p. 79)    
 
Holub returned to Care Chiropractic on April 22, 2019.  He reported constant 
aching, numbing and tingling discomfort in the back of his right shoulder.  He also 
reported pain in his right wrist.  He was not sure if this was due to his neck or back 
being out.  Additionally, he reported numbness and tingling in his hand down to his 
fingertips.  (JE5, pp. 142-144)   
 
Holub saw Sunny Kim, M.D., on February 10, 2020.  He reported aching, dull 
shoulder pain.  He was interested in re-evaluation and discussion of treatment options 
for his shoulder and left foot pain.  Dr. Kim’s assessment was chronic bilateral shoulder 
pain due to rotator cuff tendonopathy and chronic left foot pain most likely due to 
peripheral neuropathy. A PRP injection was performed.  (JE6, pp. 238-239)    

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On June 15, 2020, Holub called Dr. Hart’s office directly; he did not contact the 
defendants to request treatment.  He reported he was having new issues with his right 
shoulder, and he requested to see Dr. Hart.  (JE3, p. 86) 
 
Holub returned to Dr. Hart on June 29, 2020.  Dr. Hart noted that he had received 
a phone request to see his right shoulder, but in talking with Holub at the appointment 
he also wanted to be seen for the left shoulder, right wrist, and numbness in the right 
hand.  He reported right hand grip weakness, intermittent radial-sided right throbbing, 
stabbing wrist pain aggravated by writing or lifting objects and bilateral hand numbness, 
worse on the right, intermittent in nature and worse at night.  He also reported bilateral 
right worse than left anterior shoulder pain aggravated by use.  X-rays of the right 
shoulder revealed mild radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis and a subtle inferior 
humeral head osteophyte.  (JE1, p. 16; JE3, p. 88)  X-rays of the left shoulder were 
normal.  (JE1, p. 15; JE 3, p. 88)  X-rays of the cervical spine showed mild spondylosis.  
(JE1, p. 15; JE 3, p. 88)  X-rays of the right wrist showed mild degenerative changes at 
the thumb CMC joint and triscaphoid area, demonstrating mild osteoarthritis. (JE1, p. 
15; JE 3, p. 88)  Dr. Hart’s assessment was primary osteoarthritis of right shoulder, right 
shoulder pain, left shoulder pain, right wrist pain, primary osteoarthritis of right wrist and 
carpal tunnel syndrome on both sides.  Dr. Hart stated that 2 years ago he placed Holub 
at MMI with regard to the right shoulder and there was no additional treatment for the 
right shoulder.  Dr. Hart noted that Holub had osteoarthritis and it was not unusual to 
have persistent right shoulder symptoms.  Dr. Hart recommended EMGs and nerve 
conduction velocities repeated for both wrists because he felt he probably had carpal 
tunnel syndrome.  He also assessed right shoulder pain, left shoulder pain, and right 
wrist pain.  (JE3, pp. 87-90)      
 
On August 31, 2020, Holub saw Judith Buchanan, M.D. at PCI; Holub was 
referred by Dr. Hart.  He reported bilateral hand pain and paresthesias that had been 
going on for months.  Testing showed bilateral median neuropathies at the wrists.  
There was no cervical component.  (JE3, pp. 92-93) 
On September 8, 2020, Holub saw Meiying Kuo, M.D. at PCI.  He reported new 
issues regarding his right wrist.  Dr. Kuo noted Holub had seen Dr. Hart, thinking there 
was an issue with his right rotator cuff.  For the past 2 or 3 weeks he had been 
experiencing pain along the base of his right thumb, especially at the end of the day due 
to prolonged writing.  The doctor’s assessment included unilateral primary osteoarthritis 
of first carpometacarpal joint, right hand, trigger finger of the left middle finger, bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome, right first CMC joint osteoarthritis, and left long finger flexor 
tendinitis.  (JE3, pp. 95-98)  Holub testified that after September 2018, he saw Dr. Kuo 
for a January 2018 trigger finger/left hand injury he sustained at Rescar.  (Tr. pp. 60-61)   
On June 17, 2022, Holub saw Dr. Hart for left shoulder pain.  He reported that 
both shoulders continued to bother him.  He was interested in a cortisone shot for his 
left shoulder.  The pain in his right shoulder was progressive and he was contemplating 
surgical treatment.  He had bilateral finger numbness in both hands and had been 
seeing Dr. Kuo.  Dr. Hart noted both shoulders showed active forward elevation to 150, 
external rotation at side 40, cuff strength 5-/5.  He noted right shoulder pain, unspecified 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 7 
 
chronicity.  Dr. Hart provided a corticosteroid injection for the left shoulder.  The 
diagnosis was post-traumatic osteoarthritis, right shoulder pain, and left shoulder pain.  
Holub was to follow-up as needed.  (JE3, pp. 101-103)   
Holub returned to Dr. Hart on October 21, 2022, for his left shoulder, new injury, 
and worsening intermittent left upper extremity numbness and tingling.  He admitted to 
intermittent minor neck stiffness but nothing serious.  Four weeks ago, while he was at 
home, Holub’s shoulder caught on the left.  He then began experiencing significant 
intermittent numbness and tingling worse at night.  On exam he had full, painless range 
of motion of his cervical spine.  He also had excellent range of motion of his left 
shoulder.  The assessment was left shoulder pain, unspecified chronicity.  Dr. Hart 
recommended repeat EMGs, particularly on the left side, to rule out cervical causes, 
brachial plexopathy or compression neuropathy of either the ulnar or carpal tunnel.  No 
work restrictions.  (JE3, pp. 105-106) 
Holub saw Dr. Hart again on November 11, 2022 for bilateral shoulder pain.  The 
right shoulder bothered him, but not as much as the left.  He wanted both shoulders 
injected and EMGs on both sides.  Exam of both shoulders showed active forward 
elevation to 150, abduction 160, external rotation at side 40, rotator cuff strength 5/5.  
The assessment was right shoulder pain, unspecified chronicity.  Dr. Hart provided 
bilateral shoulder injections.  Holub was to follow-up as needed.  No restrictions.  (JE3, 
pp. 107-108) 
On November 21, 2022 Holub saw Laurence Krain, M.D., for bilateral EMGs.  
Testing demonstrated symptoms consistent with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  A 
degree of ulnar neuropathy was also present.  (JE3, pp. 109-112) 
Holub returned to Dr. Kim for left shoulder pain on December 15, 2022.  The 
assessment was chronic bilateral shoulder pain due to rotator cuff tendinopathy with 
partial thickness tears, left worse than right.  Dr. Kim performed another platelet 
injection.  (JE6, pp. 240-242)  Dr. Kim saw Holub again on March 6, 2023 for bilateral 
shoulder pain.  He denied any new or recent injuries.  Also denied any changes in 
symptoms.  Another injection was performed.  (JE6, pp. 243-245)  On March 28, 2023, 
Dr. Kim performed a right wrist injection.  (JE6, p. 246)  Holub continued to receive 
injections for his hands on April 27, 2023.  (JE6, pp. 254-256) 
On July 14, 2023 Holub saw John Hart, M.D., who had taken over his father, Dr. 
David Hart’s practice.  He reported weakness in both shoulders with overhead reaching 
and lifting as well as laterally based shoulder pain.  Pain had been disturbing his sleep.  
An MRI of each shoulder was ordered.  (JE3, pp. 113-114) 
An MRI of the right shoulder was performed on August 7, 2023.  (JE1, p. 17)  
The MRI revealed tendon thickening, mild to moderate subscapularis tendinopathy, and 
moderate osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint.  There was no indication of a new 
injury.  (Id.)   

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 8 
 
At the request of his attorney, Holub saw Stanley J. Mathew, M.D., for an 
independent medical examination (IME).  As the result of the examination and review of 
the records provided to him Dr. Mathew authored a report on September 26, 2023.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pp. 11-17)   
Dr. Mathew had previously examined Holub on November 15, 2013 for an IME 
related to a right shoulder and right arm injury he sustained at a prior employer, ADM.  
In that prior IME, Dr. Mathew assigned 20 percent permanent impairment to Holub’s 
right upper extremity.  He also assigned permanent restrictions including avoiding lifting 
more than 15 pounds, repetitive overhead activities and repetitive pushing and pulling, 
and repetitive use of the right shoulder.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11; Def. Ex. L, pp. 102-104) 
In his September 2023 report, Dr. Mathew stated,  
It is my medical opinion that though Mr. Holub does have a complicated 
history of multiple shoulder surgeries, the accident that occurred on May 
12, 2018 was a substantial contributing factor in bringing about his current 
symptoms.  His most significant symptoms are in his right upper extremity, 
including his shoulder and hand, I do feel that the symptoms were 
significantly aggravated by the accident in 2018, he has worsening right 
upper extremity weakness and pain including his shoulder elbow and right 
hand.   
Due to overuse favoring his left upper extremity he also has worsening of 
his left upper extremity pain [and] weakness. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
Dr. Mathew stated, “It is my opinion that due to progression of his left upper 
extremity pain and weakness as well as continued neck pain or sequela still [sic] the 
accident that occurred on May 18, 2015.” [sic]  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Mathew opined that 
Holub had prior upper extremity injuries including shoulders and hands that had been 
worsened by the May 12, 2018 work injury.  Dr. Mathew felt that Holub would benefit 
from continued pain management, including medication management, injection 
therapies, oversite of physical therapy, a home exercise program as well as an 
evaluation by a pain psychologist as due to his development of chronic pain syndrome 
he was at an increased risk for surgical intervention to both of his upper extremities.   
Dr. Mathew opined Holub reached MMI in regard to the injuries he has sustained to his 
bilateral upper extremities as of May 12, 2019.  Dr. Mathew cited the AMA 5th Edition 
and assigned permanent partial impairment.  Using table 15-5, he assigned 5 percent 
whole person impairment rating for the cervical spine.  Using table 16-35, he assigned 
30 percent upper extremity impairment rating.  For right elbow weakness, using table 
16-35, Dr. Mathew assigned 20 percent upper extremity impairment.  For Holub’s right 
grip weakness, using table 16-34, Dr. Mathew assigned 10 percent impairment upper 
extremity.  For left shoulder weakness, using table 16-35, he assigned 20 percent upper 
extremity impairment.  For left elbow weakness, using table 16-35, he assigned 10 
percent upper extremity impairment.  For left grip weakness, using table 16-34, Dr. 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 9 
 
Mathew assigned 10 percent upper extremity impairment.  Dr. Mathew did not apportion 
any of his impairment rating to the prior injury that he previously rated.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16)  
Regarding restrictions, Dr. Mathew stated, 
All restrictions should be placed as tolerated as he will have good days 
and bad days.  When pain is severe he should limit overhead activities 
repetitive pushing pulling and lifting, in general I would avoid lifting of more 
than 20 pounds.  He should also avoid repetitive rotation of the cervical 
spine.  His right upper extremity is most significantly impaired, when pain 
is improved, he may perform these activities as tolerated.  In general I 
would advise him to avoid repetitive overhead activities. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) (errors in original) 
 
On September 27, 2023, Joseph Chen, M.D. authored a letter to defendants in 
this case.  Dr. Chen did not examine Holub; rather he based his opinions on his review 
of the records that were provided to him.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 3-15)  Dr. Chen noted 
inconsistencies in the records regarding Holub’s work injury.  Dr. Chen was asked to 
provide his diagnoses for Holub’s work injury sustained on May 12, 2018.  Dr. Chen 
opined, 
Mr. Holub may have sustained a temporary exacerbation of his pre-
existing right shoulder glenohumeral osteoarthritis.  The MRI findings that 
were identified on May 31, 2018 included partial thickness, intra-
substance tendon tears that were less than 1 cm in length which are quite 
minimal, and do not reflect significant tissue trauma or injury.  Mr. Holub 
was noted to have degenerative osteophytes in the glenohumeral joint that 
have progressed since 2015.  His rheumatologist has diagnosed him with 
SCL-70 osteoarthritis which reflects a genetic tendency to develop 
osteoarthritis in multiple joints including the thumbs and hands. 
(Def. Ex. B, pp. 13-14) 
Regarding the right shoulder, Dr. Chen felt that the May 2018 work injury would 
have led to merely a temporary period of worsening of such symptoms that would have 
resolved within 3-6 months afterwards.  He noted the radiographic studies including x-
rays and MRI which did not identify any more significant structural injury in the right 
shoulder that Dr. Hart felt required additional surgical intervention. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 5-6) 
Dr. Chen felt that Holub’s claim of left shoulder overuse injury was not consistent with 
his medical records which document a long history of left shoulder difficulties since 
2001.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 5)  Regarding Holub’s claims of right elbow, forearm, hand, left 
elbow, wrist, and hand symptoms, Dr. Chen believed those were consistent with the 
natural progression of his primary osteoarthritis or inflammatory arthritis for which he 
had been seeing Dr. Singh for many years.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 10 
 
Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Hart’s assignment of 2 percent right upper extremity 
impairment for range of motion.  He opined that Holub did not need any permanent work 
restrictions or future treatment due to the work injury.  Dr. Chen opined that Holub did 
not sustain an injury to his left shoulder due to the May 12, 2018 work injury.  Dr. Chen 
also felt that Holub’s claims of right elbow, forearm, hand, and left elbow, wrist, and 
hand symptoms are more likely than not consistent with the natural progression of his 
primary osteoarthritis or inflammatory arthritis for which he has been seen by Dr. Singh 
for many years.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 3-15) 
           On October 1, 2023, Dr. Chen issued a second letter after he reviewed Dr. 
Mathew’s September 26, 2023 report.  (Def. Ex. C, pp. 16-18)  Dr. Chen disagreed with 
many of Dr. Mathew’s opinions.  Specifically, Dr. Chen did not agree with Dr. Mathew’s 
opinion that Holub’s May 12, 2018 work injury contributed to Holub’s current upper 
extremity pain complaints especially when other contemporaneous medical records 
indicated a nearly identical mechanism of injury reported by his chiropractor, but which 
was not mentioned by any of his healthcare providers who treated Holub in connection 
with the reported work injury.  (Def. Ex. C, pp. 16-17)  Dr. Chen also disagreed with Dr. 
Mathew’s opinion that Holub’s left upper extremity and shoulder pain were due to 
overuse of his dominant right upper extremity physical impairments.  Dr. Chen noted 
that the idea that Holub injured his left shoulder due to overuse was not consistent with 
his long history of pre-existing left shoulder problems.  Dr. Chen also cited the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation, 2nd Edition, page 766 to 
support his position.  He noted that Dr. Mathew omitted Holub’s diagnoses of primary 
osteoarthritis and auto-immune mediated inflammatory arthritis.  Dr. Chen said,   
It is my medical opinion that Mr. Holub’s varied musculoskeletal 
complaints have arisen from the natural progression of his long history of 
primary right shoulder osteoarthritis, the natural progression of prior 
injuries to his right shoulder that necessitated 2 surgical procedures on the 
shoulder, injection treatment into the hands/wrists, personal inflammatory 
auto-immune markers such as the SCL-70 antibody, and personal 
conditions including median neuropathies at the wrists that commonly 
occur in working-aged adults, and chronic myofascial neck pain. 
(Def. Ex. C, pp. 17-18)      
 
Dr. Chen reiterated that he felt no restrictions and no additional treatment was 
necessary due to the May 12, 2018 work injury.  It remained Dr. Chen’s opinion that 
Holub’s current level of physical impairment was in no way related to the alleged work 
injury.  Additionally, he set forth the reasons he believed Dr. Mathew’s impairment 
ratings were incorrect.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 18)     
Holub believes that as the result of the May 12, 2018 work injury he sustained 
injuries to his right shoulder, right wrist, and right elbow.  He testified that his left arm 
hurts because he had been compensating for his right arm.  He also testified that his 
neck was stiff.  (Tr. pp. 13-14) 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 11 
 
Kimm testified that Holub did not miss any time from work at JMS after his May 
12, 2018 work injury.  He continued to perform his same job, same part-time hours, and 
did not report any problems performing his duties.  According to Kimm, Holub was 
terminated from JMS on December 18, 2018 because he was telling people that JMS 
was not paying their vendor bills.  Once Holub was placed at MMI he did not contact 
Kimm to request any additional treatment.  (Tr. pp. 86-88) 
 
As noted by some of the physicians above, Holub had problems prior to the May 
12, 2018 work injury.  In November 2001 Dr. Fabiano noted Holub had symptoms of 
carpal tunnel syndrome and recommended further evaluation.  (JE3, p. 31)  In 2003 Dr. 
Fabiano noted Holub wanted to hold off on carpal tunnel surgery because workers’ 
compensation would not approve it, but understood he could undergo the surgery in the 
future.  (Def. Ex. L, p. 96)  
In March 2001 Dr. Fabiano performed a right shoulder surgery due to a biceps 
tendon tear, labral tear, and rotator cuff tear due to a work injury.  (JE3, p. 27)  Dr. 
Fabiano assigned 10 percent permanent impairment and restrictions for Holub’s right 
shoulder.  (JE3, pp. 30-31)  In September 2003 Dr. Fabiano performed a second right 
shoulder surgery, including a rotator cuff repair and distal clavicle resection.  (JE3, p. 
34)  In 2013 Holub sustained a right shoulder injury while working for ADM.  He was 
diagnosed with a partial thickness rotator cuff tear.  Holub received conservative 
treatment.  Dr. Tearse assigned 11 percent right upper extremity impairment.  This is 
the injury referenced above for which Dr. Mathew assigned 20 percent right upper 
extremity impairment and permanent restrictions.  (Def. Ex. L, p. 104)  In December 
2013 Dr. Tearse noted evidence of arthritic changes in Holub’s right shoulder.  (Def. Ex. 
L, p. 101)  By March 2017 Holub reported right shoulder pain with a heavy feeling 
radiating down his right arm and a sensation in his wrist of a need to pop for the past 6 
months.  (JE1, p. 3)  In April 2017 Holub experienced right-sided neck pain with pain 
radiation down his right arm.  A cervical MRI demonstrated multilevel degenerative disc 
disease.  (JE1, pp. 5-6)  Holub reported right shoulder pain, lateral distal elbow pain, 
forearm, thumb, and index finger pain.  Dr. Hart assessed ruptured long head biceps 
tendon right shoulder, glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis right shoulder, and bilateral mild 
carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE3, pp. 44-46)  A July 2017 MRI of the right shoulder noted 
advanced progression of osteoarthritis.  (JE1, pp. 8-9)  Dr. Hart commented that the 
MRI showed advanced progression of his osteoarthritis.  (JE3, p. 51)  In October 2017 
Dr. Hart stated that another arthroscopic debridement and chondroplasty of the right 
shoulder could be considered, but the pain relief and long-term success was 
unpredictable.  He did recommend Holub consider undergoing carpal tunnel release on 
the right side.  (JE3, pp. 57-58) 
In August 2015 Dr. Hart saw Holub for left shoulder pain that began one year 
prior.  (JE3, p. 35)  He received PRP injections which provided relief until Holub fell on 
July 4, 2015.  (JE3, p. 35)  In September 2015 Dr. Hart performed surgery on his left 
shoulder for a torn labrum, degenerative arthritis, rotator cuff tear, and torn biceps 
tendon.  (JE3, p. 39) 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 12 
 
In February 2018 Holub reported pain in both of his shoulders.  (JE5, p. 129)  On 
March 30, 2018, Holub told Dr. Dunkle that he fell over the weekend in the snow while 
getting out of the truck on a slippery wet garage floor.  He fell on the right shoulder 
again.  (JE5, p. 132)   
Holub sustained a work injury on March 2, 2009.  As the result of the injury, he 
was diagnosed with right lateral epicondylitis and received PRP injections.  Dr. Fabiano 
assigned 5 percent right upper extremity impairment and permanent restrictions.  He 
noted that Holub’s right elbow problem was one that would not resolve and may require 
further intervention.  (Def. Ex. L, pp. 97-99)  At hearing Holub denied the March 2, 2009 
injury was his right elbow; he testified it was for his left elbow.  When asked about the 
impairment rating and permanent restrictions for his elbow, Holub responded that he 
could not recall those.  (Tr. p. 68)   
Holub has received chiropractic treatment since at least 2014.  His chiropractor 
has told him that he has lots of arthritis in both of his shoulders.  (Tr. p. 61; JE5, p. 151)   
In his September 20, 2023 deposition Holub testified that the basis of his left 
shoulder claim was not that he injured it when he fell; rather, it was from overuse.  He 
has alleged he injured his left shoulder due to overuse because of this right shoulder 
injury.  (Def. Ex. K, p. 82, depo. p. 49)  At the hearing Holub could not put a date on 
when he believed he first sustained an overuse injury to his left shoulder as the result of 
the May 12, 2018 work injury.  (Tr. pp. 53-54)  However, in his deposition Holub testified 
that his left shoulder overuse injury began about three years ago, which would have 
been 2020.  (Def. Ex. K, p. 82, depo p. 49; Tr. p. 54)  He did not report to the 
defendants in 2020 that he believed he sustained an overuse injury to his left shoulder 
due to his May 12, 2018 work injury.  (Tr. p. 54)  The treatment he sought for his left 
shoulder was done on his own and not authorized by the defendants.  (Tr. pp. 54-55) 
Holub did not miss any time from any of his jobs due to the May 12, 2018 work 
injury.  Holub did not have any restrictions placed on his activities by a treating 
physician for his work injury.  Holub admitted that the treatment he sought for his left 
shoulder was sought on his own, not through the defendants.  (Tr. pp. 51-54, 86)  He 
has been taking Tylenol for arthritis for years.  (Tr. p. 77)    
The first issue to be addressed is whether Holub’s work injury extends beyond 
the right shoulder.  There are several experts who have offered their opinions.   
Dr. Hart was the authorized treating doctor in this case.  Dr. Hart provided 
treatment to Holub for his shoulders both before and after the May 12, 2018 work injury.  
Dr. Hart placed Holub at MMI on September 28, 2018.  Dr. Hart assigned 2 percent right 
upper extremity impairment due to the May 12, 2018 work injury.  He did not assign any 
permanent restrictions.  (JE3, p. 79)    
Dr. Chen performed a records review at the request of the defendants.  Dr. Chen 
agreed with Dr. Hart’s opinion regarding impairment for the right shoulder.  Dr. Chen 
also did not assign any permanent restrictions due to the May 12, 2018 work injury.         

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 13 
 
Dr. Mathew, claimant’s IME doctor, is the only physician to causally relate the left 
upper extremity, left shoulder, and right upper extremity conditions to the work injury.  
None of the physicians who provided treatment to Holub after he was placed at MMI for 
his right shoulder causally connect any of his conditions to the May 12, 2018 work 
injury.  Dr. Mathew stated that the May 12, 2018 work injury was a substantial 
contributing factor in bringing about his current symptoms.  At that time, Holub had 
symptoms in his left upper extremity, left shoulder, right upper extremity, and right 
shoulder.  Dr. Mathew noted that Holub had a complicated medical history with multiple 
injuries to his bilateral shoulders, but he failed to provide any rationale to support his 
blanket causation statement.  Although Dr. Mathew did not list any neck diagnoses in 
his list of conditions in the “Impression” portion of his report, he seemed to indicate that 
Holub’s neck pain is some sort of sequela to the work accident.  However, due to the 
wording of his answer to question 3, it is difficult to ascertain what exactly he was trying 
to state.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Mathew’s lack of rationale to support his blanket 
causation opinion is troubling because he is the only physician to causally connect 
anything other than the right shoulder to the work injury.  Holub has a complicated 
medical history, including multiple shoulder surgeries, yet Dr. Mathew failed to explain 
how the May 12, 2018 work injury was a substantial contributing factor in bringing about 
all of Holub’s current conditions.   
The evidence in this case shows that Holub did not miss any time from any of his 
jobs as the result of the May 12, 2018 work injury.  No treating physician placed any 
restrictions on his activities due to the work injury.  There is no evidence that Holub 
reported having difficulty performing his job duties at any of his jobs following the work 
injury.  Following the work injury, Dr. Hart provided conservative treatment for four 
months, placed him at MMI, rated his permanent impairment, released him without 
restrictions, and opined that no further treatment was necessary due to the work injury.  
I find the opinions of Dr. Hart and Dr. Chen carry the greatest weight in this case.  I find 
that Dr. Mathew’s opinions are not well reasoned and are not consistent with the record 
as a whole.  I find that Holub has failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the 
evidence that he sustained any injury beyond his right shoulder as the result of the May 
12, 2018 work injury. Thus, I find that as the result of the May 12, 2018 work injury 
Holub sustained an injury to his right shoulder.  I further find Holub reached MMI for the 
May 12, 2018 work injury on September 28, 2018.   
We now turn to the extent of impairment.  Using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, 
both Dr. Hart and Dr. Chen opined that Holub sustained 2 percent impairment of his 
right upper extremity due to the May 12, 2018 work injury.  (JE3, p. 79; Def. Ex. B, p. 
14)  Dr. Mathew assigned 30 percent right upper extremity impairment in regard to his 
right shoulder weakness.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16)  Both Dr. Hart and Dr. Chen disagreed with 
the impairment ratings set forth by Dr. Mathew.  Dr. Chen pointed out that authors of the 
AMA Guides Fifth Edition “recommend assigning rating for muscle weakness only if 
there are consistent and documented impairments that have been corroborated by two 
or more treating physicians over a consistent period of treatment.”  (Def. Ex. C, p. 17)  I 
find the impairment opinions of Dr. Hart and Dr. Chen carry greater weight than that of 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 14 
 
Dr. Mathew.  Thus, I find Holub has demonstrated that he sustained 2 percent 
impairment of his right upper extremity as the result of the May 12, 2018 work injury. 
We now turn to the rate dispute.  The parties agree that Holub’s weekly earnings 
must include the earnings he received from his full-time job and both of his part-time 
jobs for the 12 months prior to the injury.  At the time of the May 12, 2018 work injury, 
claimant was working for three employers, Rescar, CCSD, and JMS.  The parties agree 
on the gross earnings from Rescar and JMS.  Their sole disagreement is the amount of 
claimant’s gross earnings from CCSD, his other part-time job.  Part of the difficulty in 
determining the gross earnings from CCSD is that CCSD is not a party in this case and 
there is limited information regarding claimant’s earnings in evidence.  The evidentiary 
record contains three sources of his gross earnings from CCSD.   
First, there is a payroll payment history (“PPH”) which covers “payment dates” 
from September 15, 2016 through June 14, 2019.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 75-77)  The pertinent 
information in the PPH includes payment date and gross pay.  The payment dates occur 
twice per month.  The gross earnings are not broken down to a weekly or daily amount 
and do not specify the pay period.  (Id.)       
Second, there are payroll check stubs (“PCS”) from CCSD which cover pay 
periods ranging from April 10, 2017 through May 19, 2019.  The pertinent information 
from the PCS includes payment date, pay period, gross pay, and payment description.  
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 78-93)  Claimant provided approximately 16 payroll check stubs. 
Unfortunately, only three of those 16 are for the 12 months immediately preceding the 
date of injury; the remaining of the PCS are outside of the relevant 12-month period.  
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 80-82).       
Third, there are archived timecard reports (“ATCR”) for May 15, 2017 through 
May 11, 2018.  The pertinent information includes date worked and hours in and out.  
The documents also contain hand-written information which sets forth the hours worked 
each day and rate of pay.  (Def. Ex. I, pp. 62-67)  
I find that the ATCR is more detailed than the PPH and the PCS.  I also find that 
the ATCR contains the most complete information for the relevant statutory time period 
in question.  I find that the ATCR provides the best evidence of claimant’s earnings from 
his part-time job at CCSD.   
 
Claimant sets forth his rate calculation in his exhibit 2, page 20.  In his calculation 
he sets forth a 52-week subtotal of wages for CCSD which he calculates amounts to 
$9,685.04.  According to his brief, claimant based the 52-week subtotal on information 
from the PPH and PCS.  The check dates claimant used range from June 15, 2017 to 
June 15, 2018. Claimant admits that the PPH is missing pertinent information but 
contends that the missing information is provided by claimant’s payroll check stubs.  
Unfortunately, claimant only provided 3 payroll stubs for the relevant time period.  
Additionally, claimant’s calculation is problematic because it includes wages earned 
after the date of injury.  I find that that claimant’s rate calculation is not based on 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 15 
 
earnings which the employee earned during the 12 calendar months immediately 
preceding the injury.          
 
Defendants set forth their rate calculation in their exhibit H, page 54.  Defendants 
calculate the wages from CCSD for the relevant time period amount to $7,259.57.  Their 
calculation is based on the ATCR.  I find defendants’ rate calculation is the most 
consistent with the statutory language and most likely to reflect the claimant’s gross 
weekly earnings prior to the date of injury.  Thus, I find Holub’s total earnings from 
CCSD for the relevant time amounts to $7,259.57. 
The parties agree that the total earnings for the relevant timeframe from JMS and 
Rescar amounts to $58,909.52.  Thus, Holub’s total earnings from all three jobs for the 
12 months immediately preceding the injury amount to $66,169.09.   
 
Holub is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in his exhibit 4.  I 
found that claimant failed to provide that he sustained an injury beyond his right 
shoulder.  Therefore, defendants are only responsible for treatment for claimant’s right 
shoulder.  Dr. Hart placed Holub at MMI for his right shoulder injury on September 28, 
2018.  Dr. Hart stated no further treatment was needed for Holub’s work injury.  (JE3, p. 
73)  I find defendants are responsible for the prescription Holub filled on September 28, 
2018.  Claimant is seeking payment in the amount of $1.27 for a prescription for 
Meloxicam prescribed by Dr. Hart which he filled at Hy-Vee pharmacy on September 
28, 2018.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 101)  The prescription was for 30 pills.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 101)  On 
September 28, 2018, Dr. Hart prescribed Meloxicam once a day for 30 days.  (JE3, p. 
73)  I find that the prescription Holub filled on September 28, 2018 for Meloxicam 
prescribed by Dr. Hart is related to the May 12, 2018 work injury.  Thus, I find 
defendants are responsible for the costs of this prescription.  After September 28, 2018 
Holub never requested additional medical treatment from the defendants.  (Tr. p. 60) 
Thus, I find any treatment, including prescriptions, he received after September 28, 
2018 was not authorized by the defendants and therefore are not their responsibility.  
Thus, I find the only past medical expenses listed in claimant’s exhibit 4 that defendants 
are responsible for is the September 28, 2018 prescription for Meloxicam.      
 
Claimant is also seeking reimbursement for medical mileage as set forth in his 
exhibit 5.  Claimant is seeking reimbursement for mileage he incurred from May 25, 
2018 through August 7, 2023.  Based on the above findings, I find any mileage incurred 
after September 28, 2018 is not related to the May 12, 2018 work injury.  The first 11 
entries on claimant’s exhibit 5 are for mileage that was incurred on or before September 
28, 2018.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 124)  I find that the first 11 entries listed on claimant’s exhibit 5, 
page 124, dates ranging from May 25, 2018 through September 28, 2019, are related to 
the work injury.  Therefore, I find defendants are responsible to pay claimant mileage in 
the amount of $94.95.  I further find that defendants have previously issued claimant 
payment for mileage which exceeds $94.95.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 47)  Thus, I find Holub has 
failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to any 
additional medical mileage.               

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 16 
 
Claimant is seeking alternate medical care, specifically that any future medical 
care be assigned to John Hart, M.D.  (Hearing Report, numbered paragraph 10) 
Claimant demonstrated he sustained an injury to his right shoulder as the result of the 
May 12, 2018 work injury.  Defendants accepted and provided treatment for his right 
shoulder.  I find an award of alternate medical care for claimant’s right shoulder is not 
appropriate.   
Penalty 
Claimant is seeking penalty for underpayment of permanent partial disability 
(PPD) benefits, specifically underpayment of the weekly benefit amount due to the rate 
dispute.  I found that the correct weekly workers’ compensation rate in this case is eight 
hundred sixteen and 78/100 dollars ($816.78).  Defendants originally calculated the 
weekly rate as $814.53 and paid PPD at that rate.  Because Holub was a part-time 
employee, defendants had to obtain wage records from other employers in order to 
calculate his average weekly wages.  Defendants had difficulty obtaining the wage 
records from College Community School District; Holub did not assist defendants in 
obtaining those wage records.  (Tr. p. 55)  Defendants reviewed the calculation and 
determined the rate should be $816.78.  Defendants calculated the underpayment, plus 
interest, and issued a payment accordingly.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 21)  While initially there was 
an underpayment of $2.25 per week, once defendants obtained the wage records from 
CCSD, defendants voluntarily paid the underpayment, plus interest.  Given the 
circumstances of this case, where defendants had to obtain wages from two non-party 
employers, I find defendants did not unreasonably delay benefits.  Therefore, an award 
of penalty is not appropriate.                                                            
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 17 
 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant alleges he sustained permanent disability to his right shoulder, left 
shoulder, cervical spine, and both upper extremities as the result of the May 12, 2018 
work injury.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that the opinions of Dr. Hart 
and Dr. Chen are more persuasive that the opinion of Dr. Mathew.  I conclude claimant 
demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained permanent 
disability to his right shoulder.  I further conclude that claimant failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he sustained permanent disability that extends 
beyond his right shoulder. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions 
of section 85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an 
injured worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional 
disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body 
part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella 
Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
In 2017, the Iowa Legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.34. Before the 
2017 changes, shoulder injuries were considered proximal to the arm and compensated 
as a body as a whole injury, under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u). Prior to the 2017 
changes to Iowa Code section 85.34, a shoulder injury was compensated as an 
unscheduled injury, and based on industrial disability. See Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle 
Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 N.W.2d 161(1949). 
One of the changes made to Iowa Code section 85.34 in 2017, dealt with the 
shoulder. The legislative changes added the shoulder to the list of scheduled members.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) states: “[f]or the loss of a shoulder, weekly compensation 
during four hundred weeks.” Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n)(2018). This amendment 
went into effect on July 1, 2018. The legislature did not define the term “shoulder.” 
 
Claimant’s injury involves a shoulder strain.  I conclude claimant failed to prove 
that his injury is compensable as unscheduled.  See Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 972 
N.W.2d 728 (Iowa 2022); Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 665 (Iowa 2022).  
Thus, I conclude claimant has demonstrated compensation for his scheduled member 
shoulder under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
Having concluded that the disability is a scheduled member evaluated under 
Section 85.34(2)(n), I must now assess the degree of disability to the claimant’s right 
shoulder. 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 18 
 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through “t” 
or paragraph “u” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by 
utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the 
American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner 
by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  This agency has adopted The Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical 
Association for determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for 
permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  Lay testimony or agency expertise 
shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining functional 
impairment and not loss of earning capacity. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant has demonstrated by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he sustained a 2 percent right upper extremity 
impairment as the result of the May 12, 2018 work injury. 
Permanent partial disability compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based 
on a maximum of 400 weeks.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n).  Dr. Hart and Dr. Chen’s 
2 percent right upper extremity impairment rating entitles claimant to 8 weeks of PPD 
benefits commencing on September 28, 2018.  These benefits shall be paid at the 
weekly workers’ compensation rate, as discussed below, of eight hundred sixteen and 
78/100 dollars ($816.78).  Prior to hearing defendants paid claimant 8 weeks of PPD at 
said rate.  Defendants are entitled to a credit for benefits paid.  Thus, claimant has failed 
to demonstrate entitlement to any additional weekly benefits as the result of the work 
injury. 
 
We now turn to the issue of the appropriate weekly workers’ compensation rate.  
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee 
at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross salary, 
wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee 
worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured 
as the employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending on the type of earnings and employment.     
The claimant in this case was injured on a part-time job.  The parties agree that 
the claimant’s rate should be calculated pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.36(9).  The 
Code states,  
If an employee earns either no wages or less than the usual weekly 
earnings of the regular full-time adult laborer in the line of industry in which 
the employee is injured in that locality, the weekly earnings shall be one-
fiftieth of the total earnings which the employee has earned from all 
employment during the twelve calendar months immediately preceding the 
injury. 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 19 
 
Iowa Code section 85.36(9). 
  
Defendants’ rate calculation is set forth in their exhibit H, page 54.  Their 
calculation is based on the wages from CCSD for the relevant statutory time period and 
amount to $7,259.57.  Their calculation is based on the ATCR.  I conclude defendants’ 
rate calculation is the most consistent with the statutory language and most likely to 
reflect the claimant’s gross weekly earnings prior to the date of injury.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant’s total earnings for the 
12 months immediately preceding the injury amount to $66,169.09.  One-fiftieth of those 
total earnings amounts to $1,323.38.  Thus, I find claimant’s average weekly wage is 
$1,323.00 as set forth in defendants’ exhibit H, page 54.  The parties stipulated that for 
rate purposes claimant is married and entitled to 2 exemptions.  Applying the average 
weekly wage to the benefits schedule results in a weekly workers’ compensation rate of 
eight hundred sixteen and 78/100 dollars ($816.78).   
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses.  Under Iowa law the 
employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, 
podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies 
for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law.  The employer 
shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those 
services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 1975).   
Pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27, claimant is entitled to payment of reasonable 
medical expenses incurred for treatment of a work injury.  Claimant is entitled to an 
order of reimbursement if he/she has paid those expenses.  Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider.  See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). 
The employee has the burden of proof in showing that treatment is related to the 
injury.  Auxier v. Woodward State Hospital-School, 266 N.W.2d 139 (Iowa 1978), 
Watson v. Hanes Border Company, No. 1 Industrial Comm’r report 356, 358 (1980) 
(claimant failed to prove medical charges were related to the injury where medical 
records contained nothing related to that injury). See also Bass v. Veith Construction 
Corp., File No 5044438 (App. May 27, 2016) (claimant failed to prove causal connection 
between injury and claimed medical expenses). 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude the only expense claimant 
demonstrated was related to the May 12, 2018 work injury was the prescription filled on 
September 28, 2018.  Specifically, I conclude defendants are responsible for the 
prescription for Meloxicam prescribed by Dr. Hart which he filled at Hy-Vee pharmacy 
on September 28, 2018.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 101)  
 
Claimant has asserted a claim for penalty benefits.   

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 20 
 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
a. 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
known to the employer or insurance carrier at the time of the 
denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits, the 
workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits in 
addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of 
benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
 
b. 
The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award 
benefits under this subsection if the commissioner finds both 
of the following facts: 
(1) 
The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) 
The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section [10A.315(4)]1, we hold an 
employee is entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in 
payment unless the employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A 
reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary 
for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a 
reasonable basis to contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A 
“reasonable basis” for denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly 
debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
                                                 
1 Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) was previously codified as Iowa code section 86.13(4).  No 
substantive changes were made to the statute when transferred from section 86.13 to section 10A.315.  
References to the current location of this statute are substituted to avoid confusion. 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 21 
 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section [10A.315].  In that case, we 
will defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s 
finding of legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); 
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section [10A.315(4)].  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 
(Iowa 1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section [10A.315], the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 10A.315] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 
[10A.315] is applicable when payment of compensation is 
not timely . . . or when the full amount of compensation is not 
paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 22 
 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does not 
make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it clear 
that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner could 
reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See Christensen, 
554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
Weekly compensation payments are due at the end of the compensation week.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 229, 235. 
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Davidson v. Bruce, 594 
N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999).  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 338 (Iowa 2008).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I found that any delay defendants had in 
paying the correct rate was reasonable.  Thus, I conclude an award of penalty benefits 
is not appropriate in this case.       
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 6.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers' 
Compensation Commissioner or the hearing deputy.  I find that claimant was generally 
not successful in his claim.  Therefore, I exercise my discretion and conclude that an 
award of costs is not appropriate in this case.  Each party shall bear their own costs.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of eight hundred sixteen and 78/100 
dollars ($816.78).   
Claimant has demonstrated entitlement to 8 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on the stipulated commencement date of September 28, 2018.  
The parties stipulated that prior to hearing defendants paid claimant 8 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of $816.78 per week.  Thus, claimant 
has failed to demonstrate entitlement to any additional weekly benefits. 

HOLUB V. JMS TRANSPORTATION CO., INC. 
Page 23 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay the medical expense as set forth above. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ___15th ___ day of April, 2024. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Casey Steadman (via WCES) 
Stephanie Marett (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
  
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
