Case Number: 21700779.01
Case Title:  EICHMEYER, CATHY V. NORDSTROM INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Eichmeyer Cathy-21700779.01D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
CATHY EICHMEYER, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
File No. 21700779.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  :  
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
NORDSTROM, INC., 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :  
 
Self-Insured, 
  :           Head Note Nos.: 1108, 1803.1 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Cathy Eichmeyer, filed a petition for arbitration on August 2, 2021.  
She seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Nordstrom, Inc., a self-insured employer. 
The claimant was represented by Gary Nelson. The defendant was represented by 
Thomas Wolle. 
 
The matter came on for video hearing on November 16, 2022, before deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner Joe Walsh originating in Des Moines, Iowa, via 
Zoom video conferencing. The parties did an excellent job of narrowing the hearing 
record, as well as the issues in the case. The record in the case consists of claimant’s 
exhibits 1 through 4; defense exhibits A through C; and joint exhibits 1 through 3. The 
claimant testified at hearing, and was the only witness. Christal Hansen Ruda served as 
the court reporter. The matter was fully submitted on December 20, 2022. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. The nature and extent of permanent partial disability. 
 
2. Costs. 
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jun-02  08:16:12     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

EICHMEYER V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 2 
 
2. Claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment, on February 10, 2021. 
 
3. This injury was a cause of both temporary and permanent disability. 
 
4. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
 
5. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is 
December 27, 2021. 
 
6. The weekly rate of compensation is $429.52. 
 
7. Defendant has paid and is entitled to a credit of 20 weeks of 
compensation (permanent partial disability). 
 
8. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant Cathy Eichmeyer was 66 years old as of the date of hearing. She resides 
with her husband in Cedar Rapids.  She graduated from high school in 1975. She testified 
live and under oath at hearing and I find her to be a highly credible witness. She was a 
good historian. Her testimony was consistent with other portions of the record. There was 
nothing about her demeanor which caused me any concern for her truthfulness. On the 
contrary, the total picture painted was that of a highly credible person. 
 
Ms. Eichmeyer has worked for Nordstrom since September 2009 in the returned 
inspection department. This position required her to process returns and place totes 
weighing 15 to 25 pounds on a recycle line above her head. She testified in some detail 
about her work activities. (Transcript, pages 12-14)  She testified it was her understanding 
that this was the lightest job at Nordstrom. (Tr., pp. 20-21) The parties have stipulated 
that Ms. Eichmeyer sustained an injury to her left shoulder, which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment, on February 10, 2021 while performing this work. Ms. 
Eichmeyer had experienced similar symptoms in her left shoulder in 2019; however, the 
symptoms had mostly resolved at that time. 
 
Following her February 2021 injury, Nordstrom directed her medical care and sent 
her to Matthew Bollier, M.D., at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics. Dr. Bollier 
performed rotator cuff surgery in July 2021. The surgery was described as left shoulder 
arthroscopy, rotator cuff repair, capsular release, extensive debridement, biceps 
tenotomy, subacromial decompression, and distal clavicle excision. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) She 
had a relatively routine course of postoperative treatment, undergoing physical therapy 
until she was released at maximum medical improvement on January 27, 2021. Dr. Bollier 
assigned a 5 upper extremity rating. (Jt. Ex. 2, p.18). He provided no rating for the distal 
clavicle excision. 

EICHMEYER V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Ms. Eichmeyer retired from Nordstrom on August 6, 2021, while she was still under 
care by Dr. Bollier. She testified she was concerned she would reinjure her shoulder or 
that she would not be able to handle the physical requirements of her job. She testified 
that she had planned to work until she was 66 years old, but she decided to retire a little 
early due to her injury. I find this testimony to be highly believable. In fact, she returned 
to Dr. Bollier in April 2022. Dr. Bollier documented worsening shoulder pain but offered 
no additional treatment at the time. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 19) Ms. Eichmeyer testified credibly that 
her left shoulder continues to be symptomatic and has, in fact, worsened. Prior to hearing, 
she became employed with Homestead, as a companion for an individual with dementia.  
She mostly sits with the individual and visits. She does some light cleaning and earns 
$15.00 per hour. (Tr., p. 17) 
 
In April 2022, Mark Taylor, M.D. examined Ms. Eichmeyer. Dr. Taylor performed 
an extraordinarily thorough review of the records, including a summary, and examined 
her as well. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 6-10) He diagnosed her with left-side rotator cuff tear, biceps 
tendinopathy and AC joint arthropathy. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) He then assigned a 16 percent 
left upper extremity impairment per the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, for this condition. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 11) It is noted that, within this rating Dr. Taylor assigned 1 percent for “slight 
weakness of supination of the left arm” which is included in the rating. This is one of the 
primary disputes in the case; namely, whether this additional rating should result in a 
finding that claimant has sustained permanent functional impairment in two separate body 
parts, her left shoulder and her left arm. On this point, Dr. Taylor opined the following:   
 
In this circumstance, Ms. Eichmeyer was found to have slight weakness of 
supination on the left side compared to the right side, and for which I 
recommended 1% left upper extremity impairment (supination is a 
forearm/elbow movement).  Given this information, it appears that there was 
a mild functional impact on her arm strength (supination) as result of the 
biceps injury and subsequent need for treatment (tenotomy). 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) Dr. Taylor also recommended permanent restrictions for her condition. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) I find Dr. Taylor’s rating and opinions to be the most comprehensive, 
thorough, and accurate opinion in the record.   
 
In response to this, Nordstrom had Ms. Eichmeyer evaluated by James Milani, 
D.O., an occupational medicine physician in September 2022. Dr. Milani reviewed records 
and performed an examination. (Def. Ex. A) Dr. Milani assigned a 7 percent rating per the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. (Def. Ex. A, p. 5) Like Dr. Bollier, Dr. Milani downplayed any 
rating for the distal clavicle resection. (Def. Ex. A, p. 6) He also did not provide any rating 
for loss of strength in her elbow. In fact, it does not appear that Dr. Milani evaluated the 
elbow in any meaningful way. He did comment on the issue of rating strength loss, opining 
that strength loss should only be rated separately in rare instances when the range of 
motion measurements do not adequately encompass a person’s functional loss. (Def. Ex. 
A, pp. 5-6) I interpret Dr. Milani’s opinion to mean that strength loss in the elbow/forearm 
should not be rated in this case because her shoulder impairment rating adequately 
assesses her loss of function. Ms. Eichmeyer testified credibly that Dr. Milani chose not 
to evaluate her left elbow and/or forearm.  (Tr., pp. 17-18) 

EICHMEYER V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 4 
 
As mentioned previously, Ms. Eichmeyer has testified that her ongoing symptoms 
in her left shoulder impacted her ability to use her shoulder both at work and in her 
activities of daily living. (Tr. pp. 20-25) She specifically testified regarding the weakness 
in her left arm. (Tr., p. 22) 
 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the file, I find the following by a 
preponderance of the evidence: 
 
1. Ms. Eichmeyer has sustained a permanent functional loss in her left shoulder 
in the amount of 15 percent. In addition, Ms. Eichmeyer has sustained a 1 
percent impairment to her left elbow/forearm as a result of her work injury. I find 
that the combination of these disabilities to two separate body parts places her 
disability into her whole body under Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
 
2. The combined impact of these impairments to two separate body parts have 
resulted in a mild industrial disability to Ms. Eichmeyer, slightly lessened by her 
near proximity to retirement age. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first question submitted is whether claimant’s disability should be evaluated 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) for the loss of a shoulder, or whether it should be 
evaluated under section 85.34(2)(v) as two separate scheduled members within the same 
disability. This is an issue of medical causation. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The expert 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 

EICHMEYER V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 5 
 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation: Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4. The Supreme 
Court has stated the following: “If the employee suffers a compensable injury and 
thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, such 
further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767, 266 
N.W. 480, 481 (1936). The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present sufficient 
evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the original work 
injury. 
 
As set forth in the findings of fact, I have found that Ms. Eichmeyer’s work injury is 
a cause of permanent impairment in both her left shoulder and her left elbow and forearm.  
This finding is based upon the medical opinion of Dr. Taylor combined with Ms. 
Eichmeyer’s highly credible testimony. 
 
The next issue is the nature of the disability. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
governs in all cases of permanent partial disability other than those “described or referred 
to” elsewhere in subsection 85.34(2). Because of this, paragraph (v) “is often referred to 
as the ‘catch-all’ section” of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Id. see also Carmer v. 
Nordstrom, Inc., File No. 1656062.01 (App. Dec. 29, 2021) 
 
In Anderson v. Bridgestone Americas, Inc., and Second Injury Fund of Iowa, File 
No. 5067475 (Arb. Sep. 2, 2021), aff’d (App. Jan. 25, 2022), the Commissioner affirmed 
and adopted the conclusion of law that a shoulder injury and arm disability resulting from 
the same date of injury are not described or referred to elsewhere in subsection 85.34(2) 
and permanent partial disability is therefore determined under paragraph (v). Id.  
 
Since the disability is located in Ms. Eichmeyer’s left shoulder and left arm, I find 
that the disability must be evaluated under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2021). Ms. 
Eichmeyer retired in August 2021.   
 
 Compensation for permanent partial disability under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) is: 
 
... paid during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability bears 
in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed when the 
injury occurred. A determination of the reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the disability shall take into account the permanent 
partial disability of the employee and the number of years in the future it 
was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the time of 
injury. 
 
The assessment of how disability caused by work injuries impact a claimant’s 
earning capacity is based on multiple factors: functional disability, age, education, 
qualifications, work experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings before 

EICHMEYER V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 6 
 
and after the injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics of the claimant, the 
claimant’s inability, because of the injury, to engage in employment for which the claimant 
is fitted, and the employer’s inability to accommodate the claimant’s functional limitations. 
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 
604 N.W.2d 621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 
1976). 
 
I have considered all of the relevant factors of industrial disability set forth above.  
In addition, I have factored in that Ms. Eichmeyer was already near the age which she 
planned to retire. Specifically, her disability would be higher but for the age provisions of 
subsection (v). Ms. Eichmeyer, however, was already working the lightest job at 
Nordstrom and was likely unable to perform that position on a consistent, gainful basis. 
Her decision to retire following recuperation from the injury was entirely rational. She had 
worked for Nordstrom since 2009, and at the time of hearing, did not possess the 
education, training, or work skills to reenter the workforce in any position other than entry 
level service type work. Considering all the relevant factors of industrial disability, I find 
that she sustained a 20 percent loss of earning capacity as a result of her work injury.  I 
conclude this entitles her to 100 weeks of compensation commencing on December 27, 
2021. Defendant is entitled to a credit for the benefits paid. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendant shall pay the claimant one hundred (100) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of four hundred twenty-nine and 52/100 ($429.52) per week 
from December 27, 2021. 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set forth 
in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 
Defendant shall be given credit for the 20 weeks previously paid. 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
Costs are taxed to defendant as set forth in claimant’s exhibit 4, in the amount of 
$100.00. 
 
Signed and filed this    2nd    day of June, 2023. 
 
 

EICHMEYER V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
 Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
 
Thomas Wolle (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals w ithin 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iow a Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed 
via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the follow ing address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iow a Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iow a 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation w ithin 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period w ill be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a w eekend or legal holiday.  
