Case Number: 20003875.01
Case Title:  CERDA, JULIO V. WELLS ENTERPRISES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Cerda Julio-20003875.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JULIO CERDA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 20003875.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION       
WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :            Head Notes: 1403.30, 1802, 1803 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Julio Cerdo, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Wells Enterprises, Inc., (Wells), self-insured employer.  
This matter was heard on June 7, 2021, with a final submission date of August 31, 
2021. 
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 9, Defendant’s Exhibits A through G, and the testimony of claimant and David 
Calhoun.  Serving as interpreter was Luz McClellan.    
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether the injury is a cause of a temporary disability. 
2. Whether the injury is the cause of a permanent disability; and if so, 
3. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
4. Commencement date of benefits. 
5. Medical mileage. 
6. Whether defendant is liable for a penalty under Iowa Code section 86.13. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Nov-15  09:46:12     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant was 47 years old at the time of the hearing.  Claimant was born in 
Mexico.  Claimant went up to the fifth grade in Mexico.  Claimant says he speaks a little 
English.  Claimant came to the United States in 2002.   
 
Claimant began working at Tyson in Nebraska in 2002.  Claimant worked on the 
production line at Tyson.  Claimant left Tyson in 2006 to work at Wells.  Claimant was 
an order picking technician at Wells.  (Exhibit E)  Claimant’s job at Wells required him to 
fill orders.  Claimant moved product orders from a production line onto a pallet.  
 
Claimant said the orders he lifted from the production line weighed between 20 
and 40 pounds.  Claimant estimated he lifted between 150-300 orders an hour.  
Claimant worked 9-12 hours a day.  He said he worked between 4 to 7 days a week.  
(Testimony pages 20-21)  
 
Claimant said that on September 15, 2019, he felt pain in his left elbow and 
shoulders.  He reported an injury to his foreman.  Claimant said his foreman suggested 
he take a voluntary layoff during the slow holiday season to see if his injury would heal.   
 
Claimant said he took time off.  He returned to work in December 2019.  
Claimant said his symptoms continued.   
 
On January 16, 2020, claimant was evaluated by Rodney Cassens, M.D., for left 
elbow and bilateral shoulder pain.  Symptoms began when claimant was repetitively 
lifting at work.  Claimant was assessed as having lateral epicondylitis and bursitis in the 
left elbow and bilateral rotator cuff tendinitis.  Dr. Cassens opined that the bursa was 
aggravated by a bone spur in the elbow, which was not work related.  Claimant was told 
to take ibuprofen and get a tennis elbow strap.  He was prescribed physical therapy.  
Claimant was returned to work with a 10-pound weight restriction.  (Joint Exhibit 2, pp. 
16-18) 
 
On January 20, 2020, claimant was given temporary work at Wells consistent 
with his restrictions, which claimant accepted.  (Ex. 2, p. 1) 
 
David Calhoun testified he is the director of risk management at Wells.  In that 
capacity, he is familiar with claimant and his workers’ compensation injury.  (TR p. 72)  
Mr. Calhoun said that on January 27, 2020, Wells was made aware of a complaint in 
claimant’s department regarding inappropriate behavior.  He said the initial complaint 
was not specific to claimant.  Mr. Calhoun said that in the course of the investigation, 
Wells discovered claimant was a party to the misbehavior.  (TR pp. 72-74) 
 
Specifically, Mr. Calhoun testified that a video from a phone was submitted by a 
co-worker during the investigation showing claimant “dry-humping” a co-worker in a 
heating room.  (TR p. 74) 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Exhibit B consists of three short videos.  Video one of Exhibit B lasts 
approximately 10 seconds.  It shows a man in a black coat wrestling or potentially 
pretending to “dry-hump” a co-worker on a bench.  The second video is approximately 2 
seconds long and shows what appears to be a man in a black coat laughing.  Video 
number three is approximately 10 seconds long.  It shows a man in a black coat 
wrestling or pretending to “dry-hump” a co-worker on the floor.  All individuals in the 
video are clothed in cold weather gear.  (Ex. B) 
 
Mr. Calhoun said the investigation also found that a co-worker complained of 
being uncomfortable working in the same area as claimant.  (TR p. 75)  Mr. Calhoun 
said that claimant and three other co-workers were terminated as a result of the 
investigation regarding this behavior.  (TR p. 76)  Mr. Calhoun testified he was not 
personally involved in the investigation.  (TR p. 76)  He said claimant was terminated on 
January 30, 2020, for inappropriate behavior.  (TR p. 76)  Claimant testified he was not 
one of the men seen in the videos.  He said he was only shown the video approximately 
seven days after he was terminated.  Claimant said that he was told, at the time of the 
termination, the video was made in March or April of 2019 or “thereabouts.”  (TR pp. 34, 
61) 
 
Both claimant and Mr. Calhoun testified that claimant applied for, but was denied, 
unemployment insurance benefits.  (TR pp. 65, 76) 
 
Exhibit A are termination documents for claimant regarding his employment at 
Wells.  The documents indicate: 
A specific complaint came in about one of Julio’s peers, which spun an 
extensive investigation from HR and management.   Through such 
investigation and video evidence, it was discovered that Julio had been 
engaging in an unwelcome sexual behavior by dry humping some of his 
peers (horseplay).   
    The behavior was confirmed via video evidence.  The inappropriate 
behavior happened mainly while in RM13 warm-up shack.   
     Through such investigation, it was discovered that the extent of the 
inappropriate behavior was of unwelcome sexual manner and or 
encouraged by one of his peers and himself.  Specifically, by dry humping 
some of his peers.   
     Julio’s behavior caused some of his peers to want to bid out of the 
workgroup or avoid the warm-up shack altogether.   
(Ex. A, p. 2) 
 
On February 13, 2020, claimant was seen by Dr. Cassens in follow-up.  Claimant 
indicated his pain was about the same.  Claimant had full range of motion in his 
shoulders.  Claimant was again assessed as having lateral epicondylitis in the left elbow 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
and bilateral rotator cuff tendinitis.  Dr. Cassens believed claimant’s pain exceeded what 
would be expected on the physical exam.  Claimant was treated with medication and 
returned to work with restrictions of a 10-pound lifting limitation for each upper 
extremity.  (JE 2, p. 24) 
 
On March 2, 2020, claimant underwent an MRI of the right shoulder.  It showed a 
moderate tendinosis supraspinatus tendon with a mild bursal surface fraying at the 
insertion and a tear and attenuation of the posterior superior glenoid labrum.  (JE 4) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Cassens on March 6, 2020.  Claimant’s left elbow 
symptoms had improved.  The MRI showed a moderate tendinosis and fraying at the 
insertion.  Claimant was referred to an orthopedist for further evaluation of bilateral 
rotator cuff tendinosis exacerbation.  Claimant was found to be at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) for the left elbow.  (JE 2, p. 29) 
 
Claimant testified he did not tell Dr. Cassens his left elbow had improved. (TR pp. 
46-49)  
 
On March 25, 2020, claimant was evaluated by Ryan Meis, M.D., for bilateral 
shoulder pain.  Claimant was given a steroid injection in both shoulders.  (JE 1, pp. 6-
10) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Meis on May 13, 2020.  Claimant had no significant 
improvement from the injection.  Claimant’s pain became worse with activity.  Claimant 
was assessed as having bilateral shoulder pain, right greater than left.  Dr. Meis did not 
see anything on claimant’s MRI.  He was given a Medrol Dosepak and told to work 
aggressively on range of motion exercises.  (JE 1, pp. 11-12) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Cassens on May 20, 2020.  Claimant had normal range 
of motion and strength in both shoulders.  Claimant was referred to physical therapy.  
(JE 2, p. 31) 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Cassens in follow-up on June 10, 2020.  Claimant was found to 
have normal range of motion and strength in both shoulders.  Claimant indicated 
improvement of symptoms, but he still had difficulty sleeping.  Claimant was prescribed 
medication and continued physical therapy.  (JE 2, p. 35) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Cassens on July 6, 2020, and July 29, 2020, in follow-
up.  On both exam dates claimant had normal range of motion and strength in both 
shoulders.  (JE 2, pp. 38-41) 
 
On August 12, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Cassens in follow-up.  Claimant 
indicated little improvement of symptoms.  Physical therapy records noted claimant’s 
range of motion seemed to improve with distraction.  Claimant was found to have 
normal range of motion and strength on exam of both shoulders.  Claimant was found to 
be at MMI.  He was recommended to have a functional capacity evaluation (FCE).  (JE 
2, p. 42) 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
On August 27, 2020, claimant underwent an FCE.  Claimant was found to have 
given fair effort in testing.  He was found to be able to work in the medium heavy 
physical demand level.  (JE 5) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Cassens on September 10, 2020.  Dr. Cassens found 
there was not a significant difference between the FCE results and the physical 
demands of claimant’s job.  As a result, no permanent restrictions were given.  Claimant 
was found to have no permanent impairment.  Claimant was released from care.  (JE 2, 
pp. 43-44) 
 
In a November 10, 2020 report, Sunil Bansal, M.D., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME.  Claimant had pain in his left arm and left 
shoulder.  Claimant was assessed as having left and right shoulder rotator cuff tendinitis 
and lateral epicondylitis in the left elbow.  Dr. Bansal opined that claimant’s bilateral 
shoulder and left elbow condition were caused as a result of repetitive physically 
demanding work at Wells.  (Ex. 1) 
 
Dr. Bansal found that claimant had a 5 percent permanent impairment to the left 
shoulder, an 8 percent permanent impairment to the right shoulder, and a 4 percent 
permanent impairment to the left upper extremity for the elbow condition.  He restricted 
claimant to no lifting over 10 pounds and no frequent turning or twisting of the left arm.  
(Ex. 1) 
 
In a May 26, 2021 letter, Dr. Cassens indicated claimant’s range of motion and 
strength were normal in his bilateral shoulders as of August 12, 2020.  Based on that 
August 2020 exam, he found that claimant had no permanent impairment to the left or 
right shoulder.  (JE 6, p. 84)   
 
On June 2, 2021, in response to a letter written by defendant’s counsel, Dr. Meis 
indicated he was unable to identify any objective injury to claimant’s right or left 
shoulder.  He opined claimant did not need permanent restrictions regarding his 
shoulders and claimant had no permanent impairment to either shoulder.  (JE 7) 
 
Dr. Cassens testified in deposition that he treated claimant from January 2020 
through August 2020.  He testified during that period of time he measured claimant’s 
range of motion and strength in both shoulders.  Dr. Cassens testified that on visits on 
January 30, 2020, February 13, 2020, February 27, 2020, March 6, 2020, May 20, 
2020, June 10, 2020, July 6, 2020, July 29, 2020, and August 12, 2020, claimant 
exhibited normal range of motion and strength in both shoulders.  (Ex. 8, depo pp. 47-
57)  He testified that on visits of February 27, 2020, and March 6, 2020, claimant 
indicated his left elbow symptoms were improving.  He said that on claimant’s March 6, 
2020 exam, claimant indicated his left elbow symptoms had significantly improved.  (Ex. 
8, depo pp. 48-49)  He testified that on subsequent visits claimant did not communicate 
problems or discomfort in the left elbow.  (Ex. 8, depo p. 55)  He testified that as of 
March 6, 2020, claimant had no permanent impairment in the left elbow.  (Ex. 8, depo p. 
51) 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Dr. Meis testified in deposition that he was unable to identify any objective injury 
of either of claimant’s shoulders.  He testified claimant’s exam, MRI and other 
diagnostics did not warrant any permanent impairment.  (Ex. 9, depo pp. 50-52) 
 
Dr. Meis testified that when he examined claimant on May 13, 2020, claimant 
had a pain-free full range of motion in the left elbow.  (Ex. 9, depo p. 53) 
 
Claimant testified that he has looked for work through ads in the paper and 
through his brother-in-law.  Claimant said he has not worked since leaving Wells.  (TR 
p. 38) 
 
Claimant testified he has ongoing pain in both shoulders and his elbow.  He said 
that given his condition, he could not return to work at Tyson.  He said given his 
condition, he could not return to work at Wells.  (TR pp. 39-40) 
CONCLUSION OF LAW 
 
The first issue to be determined is whether the injury resulted in a temporary 
disability.   
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Those benefits are payable until the employee has returned to work, or is medically 
capable of returning to work substantially similar to the work performed at the time of 
injury.  Section 85.33(1).  
 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor 
an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the 
healing period. 
 
Claimant contends he is due temporary disability benefits from January 30, 2020, 
through August 27, 2020.  (Claimant’s post-hearing brief, p. 21) 
 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Claimant was evaluated by Dr. Cassens on January 16, 2020.  At that visit he 
was put on temporary work restrictions.  (JE 2, p. 16)  On January 20, 2020, claimant 
was offered and accepted light duty work at Wells.  (Ex. C) 
 
On January 30, 2020, claimant was terminated from Wells for inappropriate 
behavior.  Termination records from Wells indicated claimant was found to be “. . . 
engaging in an unwelcoming sexual behavior by dry humping some of his peers.”  
Documents also indicate that claimant’s behavior “. . . caused some of his peers to want 
to bid out of the work group or avoid the warm-up shack altogether.”  (Ex. A, p. 2)  
Exhibit B shows a video of an individual, who appears to be the claimant, wrestling or 
“dry-humping” a co-worker. 
 
Mr. Calhoun testified that Wells heard of misconduct on approximately January 
27, 2020.  After an investigation, claimant and three other co-workers were terminated 
from Wells on January 30, 2020.  (TR p. 76) 
 
For misconduct to disqualify a person from compensation, the misconduct must 
be tantamount to refusal to perform the offered work.  The misconduct must be serious 
and the type of conduct that would cause any employer to terminate any employee.  
The misconduct must have a serious adverse impact on the employer.  The misconduct 
must be more than the type of inconsequential misconduct that employers typically 
overlook or tolerate.  Brodigan v. Nutri-Ject Systems, Inc., File No. 5001106 (App. April 
13, 2004); Wortley v. Lowe’s Home Centers, Inc., File No. 1298582 (App. December 22, 
2006)  An employee working with restrictions is not entitled to act with impunity toward 
the employer and the employer’s interests. Nevertheless, not every act of misconduct 
justifies disqualifying an employee from workers’ compensation benefits even though 
the employer may be justified in taking disciplinary action.  Reynolds v. Hy-Vee, Inc, File 
No. 5046203 (App. October 31, 2017) 
 
 
Claimant was given light duty work from approximately January 20, 2020 through 
January 30, 2020.  Mr. Calhoun testified that the employer learned of misconduct on 
January 27, 2020, and that claimant and three other employees were terminated for 
engaging in inappropriate behavior of a sexual nature.  Video in evidence shows a 
person who appears to be claimant wrestling or dry humping a co-worker on two 
occasions.  Claimant’s behavior caused co-workers to bid out of his work area and to 
avoid claimant.  Given this record, it is found that claimant’s misconduct and engaging 
in inappropriate behavior of a sexual nature is the same as refusal to perform light duty 
work.  Claimant’s misconduct was serious and was of the type and behavior that would 
cause any reasonable employer to terminate claimant.  This misconduct was more than 
inconsequential misconduct.  Based on the record as detailed above, it is found that 
claimant’s misconduct does not entitle claimant to either temporary benefits or healing 
period benefits under Iowa Code section 85.33 or Iowa Code section 85.34. 
 
 
Claimant contends, in his post-hearing brief, that his termination at Wells was 
pretextual and retaliatory.  (Claimant’s post-hearing brief, p. 21)  Claimant contends that 
the video portraying incidents happened nine months prior to his termination.  Other 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
than claimant’s ambiguous testimony (TR p. 34), there is scant evidence to prove these 
allegations.  Mr. Calhoun credibly testified that Wells learned of the misconduct on 
January 27, 2020, and three days later terminated claimant and three other co-workers.  
(TR pp. 72-74) 
 
 
Claimant contends he was not given an opportunity to be heard prior to his 
termination.  An allegation of a wrongful termination is not a factor in finding that 
claimant engaged in serious misconduct and is thus not entitled to temporary benefits.  
The record also indicates that claimant’s union representative was able to see the video 
prior to claimant’s termination and no action was taken.  (TR p. 81)  Claimant signed the 
termination documents regarding his termination.  (Ex. A, pp. 1-4)  Claimant did not 
receive unemployment insurance benefits.  This suggests that claimant did not qualify 
for unemployment insurance benefits due to misconduct.  Given this record, claimant’s 
argument that his termination was retaliatory is found not convincing.   
 
 
The next issue to be determined is whether claimant sustained a permanent 
disability for his injury.  
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant contends he sustained a permanent disability to his bilateral shoulders 
and left elbow caused by repetitive heavy lifting at Wells.   
Three experts have opined regarding claimant’s permanent impairment.  
Claimant began care with Dr. Cassens in January of 2020 for his bilateral shoulder 
injury.  Dr. Cassens specializes in occupational medicine.  Dr. Cassens saw claimant 
over a period of approximately 8 months.  On every visit, Dr. Cassens measured 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
claimant’s range of motion and strength in both shoulders.  On every visit, Dr. Cassens 
found that claimant had normal range of motion and strength in both shoulders.  (JE 2, 
pp, 16, 21, 24, 27, 29, 31, 35, 38, 40, 42; Ex. 8, depo pp. 47-57)  Dr. Cassens testified 
in deposition that claimant’s bilateral shoulder range of motion and strength tested 
normal on every visit.  (Ex. 8, depo p. 57) 
Dr. Cassens found that claimant had no permanent impairment and no 
permanent restrictions.  (JE 2, pp. 43-44) 
In a May 26, 2021 letter, Dr. Cassens indicated claimant’s range of motion and 
strength were normal.  He found that claimant had no permanent impairment to either 
the left or right shoulders.  (JE 7) 
Claimant also treated with Dr. Meis.  Dr. Meis is an orthopedic surgeon.  Dr. Meis 
saw claimant on two occasions between March of 2020 and May of 2020.  Dr. Meis 
indicated he was unable to identify an objective injury to claimant’s right or left shoulder, 
and found claimant had no permanent impairment.  (JE 7) 
In deposition Dr. Meis testified that based on claimant’s exam, the MRI and other 
diagnostics, he believed claimant had no permanent impairment or permanent 
restrictions.  (Ex. 9, depo pp. 50-53) 
Dr. Bansal evaluated claimant once for an IME.  He found claimant had a 
permanent impairment to both his left elbow and bilateral shoulders.  (Ex. 1, pp. 11-13) 
Dr. Cassens evaluated claimant on ten different occasions.  He found that 
claimant had no permanent impairment or permanent restrictions.  The opinions of 
treating doctors are not to be given greater weight as a matter of law, solely because 
they are treating doctors.  Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 404, 409 
(Iowa 1994)  However, as a factual manner, Dr. Cassens has a far greater familiarity 
and experience with claimant’s medical history and presentation than does any other 
expert in this case.  Dr. Cassens’ opinion regarding permanent impairment and 
permanent restrictions are also corroborated by those of Dr. Meis.  
 
As noted, Dr. Bansal evaluated claimant once for an IME.  Dr. Bansal examined 
claimant on October 30, 2020, approximately nine months after claimant was terminated 
from Wells.  Dr. Bansal’s evaluation of claimant shows deficits in range of motion and 
strength when compared to those of Drs. Cassens and Meis.  It is unclear and 
unexplained why claimant’s range of motion and strength decreased when compared 
with opinions by Drs. Cassens and Meis when claimant had not been working at Wells 
for approximately nine months.  
 
Dr. Cassens and Dr. Meis have far greater experience in evaluating claimant’s 
condition.  It is unexplained how claimant’s range of motion and strength decreased 
after leaving Wells for the nine months.  Given this record, it is found that the opinions of 
Dr. Cassens and Dr. Meis regarding permanent impairment to claimant’s shoulders are 
more convincing than those of Dr. Bansal.  Given this record, claimant has failed to 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
carry his burden of proof he sustained permanent impairment regarding his bilateral 
shoulders.  
 
Regarding claimant’s alleged left elbow, Dr. Cassens notes that claimant had 
resolved left elbow symptoms on March 6, 2020.  (JE 2, p. 29)  
 
In six separate exams by Dr. Cassens and Dr. Meis, there is no mention in the 
records of any further elbow complaints.  (JE 2, pp. 31, 35, 38, 40, 42; JE 1, pp. 6-12)   
Approximately eight months after leaving Wells, the record indicates claimant was pain 
free in his left elbow.  After not working at Wells for nine months, claimant reported left 
elbow pain to Dr. Bansal.  Given this record, claimant has failed to carry his burden of 
proof he sustained a permanent disability regarding his left elbow.    
 
As claimant failed to carry his burden of proof he sustained a permanent 
disability to his bilateral shoulders or his left elbow, the issue of extent of entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits, commencement of permanent partial disability 
benefits and penalty are all found to be moot.  
 
The final issue to be determined is whether claimant is entitled to medical 
mileage.  Claimant has failed to put any evidence into the record regarding his 
expenses concerning medical mileage.  At hearing he indicated he was due medical 
mileage as found in evidence in Exhibit 8 (TR p. 41).  Exhibit 8 is the deposition of Dr. 
Cassens.  There is no evidence in the record regarding what expenses claimant 
allegedly expended concerning medical mileage.  As claimant has failed to show any 
evidence of expenses concerning medical mileage, claimant has failed to carry his 
burden of proof he is entitled to medical mileage.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE it is ordered:  
 
That claimant shall take nothing from this matter in the way of any additional 
benefits.  
 
That both parties shall pay their own costs.  
 
That defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
under rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
Signed and filed this _____15th ____ day of November, 2021. 
 
 
 
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

CERDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Judy Freking (via WCES) 
 
Al Sturgeon (via WCES) 
 
Steven Durick (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
