Case Number: 1644874.01
Case Title:  ISAACS, THOMAS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Isaacs Thomas-1644874.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
THOMAS ISAACS, 
File No. 1644874.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL 
DISTRICT, 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
IOWA COMMUNITY SCHOOL 
INSURANCE PROGRAM, 
Headnotes:  1803, 2502 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Thomas Isaacs seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer Iowa City Community School District (District) and insurance 
carrier Iowa Community School Insurance Program (Program). The undersigned 
presided over an arbitration hearing on September 14, 2023. Isaacs participated 
personally and through attorney Thomas M. Wertz. The defendants participated by and 
through attorney Lindsey E. Mills. The case was fully submitted on November 29, 2023. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The undersigned issued an order approving the hearing 
report because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
2) Is Isaacs entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical examination 
(IME)? 
3) Is Isaacs entitled to a penalty? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-02  10:42:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 2 
 
4) Is Isaacs entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Isaacs and the District 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Isaacs sustained an injury on February 28, 2018, which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment with the District. 
3) The injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of recovery, but 
Isaacs’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits is no longer in 
dispute. 
4) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5) The commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits, if 
any are awarded, is March 30, 2021. 
6) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Isaacs’s gross earnings were $1,230.00 per week. 
b) Isaacs was married. 
c) Isaacs was entitled to six exemptions. 
7) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to Isaacs 59.892041 weeks of 
compensation at the rate of $801.14 per week. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T. 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE-1 through JE-8; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 8;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through L; and 
 Hearing testimony by Isaacs that the undersigned found credible.  

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 3 
 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
A .  
I n j u r y.  
Before the work injury Isaacs sustained while working for the District on February 
28, 2018, he had no prior left wrist, left shoulder, or low back issues that required 
medical care. (Hr’g Tr. p. 31) The District hired Isaacs as a part-time refuse hauler and 
repairman. (Hr’g Tr. p. 28) He was working at City High School in this capacity when he 
and a coworker attempted to lift a 55-gallon trash barrel to empty it into the back of a 
garbage truck. (Hr’g Tr. p. 30) Isaacs had his left hand on the bottom of the barrel and 
his right hand at the top and was about halfway through the act of lifting up the barrel to 
empty it when he felt a pop in his left arm and consequently let go of the barrel. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 30)  
B . 
C a r e .  
The defendants arranged care with James Milani, D.O., at Mercy Occupational 
Health in Iowa City. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1) Dr. Milani ordered magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) of Isaacs’s left upper extremity, which showed a complete tear of the radial 
insertion of the biceps tendon with proximal retraction of the tendon in his left arm. (Ex. 
JE-1, p. 2) Dr. Milani diagnosed Isaacs with a complete distal biceps rupture and 
referred him to an orthopedic specialist. (Ex. JE-1, p. 2)  
On March 2, 2018, Isaacs saw Mark Mysnyk, M.D., at Steindler Orthopedic 
Clinic. (Ex. JE-3, p. 7) Dr. Mysnyk recommended surgery to repair the ruptured tendon, 
which he performed on March 8, 2018. (Ex. JE-3, p. 8; JE-4, pp. 80–81) After the 
surgery, Isaacs complained of burning pain radiating along the path of the lateral 
antebrachial cutaneous nerve that worsened with time. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 8, 12) Because of 
Isaacs’s ongoing and worsening pain, Dr. Mysnyk referred him to Frederick Dery, M.D., 
a colleague at Steindler. (Ex. JE-3, p. 12) 
Dr. Dery first examined Isaacs on June 13, 2018, for “nerve related pain in the 
radial left forearm essentially from his distal left biceps tendon repair surgical scar down 
into the wrist” that “basically outline[d] to a T the distribution of the musculocutaneous 
nerve.” (Ex. JE-3, p. 15) Isaacs rated his pain level at seven on a scale from zero to ten 
and described it “as aching throbbing shooting sharp tenderness on tingling pins and 
needles.” (Ex. JE-3, p. 15) Dr. Dery switched his prescription from gabapentin to Lyrica, 
prescribed a topical cream, and prescribed physical therapy. (Ex. JE-3, p. 16) 
A month later, Isaacs reported to Dr. Dery a 70 percent improvement in his pain 
level from the Lyrica. (Ex. JE-3, p. 22) Dr. Dery noted Isaacs was “ecstatic” with the pain 
reduction from the medication. (Ex. JE-3, p. 22) He increased Isaacs’s Lyrica 
prescription. (Ex. JE-3, p. 22) On August 2, 2018, Dr. Dery continued Isaacs on Lyrica 
and physical therapy. (Ex. JE-3, p. 27)  
On August 7, 2018, Dr. Mysnyk saw Isaacs and noted his arm “continues to be 
numb and is more painful in the wrist. It feels like someone hit his wrist with a hammer.” 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 4 
 
(Ex. JE-3, p. 30) Dr. Mysnyk opined he was “unsure how long he will continue to have 
these symptoms” and that they typically resolve on their own. (Ex. JE-3, p. 31) He 
informed Isaacs that if his symptoms continued one year post-surgery, he would 
consider a second surgery to address them. (Ex. JE-3, p. 31) In the meantime, Dr. 
Mysnyk recommended Isaacs follow Dr. Dery’s recommendations. (Ex. JE-3, p. 31) 
Dr. Dery next saw Isaacs on September 5, 2018, and they decided to try 
Cymbalta in addition to Lyrica. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 34–35) Isaacs followed up with Dr. Mysnyk 
about two weeks later and reported he did not notice much improvement from the 
Cymbalta. (Ex. JE-3, p. 38) Dr. Mysnyk noted that he did not think Isaacs needed 
additional physical therapy and that the best course of care was to continue to treat with 
Dr. Dery and see if his condition improved. (Ex. JE-3, p. 39) 
Isaacs saw Dr. Dery on October 3, 2018, and reported a noticeable benefit with 
Cymbalta. (Ex. JE-3, p. 42) Nonetheless, he rated his pain at seven or eight out of ten 
and described it as "tingling pins and needles[,] dull pricking[,] sharp[,] nagging[,] etc. 
Worse with any kind of heavy lifting or pressure over the surgical scar.” (Ex. JE-3, p. 42) 
Dr. Dery increased his Cymbalta dose to see if that provided any additional benefit. (Ex. 
JE-3, p. 43) Dr. Mysnyk examined Isaacs on October 30, 2018, and noted he reported 
that his left arm was feeling the best it had since his surgery following the increase in his 
Cymbalta dose. (Ex. JE-3, p 46)  
Isaacs returned to Dr. Dery on November 8, 2018, and rated his pain at a four or 
five out of ten. (Ex. JE-3, p. 50) They discussed increasing Isaacs’s dose of either 
Lyrica or Cymbalta, but Isaacs did not want to do so. (Ex. JE-3, p. 51) Isaacs told Dr. 
Dery that there were some functions at work that he cannot perform because of 
weakness in his arm, so Dr. Dery recommended a functional capacity evaluation (FCE). 
(Ex. JE-3, p. 51) On December 11, 2018, Isaacs saw Dr. Mysnyk, who noted no 
improvement since his last examination of him and recommended an FCE. (Ex. JE-1, 
pp. 54–55)  
On December 20, 2018, Isaacs underwent an FCE performed by Matthew 
Smalling, P.T. at Athletico Physical Therapy. (Ex. JE-6, p. 400) Smalling found Isaacs’s 
effort valid and that he demonstrated he was capable of performing work in the heavy 
physical demand level. (Ex. JE-6, p. 402) After the FCE, the defendants requested from 
Dr. Mysnyk an evaluation of Isaacs’s permanent impairment and in a letter dated 
January 23, 2019, he used Tables 16-15 and 16-3 of the Fifth Edition of the American 
Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides) to 
assign Isaacs a four percent impairment of the left upper extremity or two percent of the 
body as a whole. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 62–63) 
During an appointment with Dr. Mysnyk on February 15, 2019, Isaacs reported 
that he “was in pain for days after doing his [FCE]” with the nerve-like pain he had 
consistently experienced post-surgery and almost called in sick the following day 
because he was in so much pain. (Ex. JE-3, p. 64) Dr. Mysnyk opined that because the 
FCE and increased workload aggravated Isaacs’s symptoms, “even though the FCE 
indicated he could be lifting heavier loads using both arms, I don’t believe he would be 
able to do so because of the pain. In other words, there is a difference between what he 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 5 
 
can physically . . . and what he can do and not have significant pain afterwards” which is 
consistent with a neuroma-type pain. (Ex. JE-3, p. 65) Because of this dynamic, Dr. 
Mysnyk assigned Isaacs the work restriction of no significant lifting with his left arm. (Ex. 
JE-3, p. 65) 
The defendants arranged for Isaacs to undergo an examination with Matthew 
Bollier, M.D., at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) on April 1, 2019. (Ex. 
JE-8, p. 424) Dr. Bollier recommended electromyography (EMG), a nerve conduction 
velocity test (NCV), and another MRI. (JE-8, p. 428) Dr. Bollier opined that these would 
show whether Isaacs should see an elbow specialist. (JE-8, p. 428)  
Dr. Mysnyk ordered the EMG, NCV, and MRI. (JE- 3, pp. 69–73) The imaging 
showed the biceps tendon was intact and was healing well. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 72–73) The 
EMG and NCV showed moderate left carpal tunnel syndrome, which Dr. Mysnyk felt 
might be contributing to his symptoms but was unlikely to be the cause of all of his 
ongoing pain because of its location. (Ex. JE-3, p. 74) Neither the EMG, NCV, nor MRI 
ruled out neuroma. (Ex. JE-3, p. 74) They also did not confirm neuroma because it is 
common for them to be normal even when neuroma is present. (Ex. JE-3, p. 74) 
Dr. Dery saw Isaacs on June 12, 2019, for follow-up of his left antebrachial 
cutaneous neuritis. (Ex. JE-3, p. 75) Dr. Dery described Isaacs’s symptoms as 
“[b]asically . . . unchanged” and continued his medications. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 75–76) He 
suggested the possibility of a peripheral nerve stimulator that would not eliminate 
Isaacs’s pain but could help mitigate it and referred him to UIHC for such a consultation. 
(Ex. JE-3, p. 76) Dr. Dery also noted that Isaacs had developed bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome, right greater than left, and strongly recommended that he get the condition 
addressed. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 75–76) Dr. Dery opined that he did not have to see Isaacs 
again for his condition and he could follow up as needed. (Ex. JE-3, p. 76) 
Isaacs went to UIHC on July 15, 2019, to see Joseph Buckwalter, M.D., for his 
left arm pain. (Ex. JE-8, p. 432) Dr. Buckwalter agreed that Isaacs’s ongoing symptoms 
were related to the stipulated work injury. (Ex. JE-8, p. 433) Dr. Buckwalter 
recommended a diagnostic left lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve block and left 
carpal tunnel injection. (Ex. JE-8, p. 433) On July 24, 2019, Isaacs received the carpal 
tunnel injection and on August 12, 2019, the nerve block injection. (Ex. JE-8, p. 439)  
After the injections failed to provide relief, Isaacs elected surgery for both 
conditions. (Ex. JE-8, p. 443) On September 23, 2019, Dr. Buckwalter performed left 
carpal tunnel and antebrachial nerve release surgery. (Ex. JE-8, p. 450) And on October 
7, 2019, he performed the right carpal tunnel release procedure. (Ex. JE-8, p. 459)  
While Isaacs reported during a visit to Dr. Buckwalter on December 3, 2019, 
decreased tingling in his hands since surgery, he also complained of left elbow pain, 
numbness in his left hand, and aching, burning, and radiating bilateral hand pain. (Ex. 
JE-8, pp. 463–64) As well, he expressed frustration with continued weakness and loss 
of grip strength. (Ex. JE-8, p. 464) Dr. Buckwalter noted on examination that his ongoing 
pain at the elbow appeared to be secondary to the tendon, not the lateral antebrachial 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 6 
 
cutaneous nerve, and recommended adding exercises to address the distal biceps 
during occupational therapy and a pain clinic consultation. (Ex. JE-8, p. 465) 
Rahul Rastogi, M.D., saw Isaacs at the UIHC pain clinic on January 10, 2020. 
(Ex. JE-8, p. 468) Isaacs denied any color changes, swelling, or increased hair growth 
on his left arm. (Ex. JE-8, p. 468) Dr. Rastogi opined Isaacs’s pain was consistent with 
neuropathic pain but did not fit any of the Budapest criteria for complex regional pain 
syndrome (CRPS). (Ex. JE-8, p. 473) Dr. Rastogi recommended not only continuing his 
Lyrica but increasing his dosage “[i]n light of the presence of a neuropathic component 
of pain." (Ex. JE-8, p. 473) Dr. Rastogi further recommended continuing his Cymbalta 
and physical therapy focused on Graded Motor Imagery (GMI) and desensitization. (Ex. 
JE-8, p. 473) Dr. Rastogi left the door open for implantation of a spinal cord stimulator if 
conservative care failed. (Ex. JE-8, p. 473) 
Isaacs returned to UIHC for an appointment with Dr. Buckwalter on January 21, 
2020, and reported pain in his collarbone area as well as constant pain at the left wrist. 
(Ex. JE-8, p. 475) He also shared that he was recently awakened with left ring and small 
finger pain going up past his elbow. (Ex. JE-8, p. 475) Dr. Buckwalter found Isaacs was 
making “small but steady strides.” (Ex. JE-8, p. 478) He increased his Lyrica dose in 
accordance with Dr. Rastogi’s recommendation and advised him to continue therapy, 
including GMI. (Ex. JE-8, p. 478) 
 On March 16, 2020, Isaacs followed up with Dr. Rastogi. (Ex. JE-8, p. 479) 
Isaacs again denied any color changes, swelling, or increased hair growth with his 
injured arm. (Ex. JE-8, p. 479) Dr. Rastogi continued his Lyrica and increased his 
Cymbalta prescription. (Ex. JE-8, p. 485)  
Dr. Buckwalter next saw Isaacs on May 19, 2020. (Ex. JE-8, p. 491) Isaacs 
reported achy, burning pain that he rated a six out of ten in his left hand and wrist, 
extending to his elbow. (Ex. JE-8, p. 491) Dr. Buckwalter opined Isaacs was at MMI and 
sustained no impairment to his right hand. (Ex. JE-8, p. 494) However, he concluded 
Isaacs had not reached MMI on the left side and recommended he continue care with 
the UIHC pain clinic. (Ex. JE-8, p. 493) 
Isaacs returned to see Dr. Rastogi on June 8, 2020. (Ex. JE-8, p. 497) He 
reported ongoing pain that impacted his ability to sleep and perform everyday activities. 
(Ex. JE-8, p. 497) Dr. Rastogi concluded Isaacs had failed to obtain substantial benefit 
from therapy and medication management, so he recommended a spinal cord 
stimulator trial. (Ex. JE-8, p. 501)  
Dr. Rastogi initiated the spinal cord stimulator trial on September 1, 2020. (Ex. 
JE-8, p. 527–28) Three days later, Isaacs reported he was “very pleased” with the 
results because he was able to sleep better, hold his arms up to drive, and complete 
more activities of daily living. (Ex. JE-8, p. 529–30) He estimated the stimulator had 
provided a 70 percent reduction in his symptoms. (Ex. JE-8, p. 530) Because of the 
positive initial results, Isaacs wanted to move forward with placement of a permanent 
spinal cord stimulator. (Ex. JE-8, p. 530) 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 7 
 
Isaacs followed up with Dr. Rastogi on January 4, 2021. (Ex. JE-8, pp. 544–51) 
On examination, Dr. Rastogi noted Isaacs’s pain was consistent with neuropathic pain 
and that he did not “fit strict Budapest criteria for CRPS, although his presentation [met] 
partial criteria.” (Ex. JE-8, p.550) Isaacs remained interested in receiving a permanent 
implant, so Dr. Rastogi answered his questions and they scheduled the procedure. (Ex. 
JE-8, p. 550) 
On January 15, 2021, Dr. Rastogi implanted a permanent spinal cord stimulator. 
(Ex. JE-8, pp. 558–60) Dr. Rastogi advanced a lead through the skin to the midvertebral 
body of C2 with an anchor threaded over the spinal cord stimulating lead and inserted 
into the facial entry point. (Ex. JE-8, 559) The surgical team then ran a test stimulation, 
sending electricity directly into Isaacs’s spine through the lead to determine if it would 
provide adequate coverage of his painful area and Isaacs confirmed the coverage. (Ex. 
JE-8, pp. 559–60) A pocket was created in the right flank to house the pulse generator. 
(Ex. JE-8, p. 560) They then used a tunneling device to tunnel from the midline incision 
to the flank incision and the lead was advanced through the tunneler to connect the 
impulse generator and lead. (Ex. JE-8, p. 560)  
Before the surgery to implant a permanent spinal cord stimulator, UIHC staff 
marked on Isaacs’s back where he would like the stimulator placed. (Hr’g Tr. p. 46) 
When they implanted the stimulator, its top was aligned with the mark instead of its 
bottom, which meant the stimulator sat on Isaacs’s waistline. (Hr’g Tr. p. 46; Ex JE-8, p. 
562) Isaacs followed up with Dr. Rastogi a week later and reported a 25 percent 
improvement in his symptoms but complained of the stimulator’s placement on his 
waistline. (Ex. JE-8, p. 562)  
During a follow-up exam on February 26, 2021, Isaacs reported pain with his 
incisions but otherwise good relief. (Ex. JE-8, p. 572) Dr. Rastogi noted excellent benefit 
to Isaacs’s pain and functionality. (Ex. JE-8, p. 578) He recommended ongoing use of 
Lyrica and Cymbalta. (Ex. JE-8, pp. 578) On March 26, 2021, Dr. Rastogi released 
Isaacs to return to work without restrictions except for a prohibition on working in 
proximity to a magnetic environment. (Ex. JE-8, p. 580) 
Isaacs followed up with Frankie Dunbar, A.R.N.P., on March 30, 2021, and 
reported “improvement in the sharp shooting pain with the stimulator.” (Ex. JE-8, p. 582) 
Nonetheless, he described constant pain he rated at a five out of ten in severity. (Ex. 
JE-8, p. 582) Dunbar opined Isaacs’s “progress had plateaued” and he was at MMI. (Ex. 
JE-8, p. 584) Dunbar noted Isaacs would complete an FCE for assignment of 
permanent work restrictions. (Ex. JE-8, p. 584)  
During the March 30 visit, Dr. Buckwalter used the Guides to assign a permanent 
impairment. (Ex. JE-8, p. 584) According to Dr. Buckwalter’s notes, “The impairment is 
based on limited extension and flexion of the elbow resulting in a 3% impairment of the 
elbow in addition to absent sensation of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve 
distribution resulting in a 5% impairment of the upper extremity.” (Ex. JE-8, p. 584) He 
then used the combined values chart to arrive an eight percent impairment to the left 
upper extremity. (Ex. JE-8, p. 584)  

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 8 
 
Isaacs underwent a second FCE at Athletico on April 16, 2021, with John Kruzich 
ORT/L, which Kruzich found valid. (Ex. JE-8, p. 586) Dr. Buckwalter reviewed the FCE 
and in a letter dated May 19, 2021, assigned permanent work restrictions based on it 
and Isaacs’s course of care consisting of: 
 Floor-to-waist lifting up to 45 pounds occasionally; 
 Waist-to-shoulder lifting up to 35 pounds occasionally; 
 Waist-to-overhead lifting up to 35 pounds occasionally; 
 Bilateral carrying up to 35 pounds occasionally; and 
 Horizontal pushing and pulling up to 55 pounds of force occasionally. 
 
(Ex. JE-8, p. 586)  
On October 28, 2021, Isaacs had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Rastogi. (Ex. 
JE-8, pp. 588) Isaacs reported he was “happy” with the spinal cord stimulator because it 
was “providing significant benefit towards his pain symptoms and functionality.” (Ex. JE-
8, p. 588) However, he was “very displeased” with the location of his generator on his 
beltline.” (Ex. JE-8, p. 588) Dr. Rastogi opined Isaacs was not receiving the full benefit 
of the stimulator because of the generator positioning and offered relocation surgery. 
(Ex. JE-8, p. 594) 
Dr. Rastogi performed the relocation procedure on February 14, 2022. (Ex. JE-8, 
pp. 607–15) Two weeks later, Isaacs reported during a follow-up exam that he was 
experiencing “[l]ess violent sharp pains in the left arm with the stimulator turned on” and 
no negative side effects. (Ex. JE-8, p. 617) He also felt that the battery pocket was in an 
acceptable location after the relocation procedure. (Ex. JE-8, p. 617) 
Isaacs returned to follow up with Dr. Rastogi on September 13, 2022. (Ex. JE-8, 
p. 626) Dr. Rastogi noted Isaacs “continue[d] to report less violent sharp pains in his left 
arm with the stimulator turned on” and “the level of pain remained stable since his last 
visit.” (Ex. JE-8, p. 626) He also memorialized that Isaacs had developed a 
spontaneous spasm feeling in his upper back, on his left side by his scapula, about 
three times per week but that it did not affect his functionality or cause him significant 
distress. (Ex. JE-8, p. 626)  
C . 
O p i n i o n s  b y  N o n - Tr e a t i ng  E x p e r t s .  
1. IME by Richard Kreiter, M.D. 
The evidence shows that Isaacs underwent an IME by Dr. Kreiter, a doctor of his 
choosing on December 4, 2019. (Ex. H, p. 85) Dr. Kreiter issued an IME report that 
same day. (Ex. H, p. 85) The written evidence shows that the attorney representing 
Isaacs at the time paid the costs of the IME. (Ex. H, pp. 83–86) In the defendants’ post-
hearing brief, they cite to Exhibit H at pages 125 through 128 for the proposition that 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 9 
 
they reimbursed claimant’s counsel at the time for the IME; however, Exhibit H contains 
no such documentation. (Ex. H, pp. 78–86) Pages 125 through 128 of the defendants’ 
exhibits make up part of Exhibit L and reflect District payroll information, not any IME 
payments. (Ex. L, pp. 125–28) The evidentiary record does not contain enough 
information to show that the defendants reimbursed the law firm of the attorney 
representing Isaacs at the time for the costs of the 2019 IME by Dr. Kreiter. 
2. IME by David Segal, M.D. 
On March 30, 2021, Dr. Buckwalter opined on the extent of permanent 
impairment Issacs sustained from the work injury to his left arm. (Ex. JE-8, p. 584) In 
response, claimant’s counsel arranged for Isaacs to undergo an IME with David Segal, 
M.D., on June 22, 2023. (Ex. 1) Dr. Segal conducted a records review, discussed 
Isaacs’s treatment history with him, and performed an in-person examination of Isaacs 
before issuing a report with his opinions dated July 26, 2023. (Ex. 1, pp. 11–48) The 
report includes his opinions regarding Isaacs’s injury and care as well as answers 
posed by claimant’s counsel. 
a. Left Arm. 
Isaacs requested Dr. Segal examine his left arm and opine on the stipulated 
biceps tendon tear, nerve pain, and carpal tunnel syndrome. Because of the nature of 
the parties’ dispute regarding the nerve pain is focused on whether it is limited to the 
arm or extends to the whole body, it is discussed separately below. So is his 
assessment of Isaacs’s left carpal tunnel syndrome. This section focuses on Dr. Segal’s 
examination of the tendon tear. 
Dr. Segal performed an in-person examination of Isaacs’s left arm. (Ex. 1, pp. 
19–20) Dr. Segal used a goniometer to perform range-of-motion measurements of 
Isaacs’s left elbow and wrist. (Ex. 1, p. 20) He performed the measurements three times 
each. (Ex. 1, p. 20)  
Dr. Segal recorded the following range of motion measurements for the left 
elbow: 
 Flexion, 110 degrees; 
 Extension, 30 degrees; 
 Pronation, 90 degrees; and 
 Supination, 70 degrees. 
(Ex. 1, p. 37) 
In accordance with Figure 16-34 on page 472 of the Guides, Dr. Segal assigned 
Isaacs a four percent impairment to the upper extremity for lack of flexion and three 
percent for lack of extension. (Ex. 1, p. 37) He assigned no impairment for lost pronation 
or supination under Table 16-37 on page 474 of the Guides. (Ex. 1, p. 37) Dr. Segal 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 10 
 
then added the impairment percentages for extension and flexion together, as the 
Guides direct on page 470, for an upper extremity permanent impairment rating of 
seven percent based on lost range of motion to the left elbow. (Ex. 1, p. 37) 
Dr. Segal also used the process set forth in the Guides to obtain the following 
range of motion measurements for the left wrist/hand: 
 Flexion, 70 degrees; 
 Extension, 55 degrees; 
 Radial deviation, 10 degrees; and  
 Ulnar deviation, 25 degrees. 
(Ex. 1, p. 37) 
Dr. Segal used Figure 16-28 on page 467 of the Guides to assign Isaacs a two 
percent impairment for loss of extension. (Ex. 1, p. 37) He applied Figure 16-31 on page 
469 of the Guides to rate Isaacs as having an impairment of two percent for radial 
deviation and one percent for ulnar deviation. (Ex. 1, p.37) Dr. Segal then added these 
three percentage ratings together, as instructed page 466 of the Guides, to arrive at a 
total permanent impairment for lost range of motion to the wrist/hand of five percent. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 37–38) 
As well, Dr. Segal considered loss of strength when opining on permanent 
impairment and concluded: 
For Mr. Isaacs, loss of strength in his left arm is one of his primary 
impairing symptoms, possibly more than loss of range of motion. The 
impairment rating for motor weakness in his case is consistent with 
instruction in the AMA Guides on page 508: “the individual’s loss of 
strength represents an impairing factor that has not been considered 
adequately by other methods in the Guides, the loss of strength may be 
rated separately.” While the Guides instruct to use motor deficit sparingly 
in upper extremity evaluation, because Mr. Isaacs’s shoulder weakness is 
a primary and an independent variable in his impairment, he meets the 
criteria for motor weakness rating. Mr. Isaacs's motor weakness is as 
impairing as his range of motion loss, and on my exam. With the 
stimulator, Mr. Isaacs is able to give full effort on exam; therefore, the 
motor strength was measured without restriction from pain. 
The Guides also state: "Decreased strength cannot be rated on the 
presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence 
of parts that prevent effective application of maximal force on the 
region being evaluated.” However, it is not merely the presence of pain 
and decreased range of motion that prevents using rating loss of motor 
strength; it is only when pain and decreased motion prevent the 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 11 
 
application of maximal force. That is not the case with Mr. Isaacs. He was 
able to give maximal force on my exam (because of the stimulator), and 
that was not limited by pain or range of motion but purely motor weakness. 
During my motor exam, I measured his motor strength at the beginning of 
the motion arc, where his limitation in range of motion would not interfere 
with his motor strength. This supports the inclusion of motor weakness in 
the impairment rating. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 38–39 (emphasis in original)) 
With respect to the left elbow, Dr. Segal opined that he measured motor deficit 
“independent of limitation due to pain” because the “measurements were done at the 
least painful arm positions, and initial effort was measured before pain limitation could 
affect the measurement.” (Ex. 1, p. 39) He recorded the following measurements with 
respect to elbow strength: 
 Flexion, 4-/5; 
 Extension, 4/5; 
 Pronation, 4+/5; and 
 Supination, 4+/5. 
 
(Ex. 1, p. 39) 
 
Dr. Segal then arrived at percent impairment values “by converting the motor 
function found on exam to a percentage, then multiplying that percentage by the total 
Unit of Motion Relative Value found on Table 16-35 on page 510,” of the Guides. (Ex. 1, 
p. 39) This worked out to the following upper extremity impairment ratings based on the 
above measurements of motor deficit: 
 Flexion, six percent; 
 Extension, four percent; 
 Pronation, two percent; and 
 Supination, two percent. 
 
(Ex. 1, p. 39) 
Dr. Segal then directly added the values together for an elbow impairment rating 
based on strength deficit of 14 percent. (Ex. 1, p. 39) He then used Table 16-3 on page 
439 to convert the upper extremity impairment to whole body impairment, which equals 
eight percent in the case of the left elbow. (Ex. 1, p. 39) 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 12 
 
b. Nerve Injury. 
Dr. Segal considered the reference to CRPS in the records relating to Dr. 
Rastogi’s care and opined: 
Dr. Rastogi did give the diagnosis of CRPS despite the fact that Mr. Isaacs 
does not show many of the typical findings commonly seen in CRPS. I 
agree with this diagnosis because CRPS is a spectrum disease: “Due to 
its complex pathophysiology and wide spectrum of clinical manifestations, 
the diagnosis of CRPS is often missed in the early stage by primary care 
physicians.” Mr. Isaacs does not fit many of the criteria for an official 
CRPS diagnosis, but I would diagnose him with CRPS-type syndrome. 
Regardless, Mr. Isaacs definitely has a post-injury/postoperative 
neuropathic pain syndrome (see discussion below in question #10). CRPS 
is generally considered a subside of the larger category of neuropathic 
pain syndromes. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 21–22) 
Citing to various medical articles and websites, Dr. Segal expanded on his 
opinion as follows: 
CRPS is a chronic neurologic condition resulting from a traumatic insult, 
that is divided into two subtypes, based on the absence (CRPS I, 
previously known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy) or presence (CRPS II, 
previously known as causalgia) of a major nerve injury. It is distinct from 
other pain syndromes by the presence of autonomic dysfunction, 
persistent regional inflammatory changes, and a lack of dermatomal 
distribution. It commonly presents with allodynia, hyperalgesia, skin 
temperature changes, and edema. 
There is not one accepted set of diagnostic criteria for CRPS, and 
symptoms vary among individuals. CRPS is thought to be a combination 
of different factors that begin to take place at the time of an initial injury, 
including nervous system sensitization, autonomic dysfunction, and 
inflammatory changes. The symptoms can evolve and progress over time 
either spontaneously or in response to further insults. 
Diagnosis is typically made based on the presence of a constellation of 
symptoms that indicate autonomic nerve dysfunction. These symptoms 
may vary in intensity among affected individuals. Most pain management 
experts considered a positive response to a sympathetic block (i.e., relief 
of pain and associated symptoms) to be the most important diagnostic 
tool. The positive diagnostic response can be temporary or short lived, as 
long as there is a reported greater than 50% symptom relief for a period of 
time including hours. Often a number of sympathetic blocks are necessary 
for therapeutic benefit. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 13 
 
(Ex. 1, p. 27 (internal footnotes and citations omitted)) 
In response to a question from claimant’s counsel about the difference between 
CRPS and neuropathic pain, Dr. Segal explained: 
CRPS type one is a subtype of neuropathic pain syndrome. Neuropathic 
pain is a complex, chronic pain state that usually is accompanied by tissue 
injury. This condition occurs as a result of damage or disease affecting the 
somatosensory nervous system. Neuropathic pain may be associated with 
abnormal sensations or pain from normally non-painful stimuli. 
Neuropathic pain is often described as burning, stabbing, shooting, 
aching, or like an electric shock. It may occur at the area of nerve damage 
or at locations remote from the nerve damage. 
Though both conditions share a neuropathic component, CRPS typically 
manifests with a distinctive collection of sensory, motor, and autonomic 
symptoms. This cluster of signs and symptoms, often referred to as the 
Budapest Criteria, aids clinicians in diagnosing CRPS. Neuropathic pain, 
however, has a broader definition. It is characterized by pain arising due to 
a lesion or disease affecting the somatosensory system, with numerous 
potential underlying conditions causing this type of pain. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 43–44) (footnotes omitted) 
On physical examination, Dr. Segal observed Isaacs’s hair, nails, and skin color 
were “about the same on the right compared to the left.” (Ex. 1, p. 19) He also noted 
during his discussion with Isaacs: 
Mr. Isaacs does not think he has color changes in his skin in his left upper 
extremity and does not notice a difference in hair growth in his left upper 
extremity. He states his left fingernails grow normally. He does not report 
grip weakness. He also has burning pain and hypersensitivity to the touch. 
(Ex. 1, p. 15)  
Isaacs shared with Dr. Segal complaints of constant left-arm pain averaging a six 
on a scale of zero to ten. (Ex. 1, p. 14) The pain ranged “from the top of his bicep to his 
wrist, hand, thumb, index, and middle finger, and very occasionally his ring finger as 
well.” (Ex. 1, p. 14) The pain in his arm was constant, but it came and went in his hand, 
fingers, and thumb. (Ex. 1, p. 14) Isaacs shared with Dr. Segal that the combination of 
the stimulator and medications helped keep his pain under reasonable control. (Ex. 1, p. 
14) 
Dr. Segal does not elaborate on the basis for his CRPS diagnosis, though the 
report discusses the Budapest Criteria, the framework recognized in the medical 
community as that best used for diagnosing CRPS, and the use of a nerve block in 
diagnosing CRPS. (Ex. 1, pp. 21–22) Dr. Segal concluded Isaacs had CRPS even 
though he “does not show many of the findings commonly seen in CRPS, let alone the 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 14 
 
minimum to meet the Budapest Criteria, and without discussing the use of a nerve block 
for diagnosis. (Ex. 1, pp. 22, 27–28) Instead, he based his diagnosis on CRPS being “a 
spectrum disease.” (Ex. 1, p. 22)  
Dr. Segal also makes clear that his diagnosis of CRPS means that the evaluation 
of permanent impairment using the Guides is the same as a diagnosis of posttraumatic 
neuralgia. (Ex. 1, p. 22) After doing so, he refers to Isaacs’s condition as neuropathic 
pain syndrome/CRPS in his report. (Ex. 1, pp. 22, 26) He opined it was best to use 
Section 13.8 of the Guides to rate Isaacs’s permanent impairment “[b]ecause Mr. Isaacs 
does not have the classic CRPS symptoms.” (Ex. 1, p. 44) 
Dr. Segal pointed out that this is the portion of the Guides used for post-traumatic 
neuralgia. (Ex. 1, pp. 44–45) He noted that he would use Table 13-22 to rate the 
impairment caused by Isaacs’s nerve condition regardless of whether it is CRPS or 
neuralgia. (Ex. 1, p. 22) He opined: 
Based on Table 13-22, page 343, Mr. Isaacs would be rated at Middle 
class 2 while the stimulator is in use: “Individual can use the involved 
extremity for self-care and can grasp and hold objects with difficulty but 
has no digital dexterity.” Without the stimulation, Mr. Isaacs would have 
been a middle-class 4. 
(Ex. 1, p. 45)  
Dr. Segal assigned Isaacs an 11 percent whole person impairment “for 
neuropathic pain/CRPS in his nondominant upper extremity.” (Ex. 1, p. 45) 
c. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. 
Dr. Segal also considered the impact of Isaacs’s left-arm carpal tunnel syndrome 
and release surgery. The carpal tunnel is “the passageway deep to the transverse 
carpal ligament between tubercles of the scaphoid and trapezoid bones on the radial 
side and the pisiform and hook of the hamate on the ulnar side, through which the 
median nerve and the flexor tendons of the fingers and thumb pass.” Stedman’s Med. 
Dictionary, 951160 carpal tunnel (Nov. 2014) (viewed on Westlaw). “Carpal tunnel 
syndrome (CTS) is the compression and entrapment of the median nerve where it 
passes through the wrist into the hand — in the carpal tunnel.” (Ex. 1, p. 28) 
The carpal tunnel is surrounded by unyielding margins. The narrowest and 
most vulnerable part of this unyielding tunnel lies immediately below the 
transverse carpal ligament. Variations in the diameter of the carpal tunnel 
do occur. In addition to size variations, conditions that increase the 
contents of the carpal tunnel (e.g., proliferative tenosynovium) can 
contribute to the etiologic process. The inability of the carpal tunnel to 
expand with swelling or hypertrophy of the surrounding structures can lead 
to increased pressure within the tunnel. Analogous to compartment 
syndrome, the final result of this increasing pressure is the cessation of 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 15 
 
blood flow caused by reduction in the pressure differential through the 
capillaries supplying the median nerve, leading to median neuropathy. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 28–29)  
On the question of causation, Dr. Segal wrote in his report: 
There is much evidence in the literature that supports carpal tunnel 
syndrome from compensatory body mechanics both in the short term and 
long term. This is a type of hand overuse syndrome. Some of this 
literature shows: 
 Studies indicate that it is not uncommon for symptoms of carpal 
tunnel syndrome to be caused by muscle stiffness in the arm and 
shoulders, resulting in poor posture, tense muscles, nerve 
compression, and pain traveling down the arm and into the hand. 
 Persons with acquired or congenital upper limb deficiency are 
under a heightened risk of developing overuse problems…the most 
frequent problem was carpal tunnel syndrome. 
 Common extrinsic factors involving mechanical stress to both the 
upper extremities might simultaneously lead to accelerated 
entrapment syndromes. 
 Certain postures or positions will increase tension or increase 
pressure at sites where nerves are entrapped. Placing a nerve 
under tension – e.g., the median nerve with wrist extension and the 
brachial plexus with arm elevation – may compromise neural blood 
supply.  
 Excessive afferent input from an injured or dysfunctional shoulder 
girdle muscle blocks normal inhibition at the gamma motoneuron 
level, leading to inappropriate coactivation with other muscles (the 
forearm flexors, in the case of CTS) during movement….having 
observed abnormal EMG activity of flexor and extensor muscles of 
the forearm concurrent with head rotation in CTS patients. 
 In some cases, repetitive stress from overuse may cause further 
narrowing of an already narrow passage and lead to nerve 
compression. 
 Alternatively, repetitive overuse with resultant compression or 
traction of a nerve over time may also result in neuropathy. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 23–24) 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 16 
 
Dr. Segal did not tie these general observations about carpal tunnel syndrome to 
Isaacs’s condition. Dr. Segal also did not address how, if at all, the work injury caused 
Isaacs’s bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Nor did he opine on how, if at all, Isaacs’s 
work injury may have worsened or aggravated his left carpal tunnel symptoms.  
Dr. Segal noted that Isaacs experienced the following symptoms relating to 
carpal tunnel syndrome:   
 
Wrist pain at rest and with exertion of the hand can become severe; 
 
Grabbing objects makes the pain worse; 
 
Grip weakness, such as when opening jars and bottles due to gripping and 
twisting difficulty; 
 
Difficulty holding objections that causes him to drop them after holding them 
for a while; 
 
Symptoms worse when wrist extended; 
 
Driving aggravates pain; 
 
Senor abnormality in the median distribution; 
 
Pain radiates up to the mid-forearm; and 
 
Pain and tingling wakes him at night and he has to shake the symptoms out.  
(Ex. 1, p. 29) Dr. Segal opined that some of the symptoms “may also be from the 
neuropathic pain syndrome,” but he did not identify which of those listed could 
crossover between syndromes. (Ex. 1, p. 29) 
Dr. Segal found that Isaacs has sufficient pain and neurological symptoms 
referable to his left carpal tunnel to rate permanent impairment using the Guides. (Ex. 1, 
p. 39) He opined that Isaacs’s residual symptoms, clinical findings of median nerve 
dysfunction, and electrical conduction delays fall under the first scenario identified on 
page 495 of the Guides. (Ex. 1, pp. 39–40) He measured grip strength and used Table 
16-31 of the Guides to find decreased grip strength of 71 percent on the left side. (Ex. 1, 
p. 40) Dr. Segal combined that with observed sensory loss for an 18 percent impairment 
to the left upper extremity caused by residual carpal tunnel symptoms. (Ex. 1, p. 40) 
d. Shoulder. 
Dr. Segal examined Isaacs’s shoulder and opined: 
The distal biceps tendon injury of the CRPS/ neuropathic pain affected the 
function and body mechanics of Mr. Isaacs’s entire left upper extremity. 
He developed left shoulder symptoms and impairment, and he developed 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 17 
 
left carpal tunnel syndrome as a direct result of the February 28, 2018 
work injury. 
When the distal biceps tendon ruptures, it can lead to a significant loss of 
strength in elbow flexion and forearm supination. Patients may experience 
a 30% loss in flexion strength and a 40% loss in supination strength 
following a distal biceps tendon rupture. The complex interplay of muscles 
and joints in the upper limb means that a distal biceps tendon rupture may 
also indirectly influence shoulder function. 
While the primary impacts of a distal biceps tendon rupture are seen in the 
elbow and forearm, this condition would also influence shoulder function 
indirectly. The upper extremity operates as a complex system where all 
the components are interconnected. Disruption in one area could 
potentially lead to compensatory changes in others to maintain overall 
function. 
Therefore, while a distal biceps tendon rupture doesn't directly weaken the 
shoulder or limit its ROM, patients may experience changes in shoulder 
function as they adjust their movements to compensate for the loss of 
elbow flexion and forearm supination strength. For instance, they might 
use their shoulder muscles more intensively for certain tasks, which could 
lead to perceived weakness or limited ROM due to muscle fatigue or 
discomfort. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 22–23) (footnotes omitted) 
Dr. Segal opined, “There has been insufficient evaluation of Mr. Isaacs’s left 
shoulder.” (Ex. 1, p. 29) On examination Dr. Segal found “signs that suggest 
impingement syndrome and possibly [a] rotator cuff injury.” (Ex. 1, p. 29) He diagnosed 
Isaacs with left shoulder arthropathy—an umbrella term that means “[a]ny disease 
affecting a joint,” Stedman’s Med. Dictionary 76130 (Nov. 2014) (viewed on Westlaw)— 
because there was no imaging of the shoulder. (Ex. 1, p. 29) 
Dr. Segal did not expressly opine that Isaacs had reached MMI for his shoulder 
or identify the date he did so. Nonetheless, Dr. Segal evaluated permanent impairment 
using Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46 of the Guides. (Ex. 1, p. 37) He measured 
Isaacs’s left-shoulder range of motion as: flexion, 155; extension, 40; abduction, 150; 
adduction, 30; internal rotation, 55; and external rotation, 65. (Ex. 1, p. 37) He combined 
the measurements for a seven percent impairment to the left upper extremity. (Ex. 1, p. 
37)  
e. Back. 
With respect to the spinal cord stimulator battery pack implanted into Isaacs’s 
back, Dr. Segal opined: 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 18 
 
The cause of low back pain following battery placement could be 
multifactorial. It could stem from surgical trauma during the pocket 
creation for the device, pressure from the pulse generator on local tissues, 
or an inflammatory response to the foreign body. In some cases, the 
placement may affect the biomechanics of the lower back, contributing to 
discomfort and pain. 
(Ex. 1, p. 29)  
Dr. Segal noted Isaacs had pain, tenderness, guarding, and limited range of 
motion in the lumbar region of his back on physician exam because of the spinal cord 
stimulator’s battery implantation. (Ex. 1, p. 45) On the question of the extent of 
permanent impairment, Dr. Segal opined (sic): 
In the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, he would best be rated in the Spine 
Chapter, page 384, Table 15-3 DRE Lumbar Spine, and he would be a 
DRE Lumbar Category II, 5%–8% impairment of whole person based on 
the lumbar pain and dysfunction. He has “Clinical history and examination 
findings are compatible with a specific injury; findings may include 
significant muscle guarding or spasm observed at the time of the 
examination, asymmetric loss of range of motion.” 
On page 381, the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition instructions: “If the individual 
has been treated with surgery or another modality, evaluate the results, 
extent of improvement, and impact on the ability to perform activities of 
daily living. If residual symptoms or objective findings impact the ability to 
perform ADL despite treatment, the higher percentage in each range 
should be assigned.”  The specific impact on Mr. Isaacs’s ADLs are found 
on Table 1-2 on page 4 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, where walking, 
sitting, driving, etc. are found. Mr. Isaacs should be at 6% impairment of 
the whole person due to the severity of the lumbar pain and the degree of 
dysfunction that it causes him in his activities of daily living. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 45–46)  
3. Records Review by Joseph Chen, M.D. 
After receipt of Dr. Segal’s report, the defendants attempted to schedule an IME 
with Dr. Chen, but Isaacs was unable to attend at the scheduled time. Consequently, 
the defendants sent the medical records from Isaacs’s care and Dr. Segal’s IME report 
to Dr. Chen for review. Dr. Chen reviewed the medical records and answered questions 
posed by defense counsel regarding causation, diagnoses, and permanent impairment. 
(Ex. A) 
a. Left Arm. 
Based on the records review, Dr. Chen diagnosed Isaacs with a complete tear of 
radial insertion of left biceps tendon with proximal retraction and left lateral antebrachial 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 19 
 
cutaneous neuropathy due to circumferential compression of the nerve by a fibrous 
band. (Ex. A, p. 8) He opined the biceps tendon tear was causally related to the 
stipulated work injury. (Ex. A, p. 8) However, he opined, “Median neuropathies also 
occur commonly in middle-aged adults but because Mr. Isaacs had bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome symptoms, it is my medical opinion that his median neuropathies 
arose from idiopathic or personal conditions and were unrelated to his February 28, 
2018 work injury.” (Ex. A, p. 8) He did not elaborate with respect to why the bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome symptoms suggest the median neuropathy is idiopathic or 
personal in nature. (Ex. A, p. 8) 
Defense counsel asked Dr. Chen to assess Dr. Segal’s assignment of whole-
body impairment ratings for left arm range of motion and motor deficit. (Ex. A, p. 11) In 
response, Dr. Chen reiterated his opinion on permanent impairment being limited to the 
left upper extremity. (Ex. A, p. 11) In Dr. Segal’s report, he issued impairment ratings for 
the upper extremity and used the conversion table to also rate the impairment for the 
whole body, a common practice in IME reports because it is consistent with the Guides’ 
region and whole-body based approach to impairment, so the undersigned does not find 
questionable the manner in which he expressed the impairment rating.  
Dr. Chen next addressed the motor deficit Dr. Segal found. He disagreed with Dr. 
Segal’s finding that Isaacs had a functionally limiting motor deficit. (Ex. A, p. 11) Dr. 
Chen felt, “The material handling parameters that Mr. Isaacs performed during his valid 
April 30, 2021 Functional Capacity Evaluation indicate no correlating focal motor deficit. 
(Ex. A, p. 11)  
b. Nerve Injury. 
On the question of whether Isaacs has CRPS, Dr. Chen opined: 
It is my medical opinion that Mr. Isaacs should not be given a diagnosis of 
complex regional pain syndrome or nonspecific neuropathic pain 
syndrome. Mr. Isaacs’s diagnosis can be contained within neuralgia 
involving only the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve distribution. Criteria 
commonly used to exclude a diagnosis of Complex Regional Pain 
Syndrome is if there is another condition that can explain the individual’s 
symptoms. 
(Ex. A, p. 10) Dr. Chen did not elaborate with respect to why he felt the proper diagnosis 
was neuralgia involving only the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve distribution or why 
he felt Isaacs should not be given a diagnosis of nonspecific neuropathic pain 
syndrome.  
However, Dr. Chen did expand on why he felt it was not CRPS, stating Isaacs 
“developed compression of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve from a fibrous band 
of tissue around the time of his initial distal biceps tendon repair...”,  which “explains 
[his] condition in a better way than a diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome” due 
to the lack of trophic changes in the left hand, fingers, or wrists that are necessary for 
the diagnosis of CRPS. (Ex. A, pp. 16–17)  

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 20 
 
Without examining Isaacs or taking any measurements, Dr. Chen opined that, 
using Table 16-15 on page 492 of the Guides, Isaacs sustained a five percent 
permanent impairment of the left upper extremity “for ongoing sensory deficit or pain.” 
(Ex. A, p. 17) When asked about Dr. Segal’s impairment rating, he stated: 
I disagree with Dr. Segal’s assessment that Mr. Isaacs has sustained an 
11% whole person impairment for neuropathic pain/[CRPS]. Mr. Isaacs left 
lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve dysesthesias are completely 
contained within the left upper extremity. There is no motor axon 
involvement of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve. I do not follow Dr. 
Segal’s rationale that an 11% whole person impairment is reasonable for 
Mr. Isaacs’s symptoms that were surgically addressed. 
 (Ex. A, p. 18)  
c. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. 
Dr. Chen agreed with the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. A, p. 12) 
However, he opined that it was unrelated to the work injury because it “occurs 
frequently in working-aged adults and is known to arise idiopathically or due to personal 
anatomic or genetic risk factors.” (Ex. A, p. 12) It is unclear based on the record 
generally and Dr. Chen’s opinion specifically what, if any, personal anatomic or genetic 
risk factors Isaacs might have had. Based on his review of the medical records, Dr. 
Chen concluded, “Isaacs did not report any specific occupational exposure-related 
factors including repetitive use of vibratory tools, gripping, or exposure to cold 
elements.” (Ex. A, p. 12)  
In response to a question regarding whether the stipulated work injury 
aggravated, accelerated, or lit up Isaacs’s left wrist condition, Dr. Chen responded that it 
did not because: 
These records indicate that Mr. Isaacs’s nerve conduction study 
abnormalities from June 12, 2019 were more notable in the right wrist than 
the left wrist. I do not find a plausible reason for how Mr. Isaacs’ uninjured 
right wrist symptoms were more advanced than his left wrist except for the 
idiopathic development of median neuropathies at the wrists which occur 
commonly in working-aged adults. 
(Ex. A, p. 12) 
On the question of the extent of permanent impairment Isaacs sustained 
because of the carpal tunnel syndrome in his left wrist, Dr. Chen referenced page 495 of 
the Guides and opined, “Because repeat nerve conduction studies have not been 
ordered, sensory and motor latencies and EMG findings of the thenar muscles are not 
known to be abnormal . . .  it is possible that Mr. Issacs may be rated in Scenario #2 
with an impairment rating not to exceed 5% of the upper extremity may be justified”. 
(Ex. A, p. 13) Dr. Chen then critiqued Dr. Segal’s impairment rating regarding the left 
carpal tunnel syndrome as follows: 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 21 
 
I disagree with Dr. Segal’s assignment of an 18% upper extremity 
impairment or a 11% whole body impairment for left wrist carpal tunnel 
symptoms. I am unable to corroborate the degree of motor and sensory 
deficits that Dr. Segal found on his examination. It is my medical opinion 
that Mr. Isaacs had a successful surgical release of his left carpal 
ligament. His EMG was noted by Dr. Garrett to be normal on testing 
performed on May 29, 2019. 
(Ex. A, pp. 13–14) 
d. Shoulder. 
With respect to Dr. Segal’s opinion on Isaacs’s shoulder, Dr. Chen found that 
there was no record indicating he had sustained a trauma to his shoulder. (Ex. A, p. 11) 
Dr. Chen noted specifically that Dr. Bollier did not diagnose Isaacs with left shoulder 
arthropathy. (Ex. A, p. 11) He also states, “Dr. Segal also noted in his report that 
shoulder impingement would be unrelated to Mr. Isaacs’s work injury in which he was 
lifting a heavy barrel.” (Ex. A, p. 11) As discussed above, Dr. Segal gave a thorough 
explanation of his theory with respect to how the torn biceps tendon caused the 
shoulder issue, which makes Dr. Chen’s assertion regarding his report unpersuasive. 
e. Back. 
In response to the question of what, if any, diagnosis Dr. Chen would make for 
Isaacs’s back, he answered that the records only show that Isaacs complained about 
focal soft-tissue irritation and discomfort around the waist when wearing a belt because 
of the battery pack. (Ex. A, p. 14) Dr. Chen concluded, “I do not see any objective 
evidence that Mr. Isaacs sustained any structural injury to his lumbar spine.” (Ex. A, p. 
14) He expanded that in his opinion Isaacs’s back complaints are not causally 
connected to the stipulated work injury because, “Low back symptoms are common in 
the general adult population and become more prevalent as individuals age, gain 
weight, or reduce engagement in physical exercise.” (Ex. A, p. 15)  
In response to questions about any permanent impairment to the back, Dr. Chen 
opined that he did “not see any objective evidence” that Isaacs sustained a permanent 
impairment to his back. (Ex. A, p. 15) He opined that he disagreed with Dr. Segal’s 
rating because, “There are many other reasons for Mr. Isaacs to have limited lumbar 
spine [r]ange of motion.” (Ex. A, p. 16) He further stated, “I do not see any corroborating 
record that Mr. Isaacs has sustained any injury or structural alteration of the spine or 
vertebral bodies which would be required for rating an individual according to Table 15-
3 on page 384 of the [Guides].” (Ex. A, p. 16) 
Dr. Chen did not talk to Isaacs or examine him. He did not explain how 
implanting a spinal cord stimulator does not entail making objective physiological 
changes to the spine or back. Nor did he observe or consider how the implantation of 
the spinal cord stimulator has impacted Isaacs’s function. For these reasons, Dr. Chen’s 
opinions with respect to how the implantation of the spinal cord stimulator has affected 
Isaacs’s spine and lumbar back are unpersuasive. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 22 
 
D . 
C a u s a t i o n.  
Isaacs seeks benefits for a stipulated work injury to his shoulder that he alleges 
caused sequelae to his nervous system, arm, hand, shoulder, and back. The question 
of causation with respect to his arm is nuanced. While the parties have stipulated to a 
work injury to the left arm, they disagree with respect to the sequelae caused by that 
injury. This decision has parceled out the disputed alleged sequelae in an attempt at 
clarity. 
1. Left Arm. 
The parties agree that Isaacs sustained a torn left biceps tendon that required 
surgical repair. They also agree that Isaacs sustained nerve pain stemming from the 
torn tendon. They disagree on the nature of the nerve pain as well as the additional 
condition of left carpal tunnel syndrome, so each is discussed separately below. 
2. Nerve Injury. 
Isaacs argues that Dr. Rastogi, an authorized treating physician, and Dr. Segal, 
his IME doctor of choice, both diagnosed him with CRPS. This is true. However, the 
record does not include any evidence reflecting the basis for Dr. Rastogi’s diagnosis. 
Dr. Segal opined that he agreed with Dr. Rastogi even though Isaacs does not exhibit a 
majority of the symptoms that are used to diagnosis CRPS. 
The Sixth Edition of the Guides defines CRPS as, “An uncommon, chronic 
condition characterized by burning pain that usually involves an upper or lower 
extremity, and rarely other body parts.” American Medical Association, Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, p. 538–39 (6th ed. 2008).1 The Budapest Criteria 
reflect the current international consensus with respect to the diagnosis of CRPS. See 
id.  The Budapest Criteria are adopted in the Sixth Edition of the Guides and consist of: 
1) Continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting event. 
2) Must report at least 1 symptom in three of the following categories: 
a) Sensory:  Reports of hypersthesia and/or allodynia; 
                                                 
1 In 2017, the legislature amended the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act to mandate use of the 
fifth edition of the Guides adopted by the Commissioner when determining the permanent impairment 
caused by a work injury and the Commissioner has adopted the Fifth Edition for determining impairment. 
See Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x); see also Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—2.4. However, there is no requirement 
under the Iowa Code, agency rules, or caselaw that a specific authority must be used when diagnosing 
an injured employee's condition. Therefore, use of the Sixth Edition of the Guides is not fatal to the 
credibility of an expert's opinion on the question of diagnosis like it might be on the question of permanent 
impairment. Ramirez Ruiz v. Hy-Vee, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 22004416.01, 2023 WL 
9021011, *22 (Arb. Dec. 21, 2023) aff’d 2024 WL 1843002 (App. Apr. 19, 2024) (affirming the conclusion 
that an expert opinion that relied on the Budapest Criteria adopted in the Sixth Edition of the Guides for 
diagnosis of CRPS and the Fifth Edition of the Guides for the permanent impairment rating of CRPS). 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 23 
 
b) Vasomotor:  Report of temperature asymmetry and/or skin color 
changes and/or skin color asymmetry; 
c) Sudomotor/Edema: Reports of edema and/or sweating changes and/or 
sweating asymmetry; 
d) Motor/Trophic:  Reports of decreased range of motion and/or motor 
dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, 
nail, skin). 
3) Must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or more of the 
following categories: 
a) Sensory:  Evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or allodynia (to 
light touch and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint movement. 
b) Vasomotor:  Evidence of temperature asymmetry and/or skin color 
changes and/or asymmetry. 
c) Sudomotor/Edema:  Evidence of edema and/or sweating changes 
and/or sweating asymmetry. 
d) Motor/Trophic:  Evidence of decreased range of motion and/or motor 
dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, 
nail, skin). 
4) There is no other diagnosis that better explains the signs and symptoms. 
Id., § 16.5, p. 539 (6th ed., 2008). 
Based on the medical records in evidence, Dr. Rastogi’s diagnosis is conclusory. 
There is no indication he considered or used the Budapest Criteria, which the agency 
has recognized as the current standard of care for diagnosing CRPS and the AMA has 
endorsed in the Sixth Edition of the Guides. Similarly, there is no indication Dr. Rastogi 
based his diagnosis on a nerve block. Moreover, diagnosing CRPS is difficult with the 
AMA recognizing that most diagnoses of CRPS are incorrect. See id. For these 
reasons, Dr. Rastogi’s conclusory diagnosis is unpersuasive. 
In Dr. Segal’s report, he recognizes the Budapest Criteria and the use of a nerve 
block in diagnosing CRPS. He does not explain why he did not use either before 
reaching the conclusion that he agrees with Dr. Rastogi on the diagnosis of CRPS. Nor 
does he explain why he ruled out any other potential diagnosis. For these reasons, Dr. 
Segal’s diagnosis of CRPS is unpersuasive. There is an insufficient basis in the 
evidence from which to conclude Isaacs’s symptomology shows by a preponderance of 
the evidence he has CRPS.  
While the evidence is insufficient to establish Isaacs has CRPS, it nonetheless 
establishes that Isaacs sustained a nerve injury. Beginning with his initial examination, 
Dr. Rastogi has consistently described Isaacs’s symptoms as “consistent with 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 24 
 
neuropathic pain” and that he did not fit the Budapest Criteria for CRPS. (Ex. JE-8, p. 
501) This and the fact that physical therapy and medication failed to provide relief, is 
why Dr. Rastogi opted for the spinal cord stimulator trial with the goal of a 50 percent 
reduction in pain symptoms. (Ex. JE-8, p. 501; Ex. JE-8, p. 511) As Dr. Segal notes in 
his IME report, “The spinal cord stimulator is the best treatment for . . . neuropathic 
pain.” (Ex. 1, p. 46)  
As detailed above, the implantation of a spinal cord stimulator entails implanting 
leads into the spine itself that are connected to a pulse generator that sends electricity 
directly into the spinal cord to relieve pain. It also requires the implantation of a battery 
back under the skin in Isaacs’s back. The evidence thus shows that Isaacs has 
neuropathic pain that is best treated by sending an electrical pulse directly into his 
spine, necessitated the implantation of a spinal cord stimulator that involves objective 
changes to the spine. Therefore, the weight of the evidence shows Issacs sustained 
neuropathic pain syndrome caused by the stipulated work injury that extends into the 
whole body and the treatment for which involves an implant that physiologically 
changed and functionally impairs his back. 
3. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. 
Dr. Segal did not give an express opinion on causation with respect to Isaacs’s 
left carpal tunnel syndrome. Rather, he listed what studies have shown can be factors in 
causing the syndrome. Further, Dr. Segal did not explain how the work injury to Isaacs’s 
left arm may have caused the bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome he had or if the work 
injury may have made the residual symptoms on the left side worse. Dr. Chen’s opinion 
based on the normal post-release EMG is persuasive. Consequently, there is an 
insufficient basis in the record from which to find that a factor in causing Isaacs’s left 
carpal tunnel syndrome. Further, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from 
which to conclude he had residual symptoms relating to carpal tunnel syndrome. The 
weight of the evidence shows that the neuropathic pain in his right arm is related to the 
nerve condition caused by the stipulated work injury, not carpal tunnel syndrome. 
4. Shoulder. 
Isaacs did not receive treatment for a shoulder condition between the stipulated 
date of the work injury and the date of hearing. He did not identify the shoulder as an 
injured body part in his petition. Nor did he move to conform to proof during the hearing. 
Claimant’s counsel did not ask Dr. Segal about Isaacs’s shoulder in his letter before the 
IME. Nonetheless, Dr. Segal found Isaacs had sustained a permanent impairment to his 
shoulder that is a sequela to the stipulated work injury to his arm. 
There is little in Isaacs’s treatment records relating to any shoulder complaints. 
Further, Dr. Segal does not offer a specific diagnosis for Isaacs’s shoulder complaints. 
While it is possible Isaacs sustained a sequela to his shoulder, the evidence does not 
show it is probable. There is an insufficient basis from which to conclude that Isaacs 
sustained a work injury, in the form of a sequela or otherwise, to his left shoulder. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 25 
 
5. Back.  
The parties agree Isaacs sustained a nerve injury that is a sequela to the 
stipulated work injury to his left arm. The nerve condition ultimately required the 
implantation of a spinal cord stimulator, which involved implanting leads directly into 
Isaacs’s spine and a battery pack under a flap of skin in the lumbar region of his back. 
As a result of the implantation, Isaacs experiences pain, tenderness, guarding, and 
limited range of motion. The weight of the evidence shows that it is more likely than not 
the implantation of the spinal cord stimulator, necessitated by the nerve damage caused 
by the stipulated work injury, caused Isaacs’s back issues. As found above, this 
demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that Isaacs’s nerve injury has caused 
impairment to his whole person. 
E . 
P e r m a n e n t  I m p a i r m e n t .  
The parties disagree on whether the work injury caused Isaacs to sustain 
permanent impairment to only his left arm or the body as a whole. The evidence shows 
that Isaacs tore his biceps tendon while lifting a trash bin. Either the injury itself or the 
surgery to repair it caused Isaacs to sustain a nerve injury. The nerve damage caused 
by the injury has resulted in significant ongoing symptoms. 
The uncontroverted evidence in the record shows that the symptoms directly 
related to the work injury resulted a referral to Dr. Rastogi to treat Isaacs’s nerve pain. 
The course of care with Dr. Rastogi culminated with the implantation of a permanent 
spinal cord stimulator. That implantation entailed implanting leads directly into Isaacs’s 
spine and then connecting them to a battery pack, which is also implanted into Isaacs’s 
back. The implant offers Isaacs pain relief by sending electricity directly into his spine, 
which reduces the pain in his left arm to a more tolerable level. The evidence shows 
Isaacs has sustained objective physiological changes and impairment from the spinal 
cord stimulator implant and the battery pack installation.  Therefore, Isaacs has met his 
burden of proof on the question of whether or not the stipulated work injury to his arm 
caused a sequela to his back.  
The defendants argue Dr. Buckwalter’s opinion is most persuasive on the 
question of permanent impairment because it is in line with Dr. Mysnyk’s opinion. This 
argument is unavailing because Dr. Mysnyk’s opinion is dated January 23, 2019, before 
care for the sequelae and the stipulated date of MMI. It is therefore of no probative 
value. Moreover, there is no indication Dr. Mysnyk performed range-of-motion 
measurements using a goniometer as the Guides instruct, which further undermines it 
probative worth and persuasiveness. 
The defendants contend Dr. Buckwalter’s opinion should be given more weight 
because he is a treating physician. Adopting this view would require the agency to defy 
controlling precedent on how to weigh expert opinions in workers’ compensation cases 
by finding a treating physician’s opinion on permanent impairment most persuasive 
because he is the treating physician. Such an error would be magnified here because 
there is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Dr. Buckwalter 
performed range-of-motion measurements using a goniometer, as the Guides direct an 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 26 
 
evaluating physician to do when determining permanent impairment. Because there is 
an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Dr. Buckwalter performed his 
evaluation of permanent impairment in accordance with the Guides, his credibility is 
undermined on the question of permanency. 
The defendants posit as well that Dr. Segal’s measurements of range of motion 
are out of line with that of other doctors and should consequently be viewed with 
skepticism. The problem with this argument is the evidence only allows for the 
conclusion that one doctor used a goniometer to perform range-of-motion 
measurements three times in accordance with the Guides and that is Dr. Segal. So, the 
evidence shows it is more likely than not that the reason Dr. Segal’s range of motion 
findings are different is that he followed the process set forth in the Guides while the 
other physicians did not. Therefore, the undersigned finds Dr. Segal's opinions on 
permanent impairment more persuasive than those of the other physicians. 
Dr. Segal rated multiple injuries or conditions that, in his opinion, caused 
permanent impairment to Isaacs’s left arm. Because Isaacs failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that his carpal tunnel syndrome was caused or 
aggravated by the stipulated work injury to his left arm and that it resulted in residual 
symptoms causing permanent impairment, this decision does not include the 
impairment Dr. Segal attributed to that condition in its determination of permanent 
impairment. The same is true of the shoulder limitations Dr. Segal found on 
examination.  
The evidence shows Dr. Segal had a thorough understanding of Isaacs’s medical 
history due to his records review and discussion with Isaacs. His examination was 
performed in substantial compliance with the framework in the Guides for assessing 
causation and permanent impairment. See Guides, ch. 2 With respect to the range-of-
motion measurements, the evidence shows Dr. Segal performed them in accordance 
with the Guides by using a goniometer and performing the measurements three times. 
His assessment of Isaacs’s neuropathic pain syndrome and back condition is in line with 
the evidence in record and the Guides. Typically, motor deficit is not included with an 
impairment rating; however, Dr. Segal’s methods and rationale for excluding such that 
might be affected by pain is compelling in this case.  
The following impairment ratings by Dr. Segal are found to be in accordance with 
the Guides and are adopted because they are persuasive against the backdrop of the 
rest of the evidentiary record: 
 7 percent to the left upper extremity or 4 percent to the whole person for lost 
range of motion to the elbow; 
 
 5 percent to left upper extremity or 3 percent to the whole person based on 
lost range of motion to the wrist/hand; 
 
 14 percent to the left upper extremity or 8 percent to the whole person for 
elbow motor deficit;  
 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 27 
 
 
 11 percent to the whole body for the neuropathic pain syndrome; and 
 
 6 percent to the whole body for implantation of the spinal cord stimulator in 
Isaacs’s back. 
Chapter 1 of the Guides is entitled, “Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use 
of the Guides.” Section 1.3, “The Organ System and Whole Body Approach to 
Impairment,” provides: 
The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the 
organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations. Most 
organ/body systems chapters in the Guides provide impairment ratings 
that represent the extent of whole person impairment. In addition to listing 
whole person impairments, the musculoskeletal chapters provide regional 
impairment ratings (e.g., upper extremity, lower extremity); regional ratings 
are then converted into whole person impairment ratings. Within some 
musculoskeletal regions, a consensus group developed weights to reflect 
the relative importance of certain regions. For example, different fingers or 
different areas of the spine are given different weights, representing their 
unique and relative importance to the region’s overall functioning. These 
weights, which have gained acceptable in clinical practice, have been 
retained to enable regulatory authorities to convert from a regional body to 
whole person impairment when needed. 
Id., § 1.3, p. 9. 
The next section is entitled, “Philosophy and Use of the Combined Values Chart.” 
Id. § 1.4, pp. 9–10. It provides, “In general, impairment ratings within the same region 
are combined before combining the regional impairment rating with that from another 
region.” Id. at p. 10. For example, regional impairments to the upper extremity “are first 
expressed individually as upper extremity impairments and then combined to determine 
the total upper extremity impairment. The latter is finally converted to whole person 
impairment (Table 16-3).” Id., § 16.1c, p. 438; see also id., § 16.1d, p. 441 (providing 
the principles for when hand impairment ratings are added before reiterating, “All other 
upper extremity impairment ratings are combined.”). 
The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) was designed to enable the 
physician to account for the effects of multiple impairments with a 
summary value. A standard formula was used to ensure that regardless of 
the number of impairments, the summary value would not exceed 100% of 
the whole person. According to the formula listed in the combined values 
chart, multiple impairments are combined so that the whole person 
impairment value is equal to or less than the sum of all the individual 
impairment values. 
Id. § 1.4, p. 9 (boldface omitted). 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 28 
 
Further, the Guides instruct: 
The Combined Values Chart (p. 604) is used to determine the combined 
value of two impairment percentages. All percentages being combined 
must be expressed on a common denominator or same unit relative value. 
If three or more values are to be combined, the two lowest values are first 
selected and their combined value is found. The combined value and the 
third value are then combined to given the total value. This procedure can 
be repeated indefinitely, with the value obtained in each case being a 
combination of all the previous values. 
Id. § 16.1c, p. 438. 
The Guides provide the following directions for using the Combined Values 
Chart: 
The values are derived from the formula A + B(1-A) = combined value of A 
and B, where A and B are the decimal equivalents of the impairment 
ratings. In the chart all values are expressed as percents. To combine any 
two impairment values, locate the larger of the values on the side of the 
chart and read along that row until you come to the column indicated by 
the smaller value at the bottom of the chart. At the intersection of the row 
and the volume is the combined value. 
**** 
If three or more impairment values are to be combined, select any two and 
find their combined value as above. Then use that value and the third 
value to locate the combined value of all. This process can be repeated 
indefinitely, the final value in each instance being the combination of all 
the previous values. In each step of this process the larger impairment 
value must be identified at the side of the chart. 
Id., p. 604. 
Dr. Segal followed the Guides when combining the various impairment ratings 
that he opined arose out of and in the course of Isaacs’s employment. However, 
because some of his opinions on causation are not persuasive, the total combined 
value of impairment Dr. Segal found is not adopted. Instead, the combined value of the 
impairments that the weight of the evidence establishes were caused by the work injury 
must be calculated in accordance with the Guides, as required by the statute. 
As found above, the evidence establishes Isaacs has sustained impairment 
caused by a nerve injury that implicates his whole body. This means that Isaacs’s 
injuries have created permanent impairment to the whole body, not just a scheduled 
member. The common denominator mandated by the Guides for determining 
permanent impairment to multiple body parts caused by an injury is a whole person 
impairment. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 29 
 
Because the permanent implantation of the spinal cord stimulator establishes a 
back condition causing permanent impairment, the denominator in this case must be the 
whole person for combining impairments. Therefore, the impairments to the regions of 
the left upper extremity must be combined for an upper extremity impairment before 
converting that impairment to a whole person impairment using Table 16-3. After that is 
completed, the whole person impairments are combined using the Combined Values 
Chart. 
Dr. Segal provided upper extremity impairment ratings and converted them to 
whole person impairment using Table 16-3 on page 439 of the Guides. Using the 
Combined Values Chart and following its instructions, 11 percent whole person 
impairment for the neuropathic pain syndrome combines with the 8 percent whole 
person impairment for motor deficit to equal 18 percent whole person impairment. That 
combines with the 6 percent whole person impairment for the back to equal 23 percent. 
And the 23 percent whole person impairment combines with 4 percent for the lost elbow 
range of motion for 26 percent. Lastly, that combines with the 3 percent whole person 
impairment for lost wrist range of motion to total a 28 percent whole person impairment.  
F .  
I M E  C o s t s .  
The introductory chapter of the Guides states the following with respect to the 
process it details for evaluating permanent impairment or disability: 
Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides 
as comprehensive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing 
the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed 
in Chapter 2. A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable 
information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a 
discussion about the person’s abilities and limitations, including the ability 
to perform common activities listed in Table 1-2. Combining the medical 
and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about 
essential work activities, if requested, is a basis for improved 
understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the 
individual’s work ability. 
Guides, § 1.12, p. 15. 
Chapter 2, “Practical Application of the Guides,” provides the following with 
respect to the examiners’ roles and responsibilities: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 30 
 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. Moreover, the Guides state, “A clear, accurate, and complete report is 
essential to support a rating of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
To that end, the Guides lay out a list of elements that “should be included in all 
impairment evaluation reports. Id. (emphasis in original). The first is a narrative history 
of medical condition(s) consisting of 
the onset and course of the condition, symptoms, findings on previous 
examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse 
effects. Include information that may be relevant to onset, such as an 
occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any 
relevant investigations. Include detailed list of prior evaluations in the 
clinical data section. 
Id., § 2.6a.1, p. 21. 
In addition, the Guides direct a physician to “[a]ssess current clinical status, 
including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of 
contemplated treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.” Id., § 2.6a.3, 
p. 21 (boldface omitted). They also direct an evaluating physician to include in the report 
a discussion of diagnostic study results and outstanding pertinent diagnostic studies, 
whether the injured employee is at MMI, and diagnoses and impairments. Id., §§ 
2.6a.4–2.6a.6, pp. 21–22. Moreover, the Guides state a report should discuss 
impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and limitations; calculation of the 
impairment rating; and discussion of how the impairment rating was calculated. Id., §§ 
2.6a.8, 2.6b, 2.6c. p. 22. 
The Guides also state that other elements may be included in an impairment 
evaluation that include “a work history with detailed, chronological description of work 
activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, 
any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity, 
and duration of exposure and activity, and any protective measures” as well as 
discussion of causation and apportionment. Id., §§ 2.6a.4, 2.6a.6, pp. 21–22.  
The Guides provide a “Sample Report for Permanent Medical Impairment” for 
physicians to follow to help ensure they adhere to the process in the Guides. Id., pp. 
23–24. The sample includes a section entitled “Identifies” with information about the 
injured employee and examination. Id., p. 23. The next section is entitled, “Introduction,” 
and consists of the “[p]urpose (impairment or IME evaluation, personal injury, workers’ 
compensation) and procedures (who performed the exam, patient consent, location of 
examination.” Id. Following that is the “Narrative History,” which includes, “Chief 
complaints, history of injury or illness, occupational history, past medical history, family 
history, social history, [and] review of symptoms.” Id. After that is the section entitled, 
“Medical record review,” which is described as, “Chronology of medical evaluation, 
diagnostic studies, and treatment for the injury or illness.” Id. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 31 
 
Next is a section detailing the physician’s physical examination. Id. After that, a 
section discussing diagnostic studies. Id., p. 24. Then the section “Diagnoses and 
Impairments” with the note, “If requested, discuss work relatedness, causation, 
apportionment, restrictions, accommodations, assistive devices.” Id. 
The report then has a section entitled, “Impairment Rating Criteria,” which 
includes “MMI residual function, limitations of activities of daily living, [and] prognosis.” 
Id. This is following by the “Impairment Rating and Rationale,” which includes the body 
part or system being rated, the chapter number of the Guides used, the table number of 
the Guides used, the percentage impairment of the whole person, and “[d]iscussion of 
rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination.” Id. 
The report template concludes with a section entitled, “Recommendations,” which 
is for, “Further diagnostic or therapeutic follow-up care.” Id. Then there is a section 
labeled, “Work ability, work restrictions.” Id. This final section includes the explanatory 
note, “If requested, review abilities and limitations in reference to essential job activities.” 
Id. 
Unsurprisingly, every section of the “Sample Report for Permanent Medical 
Impairment” in the Guides is relevant to the determination of permanent disability or 
impairment in workers’ compensation cases before the agency. As discussed above, 
the rationale for directing a physician to write a report contained in the Guides is 
accurate: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. “A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating 
of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
Dr. Segal performed a thorough medical records review. He included in his report 
a discussion of Isaacs’s relevant medical history. This included, but was not limited to, 
the relevant imaging. Dr. Segal also performed a physical examination that included 
using a goniometer to measure Isaacs’s range of motion. The weight of the evidence 
establishes Dr. Segal evaluated Isaacs’s permanent impairment and recorded his 
findings in a report that substantially complies with the framework in the Guides. Dr. 
Segal’s report also includes his opinions on causation, work restrictions, and future 
care. 
The invoice for Dr. Segal’s IME itemizes components. He spent one hour and 
charged $800.00 for the records review. (Ex. 8, p. 146) Dr. Segal spent just under two 
hours on his in-person examination of Isaacs and charged $1,466.67 for it. (Ex. 8, p. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 32 
 
146) The drafting of the report and impairment rating took three hours and ten minutes, 
with a cost of $2,533.34. He spent ten minutes and charged $133.33 each on future 
treatments and restrictions. (Ex. 8, p. 146) 
The vast majority of the records Dr. Segal reviewed relate to the compensable 
work injury. A relative few relate only to the non-compensable shoulder injury or carpal 
tunnel syndrome. Nonetheless, those records relating to both non-compensable 
conditions would have been reviewed regardless of compensability because of the 
records they are in, which also relate to care for the work injury. Put otherwise, the 
records relating to the shoulder condition are the same records relating to the arm and 
nerve injury and the records relating to the carpal tunnel syndrome had to be reviewed 
to determine if that condition resulted in permanent impairment that must be accounted 
for and considered relative to the nerve injury. Furthermore, in order to accurately 
understand Isaacs’s history, Dr. Segal had to review the records relating to the 
treatment of all of the conditions for which he received care between the date of injury 
and the IME. For these reasons, there is no reduction for this component of the IME 
under section 85.39(2). 
The invoice shows that the in-person examination took one hour and fifty minutes 
to perform. The components of that relating to the shoulder and left carpal tunnel 
syndrome took a fair amount of time as Dr. Segal performed measurements for range of 
motion and strength. That is time relating to non-compensable injuries or conditions and 
must be reduced. The weight of the evidence shows a reduction of 35 percent or 
$513.33 is appropriate for this line item. 
The IME report took Dr. Segal the most amount of time, three hours and ten 
minutes. The bulk of the report is devoted to Isaacs’s medical history. That being said, it 
contains opinions on causation and permanent impairment for each non-compensable 
condition. Based on the record before the agency, it is appropriate to reduce the report 
line item by 20 percent or $506.67 for the non-compensable conditions. 
Based on the foregoing, the weight of the evidence shows Isaacs is entitled to 
reimbursement for $4,046.67 of the $5,066.67 Dr. Segal charged for his IME. 
G .  
P a y m e n t  o f  B e n e f i t s .  
Isaacs contends the defendants were late in paying him benefits on multiple 
occasions. The following chart shows those allegedly late payments, including the 
amount paid, type of benefits paid, periods of time for which the benefits were paid 
(start to end), number of days late, and a citation to the exhibit in the record showing the 
information. Under the “Type” column, “TTD” means temporary total disability and “PPI” 
means permanent partial impairment. 
Amount 
Type 
Time Period 
Date of Check 
Date Mailed 
Exhibit 
Start 
End 
$9,872.11 
PPI 
2/11/19 
2/11/19 
9/19/2019 
- 
7, p. 142 
$1,932.82 
TTD 
1/15/21 
1/28/21 
1/29/21 
- 
7, p. 141 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 33 
 
$966.41 
TTD 
1/29/21 
2/4/21 
2/5/2021 
- 
7, p. 141 
$966.41 
TTD 
2/5/21 
2/11/21 
2/12/21 
- 
7, p. 141 
$966.41 
TTD 
2/12/21 
2/18/21 
2/19/21 
- 
7, p. 140 
$966.41 
TTD 
2/19/21 
2/25/21 
2/26/21 
- 
7, p. 140 
$966.41 
TTD 
2/26/21 
3/4/21 
3/5/21 
- 
7, p. 140 
$966.41 
TTD 
3/5/21 
3/11/21 
3/12/21 
- 
7, p. 140 
$966.41 
TTD 
3/12/21 
3/18/21 
3/19/21 
- 
7, p. 140 
$966.41 
TTD 
3/19/21 
3/25/21 
3/26/21 
- 
7, p. 137 
$690.29 
TTD 
3/26/21 
3/25/21 
42/2/24 
- 
7, p. 137 
$10,672.11 
PPI 
3/31/21 
6/15/21 
6/21/21 
6/21/21 
7, pp. 138–39 
$966.41 
PPI 
6/30/21 
7/6/21 
7/7/21 
- 
7, p. 137 
$966.41 
PPI 
7/7/21 
7/13/21 
7/14/21 
- 
7, p. 137 
$966.41 
PPI 
7/14/21 
7/20/21 
7/21/21 
- 
7, p. 137 
$966.41 
PPI 
7/21/21 
7/27/21 
7/28/21 
- 
7, p. 136 
$966.41 
PPI 
7/28/21 
8/3/21 
8/4/21 
- 
7, p. 136 
$966.41 
PPI 
8/4/21 
8/10/21 
8/11/21 
- 
7, p. 136 
$966.41 
PPI 
8/11/21 
8/17/21 
8/18/21 
- 
7, p. 136 
$966.41 
PPI 
8/18/21 
8/24/21 
8/25/21 
- 
7, p. 135 
$966.41 
PPI 
8/25/21 
8/31/21 
9/1/21 
- 
7, p. 135 
$966.41 
PPI 
9/1/21 
9/7/21 
9/8/21 
- 
7, p. 135 
$966.41 
PPI 
9/8/21 
9/14/21 
9/15/21 
- 
7, p. 135 
$7,869.48 
PPI 
9/15/21 
11/10/21 
10/22/21 
10/22/21 
7, pp. 133–34 
Isaacs has presented sufficient evidence to meet his burden of establishing a 
delay in the payment of benefits. Some of the delays are short, spanning a day or two. 
Others lasted weeks. 
The defendants present no argument regarding the circumstances surrounding 
any of the alleged late payments. There is no indication in the record that the delayed 
payments were the result of an investigation into causation or the extent of permanent 
impairment or disability. Further, there is an insufficient basis in the record from which to 
conclude the defendants sent any communication to Isaacs regarding the late payment 
of benefits.  
The only written communication to Isaacs regarding payment of benefits came 
from defense counsel in a letter dated June 16, 2021, regarding the forthcoming 
termination of benefits for permanent impairment. (Ex. 5, p. 112) The defendants then 
continued to pay permanency benefits past the initially identified termination date and in 
a letter dated October 11, 2021, informed Isaacs that his benefits would terminate on 
November 10, 2021. (Ex. 5, p. 113) Thus, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence 
from which to conclude the reason for the defendants’ failure to timely pay benefits to 
Isaacs was due to a reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delays or 
contemporaneous communication to Issacs regarding the delays. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 34 
 
H . 
E a r n i n g s .  
The parties stipulated that at the time of the stipulated work injury, Isaacs’s gross 
earnings were $1,230.00 per week. Isaacs testified at hearing that after the work injury, 
he changed jobs and held the position of mail carrier at the time of hearing. In that 
position, his earnings were greater than at the time of the injury. The weight of the 
evidence establishes Isaacs received salary, wages, or earnings at the time of hearing 
that were greater than at the time of injury. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments took effect on July 1, 2017. Id. at § 
24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). Because the injury at issue in this case occurred on 
February 28, 2018, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. 
See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5064673, 2020 
WL 6037539 *2 (App. Oct. 2, 2020).  
A .  
C a u s a t i o n.  
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must “provide, 
secure, and pay compensation . . . for any and all personal injuries sustained by an 
employee arising out of and in the course of the employment, and in such cases, the 
employer shall be relieved from other liability for recovery of damages or other 
compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code § 85.3(1). “[W]here an accident 
occurs to an employee in the usual course of his employment, the employer is liable for 
all consequences that naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Oldham v. 
Scofield & Welch, 266 N.W. 480, 482, opinion modified on denial of reh'g, 222 Iowa 
764, 269 N.W. 925 (Iowa 1936). This includes, but is not limited to, sequelae. See 
Coghlan v. Quinn Wire & Iron Works, 164 N.W.2d 848, 852–53 (Iowa 1969).  
“[T]he burden of proof is on the claimant to prove some employment incident or 
activity was a proximate cause of the health impairment on which he bases his claim.” 
Anderson v. Oscar Mayer & Co., 217 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1974). “[A] possibility is 
insufficient; a probability is necessary.” Id. The claimant must prove causation by a 
preponderance of the evidence. See, e.g., St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 
652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996)). 
“‘Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” IBP, Inc. v. 
Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency, “as the fact finder, determines the weight to 
be given to any expert testimony.” Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 
1998). The agency must weigh the evidence in a case and accept or reject an expert 
opinion based on the entire record. Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. The agency may 
accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in part. Sherman, 576 N.W.2d at 321. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 35 
 
As found above, Isaacs has met his burden of proof on the question of whether a 
causal connection exists between the stipulated work injury to his arm, the neuropathic 
pain syndrome as well as his back. However, the evidence forms an insufficient basis 
from which to conclude the work injury caused, worsened, or aggravated his left carpal 
tunnel syndrome or a shoulder injury and those conditions are consequently not 
compensable under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
B . 
B e n e f i t s .  
Workers’ compensation is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 
570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 481 
N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992).  And “it is the legislature’s prerogative to fix the 
conditions under which the act’s benefits may be obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The legislature enacted the workers' compensation statute primarily for the 
benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents. Therefore, we apply 
the statute broadly and liberally in keeping with the humanitarian objective 
of the statute. We will not defeat the statute's beneficent purpose by 
reading something into it that is not there, or by a narrow and strained 
construction. 
Gregory v. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 399 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812, 815–16 (Iowa 2008) (citations omitted)).  
“Although the workers' compensation statute is to be liberally construed in favor 
of the worker, the statute is not to be expanded by reading something into it that is not 
there.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). “To determine 
legislative intent, we look to the language chosen by the legislature and not what the 
legislature might have said.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 
(Iowa 2016) (citing Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 337 (Iowa 
2008)). The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation 
(apart from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a 
physical injury.” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 
2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law 
§ 80.02, at 80–2 (2009)).  
Under Iowa Code section 85.3(1), “An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act must “provide, secure, and pay compensation according to the 
provisions of this chapter for any and all personal injuries sustained by an 
employee arising out of and in the course of the employment, and in such cases, the 
employer shall be relieved from other liability for recovery of damages or other 
compensation for such personal injury.” Entitled “Permanent disabilities,” section 85.34 
provides, “Compensation for permanent disabilities and during a healing period for 
permanent partial disabilities shall be payable as provided in this section.” And section 
85.34(2) states: 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 36 
 
The compensation shall be based upon the extent of the disability and 
upon the basis of eighty percent per week of the employee’s average 
spendable weekly earnings, but not more than a weekly benefit amount, 
rounded to the nearest dollar, equal to one hundred eighty-four percent of 
the statewide average weekly wage paid employees as determined by the 
department of workforce development under section 96.1A, subsection 35, 
and in effect at the time of the injury. 
Before 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body part caused by 
a work injury was “compensated by the industrial disability method which takes into 
account the loss of earning capacity.” Id. (citing Mortimer, 502 N.W.2d at 14–15). An 
industrial disability analysis was used regardless of whether the injured employee 
returned to work with the defendant-employer or the level of earnings at the time of 
hearing relative to the date of injury. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 
(Iowa 2009) (quoting Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 
1992)); see also Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 158 (Iowa 1996); Arrow-
Acme Corp. v. Bellamy, 500 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa App. 1993). With the 2017 
amendments, the legislature carved out an exception to this general rule and created a 
mandatory bifurcated litigation process on the issue of permanent disability under 
certain circumstances. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v)). The statute now articulates an exception and the circumstances 
triggering the bifurcated litigation process as follows: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee's 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee's earning 
capacity caused by the employee's permanent partial disability. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).  
Thus, the 2017 amendments changed the statute so that its text expressly 
incorporates the agency’s review-reopening process to create a mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process when certain criteria are met. See, e.g., Garcia v. Smithfield Foods, 
File No. 1657969.01 (Arb. February 16, 2022). Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), 
review-reopening is a process by which a determination of compensation is revisited 
due to a change in the claimant’s condition. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387, 391–95 (Iowa 2009) The bifurcated litigation process created in section 85.34(2)(v) 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 37 
 
allows a claimant to seek a new agency determination of permanent disability using an 
industrial disability analysis when the defendant-employer terminates the claimant’s 
employment after the initial agency award or approval of the parties’ agreement for 
settlement. Presumably, this is because the defendant-employer’s discharge of the 
claimant after the award or agreement for settlement creates a potential change in the 
claimant’s condition that could trigger reopening the determination of permanent 
disability. See id.  
The parties stipulated to the Isaacs’s earnings at the time of injury. The parties 
agree that the evidence shows he was earning more working for the District at the time 
of hearing than at the time of injury. Therefore, the mandatory bifurcated litigation 
process created in 2017 applies to Isaacs. Under the statute, he is entitled to benefits 
based only on the functional impairment caused by the work injury to his left arm. This 
implicates another 2017 amendment to the statutory scheme. 
Before the 2017 amendments, the agency could use all evidence in the 
administrative record, as well as agency expertise, when determining the permanent 
disability of an injured worker. See, e.g., Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 
417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Under agency rules before the 2017 amendments, the Guides 
were considered a “useful tool in evaluating disability.” See Westling v. Hormel Foods 
Corp., 810 N.W.2d 247, 252 (Iowa 2012). However, in cases involving injuries on or 
after July 1, 2017, the Guides are more than a tool when determining functional 
impairment; they are dispositive. As amended, section 85.34(2)(x) now states: 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Thus, with the 2017 amendments, the legislature effectively incorporated the Guides 
into the act.  
As amended in 2017, section 85.34(2) mandates use of the edition of the Guides 
adopted by the Commissioner under the IAPA. The Commissioner has adopted the Fifth 
Edition of the Guides for use in determining permanent impairment in cases before the 
agency. See Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—2.4. The definition of “permanent impairment” 
from the Guides, as detailed above, is applied here in accordance with the governing 
statute and agency rule. 
The legislature made the policy choice that an individual who sustains a work 
injury and returns to work for the employer earning the same or more as at the time of 
the injury is entitled to benefits for permanent impairment only and the impact of the 
work injury on the individual’s ability to work and earn may not be considered unless the 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 38 
 
employment relationship between the injured employee and defendant-employer 
subsequently ends. If that day comes, the injured employee may file a petition seeking 
review-reopening under the bifurcated litigation process created by the 2017 
amendments. Because Isaacs remains employed by the District and his earnings are 
more than they were at the time of the injury, the determination of his entitlement to 
benefits is based only on the permanent impairment resulting from the work injury as 
determined using the Guides. 
To comply with the requirement imposed by Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) to 
determine “the . . . percentage of permanent impairment” Isaacs has sustained from the 
work injury “solely by utilizing the [Guides],” the agency necessarily must apply the 
Guides as written, including terms the AMA has defined for that purpose. The Guides 
define “impairment” as follows: 
The Guides continues to define impairment as “a loss, loss of use, or 
derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” This 
definition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical impairment 
can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is considered 
permanent when it has reached maximal medical improvement (MMI), 
meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change substantially in the next 
year with or without medical treatment. The term impairment in the Guides 
refers to permanent impairment, which is the focus of the Guides. 
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, 
and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain. Although the Guides 
emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included 
within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining 
whether an injury or illness results in permanent impairment requires a 
medical assessment performed by a physician. An impairment may lead to 
functional limitations or the inability to perform the activities of daily living. 
Guides, p. 2 (italics in original) (bold-face omitted). 
The Guides further provide: 
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and 
functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either 
anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that 
specialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body 
structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ 
or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of 
heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or 
the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater 
emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measures such as range of 
motion. Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in the mental 
and behavioral section. 
Id. at 4 (emphasis in original).   

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 39 
 
As well, the Guides expressly provide: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment percentages 
listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment on the 
individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding 
work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
Guides, at 4 (italics in original) (boldface omitted). Table 1-2, entitled “Activities of Daily 
Living Commonly Measured in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and Instrumental 
Activities of Daily Living (IADL) Scales,” from Page 4 of the Guides, is recreated below. 
Activity 
Example 
Self-care, personal hygiene 
Urinating, defecating, 
brushing teeth, combing 
hair, bathing, dressing 
oneself, eating 
Communication 
Writing, typing, seeing, 
hearing, speaking 
Physical activity 
Standing, sitting, reclining, 
walking, climbing 
Sensory function 
Hearing, seeing, tactile 
feeling, tasting, smelling 
Nonspecialized hand 
activities 
Grasping, lifting, tactile, 
discrimination 
Travel 
Riding, driving, flying 
Sexual function 
Orgasm, ejaculation, 
lubrication, erection 
Sleep 
Restful, nocturnal sleep 
pattern 
The Guides further explain its approach to impairment in pertinent part: 
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment 
percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but 
could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 40 
 
included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several 
reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is 
highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment 
percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and 
occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors 
as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine 
the extent of work disability. For example, an individual who receives a 
30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is 
considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general 
functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities 
of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no 
decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. 
Thus, 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in 
work capability. Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impairment 
rating due to pericardial disease may be completely unable to do his or 
her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability. 
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct 
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate 
work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable 
about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the 
worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment. 
Id. at 5.  
In accordance with section 85.34(2)(v) and the Guides, the determination of 
permanent impairment that Isaacs has sustained because of the work injury focuses on 
“the severity of the medical condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases 
an individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), excluding work.” 
Id. at 4 (italics in original). Consequently, the undersigned has not considered any work 
restrictions recommended by a physician in determining the extent of permanent 
impairment. Such considerations are outside the framework set forth in the Guides for 
determining permanent impairment because they directly relate to work. 
As discussed in greater detail above, the evidence establishes Dr. Segal’s 
opinion is most persuasive on the question of permanent impairment. The Guides 
advise physicians performing an evaluation of permanent impairment to review records, 
discuss the injury and its effects with the injured person, and perform a physical 
examination. Dr. Segal performed his examination in accordance with the Guides. In 
contrast, Dr. Chen did not perform an in-person physical examination of Isaacs, only a 
records review. His opinion on permanent impairment was not based on his 
observations or measurements, but those of other physicians, which lessens the weight 
given to his opinions. And the record does not allow for the finding that Dr. Buckwalter 
performed his impairment rating in accordance with the Guides. Further, Dr. Segal 
observed and properly considered the impact of Isaacs’s spinal cord stimulator implant 
as well as the effect of the neurological pain syndrome on Isaacs’s ability to perform 
activities of daily living, excluding work. Isaacs has met his burden of proof on the 
disputed issue of permanent impairment. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 41 
 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, the determination of “whether an 
injury results in the ‘loss of use’ to a scheduled member or extends to the body as a 
whole is a fact-based inquiry that must be determined on a case-by-case basis. In some 
cases, an injury to a bodily system may extend beyond a localized area and amount to 
an injury to the body as a whole.” Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, --- N.W.3d ---, 
2024 WL 2096215, *5 (Iowa 2024). As found above, the evidence in this case shows 
that Isaacs’s nerve condition is an injury to the whole body. Therefore, the permanent 
impairment caused by the work injury is determined using whole person impairment 
ratings under the Guides. The combined value percentage of permanent impairment is 
then used to calculate entitlement to benefits out of 500 weeks under the statute. 
As found above, the weight of the evidence establishes that the stipulated work 
injury has caused Isaacs to sustain a 28 percent whole person impairment. Multiplying 
28 percent by 500 weeks equals 140 weeks. Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), 
Isaacs is entitled to 140 weeks of benefits for the permanent impairment to the whole 
person he sustained due to the stipulated work injury. 
C . 
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated Isaacs’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date were 
gross earnings were $1,230.00 per week. They also stipulated she was married and 
entitled to six exemptions at the time. Based on the parties’ stipulations and the 
ratebook spreadsheet issued by the agency for the applicable time period, Isaacs’s 
workers’ compensation rate is $801.14 per week. 
D . 
P e n a l t y.  
“Because penalty benefits are a creature of statute, our discussion begins with 
an examination of the statutory parameters for such benefits.” Keystone Nursing Care 
Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 307 (Iowa 2005). Under Iowa Code section 
86.13(4)(a),2 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this subchapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
This provision “codifies, in the workers’ compensation insurance context, the 
common law rule that insurers with good faith disputes over the legal or factual validity 
                                                 
2 The agency has held the Iowa Code edition in effect on the date of injury governs in contested 
case proceedings before it. In the edition of the Iowa Code, section 86.13 governs penalties. In legislation 
that took effect July 1, 2023, the legislature transferred chapter 86 to sections 10A.303 through 10A.333. 
See 2023 Iowa Acts ch. 19, § 1477. As a result, section 86.13 (2018) was transferred to section 10A.315 
(2023). Because the stipulated date of injury is in 2018, this decision cites to section 86.13 despite the 
subsequent transfer. See Stiles, 2020 WL 6037539 *2. 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 42 
 
of claims can challenge them, if their arguments for doing so present fairly debatable 
issues.” Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993) (citing Dirks v. Farm 
Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 465 N.W.2d 857, 861 (Iowa 1991) and Dolan v. Aid Ins. Co., 431 
N.W.2d 790, 794 (Iowa 1988)). “The purpose or goal of the statute is both punishment 
and deterrence.” Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 237 (Iowa 
1996). 
The statute codifies a burden-shifting framework for determining whether penalty 
benefits must be awarded in a workers’ compensation case. See 2009 Iowa Acts ch. 
179, § 110 (codified at Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b)); see also Pettengill v. Am. Blue Ribbon 
Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 740, 746–47 (Iowa App. 2015) as amended (Feb. 16, 2016) 
(discussing the burden-shifting required by the two-factor statutory test). The employee 
bears the burden to establish a prima facie case for penalty benefits. See Iowa Code 
§ 86.13(4)(b). To do so, the employee must demonstrate a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of workers’ compensation benefits. Id. at § 86.13(4)(b)(1). If the employee 
fails to prove a denial, delay, or termination, there can be no award of penalty benefits 
and the analysis stops. See id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
However, if the employee makes the requisite showing, the burden of proof shifts to the 
employer. See id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
As found above in the current case, Isaacs has met his burden of proof on the 
question of delayed payment of benefits. The weight of the evidence shows the 
defendants made delayed payments of benefits. Isaacs has established a prima facie 
case for penalty under the statute. 
To avoid an award of penalty benefits, the employer must “prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits.” 
Id. § 86.13(4)(b)(2). An excuse must meet all of the following criteria to be “a reasonable 
or probable cause or excuse” under the statute: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
 
(Id. § 86.13(4)(c)).  
This paragraph creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in 
showing it had a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for the 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 43 
 
termination of benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(c)(1)-(3)). First, the 
employer's excuse for the termination must have been preceded by an 
investigation. Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the investigation 
were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously” relied on by the employer in 
terminating the benefits. Third, the employer “contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits to the employee at 
the time of the ... termination.” Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3). 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747 (emphasis in original). “An employer cannot unilaterally 
decide to terminate an employee's benefits without adhering to Iowa Code section 
86.13; to allow otherwise would contradict the language of that section.” Id. 
“A ‘reasonable basis’ for denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly 
debatable.’” Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307 (quoting Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996)). A claim may be fairly 
debatable because of a good faith legal or factual dispute. See Covia, 507 N.W.2d at 
416 (finding a jurisdictional issue fairly debatable because there were “viable arguments 
in favor of either party”).  “[T]he reasonableness of the employer’s denial or termination 
of benefits does not turn on whether the employer was right. The issue is whether there 
was a reasonable basis for the employer’s position that no benefits were owing.” 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307–08.  
Here, the defendants have presented no evidence regarding the reason for the 
delayed payments. They have also not presented evidence sufficient to establish that 
the reason for the delay was preceded by a reasonable investigation or that the 
defendants contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the delay to Isaacs. The 
defendants have therefore failed to meet their burden. The weight of the evidence 
shows Isaacs is entitled to a penalty. 
The following factors are used in determining the amount of penalty benefits: 
 The length of the delay; 
 The number of the delays; 
 The information available to the employer regarding the employee's 
injuries and wages; and  
 The prior penalties imposed against the employer under section 86.13. 
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
The evidence shows many delayed payments by the defendants. The majority of 
the delayed payments were at most a few days in length. However, there were multiple 
delays measured in weeks or months. 
There is no indication in the record that the defendants lacked any information 
regarding Isaacs’s wages. They had accepted his work injury as compensable. Thus, 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 44 
 
there is no indication that they lacked the information they needed to pay TTD benefits 
and they do not argue otherwise.  
Benefits for permanent impairment are another question because the defendants 
need an evaluation of permanent impairment from a physician before they can pay 
them. Here, the evidence shows the defendants paid permanency benefits on: 
 September 19, 2019, for the time period from February 11, 2019, through 
February 11, 2019, which was more likely than not based on Dr. Mysnyk’s 
January 23, 2019 opinion; and 
 June 21, 2021, for the time period from March 31, 2021, through June 15, 
2021, based on the March 30, 2021 impairment rating by Dr. Buckwalter. 
In both instances, the defendants had the information they needed to pay 
benefits for permanent impairment for months before they did so. In 2019, the delay 
was almost eight months, and the delay was almost three months in 2021. Isaacs had a 
weekly benefit rate of $966.41 for both time periods of the delayed payments, which 
means that the defendants made payments of thousands of dollars in benefits after 
prolonged delays.  
There is no indication in the record that the agency has imposed prior penalties 
against the District for delayed payment of benefits. 
The weight of the evidence shows that the defendants made delayed payment of 
benefits without a reasonable excuse, let alone one contemporaneously communicated 
to Isaacs. Under the statute, Isaacs is entitled to a penalty for delayed payments of 
benefits. Based on consideration of the required factors, a penalty of $5,000.00 is 
appropriate. 
E . 
I M E .  
The parties do not dispute the reasonableness of Dr. Segal’s fee compared to 
other physicians in his area. Rather, the defendants contend that because they paid for 
the 2019 IME by Dr. Kreiter, they are not responsible for any of the costs relating to Dr. 
Segal’s IME or report.  
As found above, the evidentiary record is insufficient from which to conclude the 
defendants reimbursed the attorney representing Isaacs at the time of the IME by Dr. 
Kreiter for the costs relating to that IME. But even if they did, the statutory text does not 
limit a claimant to the cost of one IME per work injury. As explained in more detail 
below, the defendants’ argument is unavailing. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 governs examinations of injured employees to 
determine the extent of permanent impairment or disability caused by a work injury. Mid 
American Const. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 847–48 (Iowa 2024). Under subsection 
1, the employee must attend an examination by a physician of the employer’s choice or 
be disqualified from benefits for the period of refusal. An opinion on causation or the 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 45 
 
extent of permanent impairment or disability by a doctor retained by the employer 
triggers the injured employee’s right to an IME under subsection 2. 
 
“In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the employer 
and the employee.” Id. 2 N.W.3d at 848. “The statutory process balances the competing 
interests of the employer and employee and permits the employee to obtain an 
independent medical examination at the employer's expense.” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015).  
 
Subsection 2 entitles the employee to receive an examination if the employee 
believes the evaluation made by the employer's physician was too low. Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2); Young, 867 N.W.2d at 844. The employee's own examination 
“is known as an IME because the examination is independent of the examination 
done by the physician selected by the employer.” Young, 867 N.W.2d at 843–44. 
 
Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 848. 
There is no language in the statutory text limiting an employee to one IME for a 
given work injury. If the legislature had intended to so limit an injured employee’s ability 
to obtain an IME in response to an opinion on permanency from an employer-chosen 
doctor, it could have included such language in the statute. That the legislature chose 
not to expressly provide such limiting language in the text reflects an intent to have no 
such limitation apply in workers’ compensation cases. 
As well, reading the statute as advocated by the defendants would run contrary 
to the purpose of the statutory right to an IME for an injured employee. In this case, the 
defendants obtained an opinion on permanent impairment from a treating physician they 
chose. Isaacs disagreed and obtained an IME by Dr. Kreiter. At the time of each 
opinion, the parties thought Isaacs had reached MMI. Unfortunately, Isaacs’s condition 
required additional care. The defendants directed and authorized the additional care. 
Ultimately, they wound up obtaining an opinion on permanent impairment by Dr. 
Buckwalter, one of their chosen treating physicians after both parties obtained their 
initial opinions on permanency. At that point in time, only the defendants had an 
impairment rating that post-dated Isaacs’s most recent MMI date.  
The defendants’ proposed interpretation would effectively leave employees who 
suffer a worsening of their condition that requires additional care without the ability to 
receive an IME after they reach MMI following such care. There is no basis in the 
statutory text for limiting an employee to one IME when the employee’s condition 
worsens such that it requires additional care that is extensive enough to take the 
employee off work and result in a new opinion on permanent impairment by the 
defendants’ chosen doctor. That new opinion on permanency by an employer-chosen 
physician triggers the injured employee’s right to an IME under section 85.39(2), 
regardless of whether an earlier opinion by the employer’s chosen doctor resulted in the 
employee obtaining an IME in response. 
The implications of the defendants’ requested interpretation extend beyond the 
facts presented in the current case. Also implicated are cases in which the work injury 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 46 
 
causes a sequela to another body part. For example, it is possible for an injured 
employee to reach MMI for a leg injury resulting an altered gait that a treating physician 
and IME doctor evaluate for permanent impairment only for a sequela to the hip due to 
the altered gait to later manifest itself and necessitate care. Under the defendants’ 
proposed “one IME only” interpretation, if the employer ultimately obtains an 
examination and opinion on permanency with respect to the injured hip by a doctor of 
their choice and with which the employee disagrees, the employee would have no right 
to obtain an IME on the question of impairment and disability to the hip because the 
employee already obtained one focused solely on the leg. Such a result would be 
nonsensical and examples why agencies and courts refrain from reading something into 
a statute’s text that is not there. 
Moreover, even assuming arguendo, that the defendants’ argument is legally 
valid, the evidence is insufficient from which to conclude they reimbursed Isaacs for Dr. 
Kreiter’s IME. As discussed in greater detail above, the documentary evidence shows 
that the attorney who represented Isaacs before his current counsel took over the case 
paid for the IME and requested reimbursement for it. But there is no documentary 
evidence that the defendants paid the costs as requested. Evidence of payment from an 
account belonging to the defendants would be accessible to them and the lack of any 
such evidence in the record causes a negative inference. 
With the question of whether Isaacs is entitled to reimbursement for the 
reasonable costs of a second IME under the circumstances of this case answered, the 
analysis shifts to what costs relating to Dr. Segal’s IME are reimbursable. Under section 
85.34(2), an injured employee is entitled to payment of the reasonable costs related to 
an IME for a “compensable” injury. It is the agency’s responsibility “to parse out the cost 
and fee of non-reimbursable items under Iowa Code section 85.39(2).” Fuller v. Bimbo 
Bakery USA, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 20012896.01, 2023 WL 6140681, *3–
*4 (App., Sept. 12, 2023). In cases such as this, where the IME covered injuries that are 
determined not to be “compensable” under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, the 
injured employee is not entitled to payment of those IME costs relating solely to the 
components of the records review, examination, and report that stem from non-
compensable injuries. See id. 
Under section 85.34(2), Isaacs is entitled to reimbursement for the reasonable 
costs of an IME relating to compensable injuries or conditions. As found above, the 
evidence is insufficient to establish that the shoulder condition and carpal tunnel 
syndrome are compensable under the law. Isaacs is consequently not entitled to 
reimbursement for all of the costs of Dr. Segal’s IME. After removing those costs, the 
evidence shows were related to the non-compensable injuries or conditions, Isaacs is 
entitled to reimbursement for $4,046.67 of the $5,066.67 Dr. Segal charged for his IME. 
F .  
C o s t s .  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 47 
 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 660 (Iowa 
2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are strictly 
construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
The following costs are taxed against the defendants under Iowa Code section 
and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.33: 
 $15.64 for the costs of service of the original notice under rule 876—4.33(3); 
and 
 $103.00 for the petition filing fee under rule 876—4.33(7). 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to Isaacs 140 weeks of benefits for permanent 
impairment at the rate of eight hundred one and 14/100 dollars ($801.14) per 
week from the stipulated commencement date of March 30, 2021. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants are to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the 
stipulated amount of forty-seven thousand nine hundred eighty-one and 
91/100 ($47,981.91). 
5) The defendants shall pay to Isaacs a penalty of five thousand dollars 
($5,000.00). 
6) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
7) The defendants shall pay to Isaacs four thousand forty-six and 67/100 dollars 
($4,046.67) for the cost of Dr. Segal’s IME. 
8) The defendants shall pay to Isaacs the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a. One hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee; and 
b. Fifteen and 64/100 dollars ($15.64) for the cost of service of process. 
9) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  

ISAACS V. IOWA CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 48 
 
Signed and filed this     2nd    day of July, 2024. 
 
 
 
                BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
                     DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
 
Thomas M. Wertz (WCES) 
 
Lindsey E. Mills (WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
