Case Number: 22010832.01
Case Title:  HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR, MARIA V. GENERAL MILLS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hernandez de Escobar Maria-22010832.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARIA HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 22010832.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
GENERAL MILLS, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1808, 2209,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
2907, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Maria Hernandez de Escobar, filed a petition in arbitration for workers’ 
compensation benefits against General Mills, Inc., as employer, and Old Republic 
Insurance Company, as insurance carrier.  The undersigned heard this case on April 3, 
2024, via Zoom.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are bound by their stipulations.   
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 10, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through H.  Claimant testified on her own 
behalf.  Jake Fish testified on defendants’ behalf.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on or 
before May 17, 2024, at which time the case was deemed fully submitted.   
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. The nature and extent of permanent partial disability benefits; 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for her independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-04  07:38:26     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to past medical expenses for her injury; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits for a delay in benefits; and  
5. Costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Maria Hernandez de Escobar sustained a cumulative injury as a result of the 
work activities she performed for Blue Buffalo, a brand of General Mills, Inc.  The parties 
stipulate that the cumulative injury manifested on August 30, 2022, but dispute the 
nature and extent of said injury. 
Maria began working for Tyson, which ultimately became Blue Buffalo, on 
October 3, 2001. (Defendants’ Exhibit H, Depo. p. 5)  For the ten years leading up to the 
date of injury, Maria worked in the packaging department.  In the packaging department, 
Maria rotated between a number of jobs.  At various times throughout her workday, 
Maria filled bags of dog treats, operated a “sealer,” and boxed the finished product. 
(Hearing Transcript, pages 12-13)  Maria asserts her work required repetitive pinching, 
squeezing, and gripping. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 12-20) 
Before commencing her employment with Tyson/General Mills, Maria had not 
sustained any injuries to her arms or hands.  She did not have any pre-existing issues 
with her left elbow or her bilateral hands. (Hr. Tr., p. 12) 
Maria presented to Kristen Grapp, ARNP, on September 10, 2022, complaining 
of left forearm and left hand pain. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1)  Claimant reported that the 
pain had been present for approximately one week. (Id.)   Ms. Grapp assessed lateral 
epicondylitis of the left elbow and prescribed NSAIDs and an elbow strap. (JE1, p. 2) 
Ten days later, Maria presented to Alyssa Verheyen, ARNP, of UnityPoint 
Occupational Medicine. (JE2, p. 7)  Maria reported that her job required frequent 
gripping and twisting with her arms and hands. (Id.)  Ms. Verheyen opined that 
claimant’s complaints were causally related to her work activities and placed her on 
restricted duty. (JE2, p. 9)   
Ms. Verheyen elected to treat Maria’s condition conservatively with work 
restrictions, anti-inflammatories, and physical therapy.  Maria ultimately participated in 
physical therapy from October 13, 2022, through December 12, 2022. (JE3, pp. 60-119) 
By December 27, 2022, Maria was showing signs of improvement.  She reported 
0/10 pain on examination and described her pain as “more of a soreness.” (JE2, p. 47)  
She further relayed that her pain occurred “very infrequently” and denied numbness and 
tingling. (Id.)  Following her examination, Ms. Verheyen placed Maria at maximum 
medical improvement and released her to full duty work without restrictions. (JE2, p.48) 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Maria returned to UnityPoint Occupational Medicine and saw Sarvenaz Jabbari, 
M.D., on January 13, 2023, after noticing that she was dropping items with her left hand. 
(JE2, p. 50)  She reported intermittent numbness and tingling with grabbing. (Id.)  Given 
these complaints, Dr. Jabbari ordered EMG/NCV testing of the left hand and provided 
Maria with a wrist splint. (JE2, p. 51) 
The February 13, 2023, EMG/NCV of Maria’s hands revealed right median 
neuropathy at/or distal to the wrist consistent with moderate carpal tunnel syndrome. 
(JE4, p. 121; See JE2, p. 54)  Dr. Jabbari reviewed the results of the EMG/NCV testing 
with Maria on February 16, 2023. (JE2, p. 54)  The medical record seemingly contains a 
number of errors.  For instance, Dr. Jabbari notes that Maria underwent EMG/NCV 
testing of the right hand, which revealed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (Id.) In reality, 
Dr. Jabbari ordered EMG/NCV testing of the left hand and the neurology department 
ultimately tested both hands.  Moreover, the EMG/NCV testing revealed right, not 
bilateral, carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE4, p. 121)  Notably, Maria relayed that she was not 
dropping items with her right hand.  Despite the results of the EMG/NCV testing, Dr. 
Jabbari diagnosed left hand carpal tunnel and referred Maria for an orthopedic 
evaluation of the same. (JE2, p. 55) 
Following the February 16, 2023, evaluation, Maria asked to continue working full 
duty at work as she felt safe and comfortable performing her job duties.  Dr. Jabbari felt 
Maria’s request was reasonable and agreed to return her to work without restrictions. 
(Id.)  Unfortunately, the return to full duty work increased her left hand numbness and 
pain. (JE2, p. 57)  She also reported the development of right hand numbness and pain 
on February 23, 2023. (Id.)  Maria testified that she favored her right arm upon her 
return to work due to the symptoms she was experiencing on the left. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  Dr. 
Jabbari diagnosed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and referred Maria for an orthopedic 
evaluation.  The referral provides, “right and left hand to Ortho or Neurosurgery for 
carpal tunnel release.” (Ex. 10, p. 30)  Lastly, Dr. Jabbari commented that the cause of 
Maria’s problems is related to her work activities. (JE2, p. 59) 
Mark Gorsche, M.D. conducted an orthopedic evaluation of Maria on April 3, 
2023. (JE5, p. 127)  She reported left elbow pain and bilateral hand numbness. (Id.)  Dr. 
Gorsche causally related Maria’s conditions to her work activities and recommended 
injections for her wrists and left elbow. (JE5, p. 129)  Specifically, Dr. Gorsche opined, 
“Given her occupation and job demands of repetitive work her symptoms in her hands 
are more likely than not related to her employment.” (Id.) 
Dr. Gorsche administered a cortisone injection to the left elbow on April 3, 2023. 
(Id.)  He subsequently administered diagnostic and therapeutic injections of her carpal 
tunnels on April 19, 2023. (JE5, p. 132) 
On May 15, 2023, Maria returned to Dr. Gorsche and reported right elbow pain 
that felt similar to her left elbow pain. (JE5, p. 138)  Dr. Gorsche opined Maria was likely 
experiencing some lateral epicondylitis and recommended physical therapy to treat the 
same.  Dr. Gorsche also recommended Maria undergo a right carpal tunnel release. 
(JE5, p. 139) 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
When the defendant insurer did not immediately approve the right carpal tunnel 
release, Maria returned to Dr. Gorsche to discuss the possibility of moving forward with 
a left carpal tunnel release. (JE5, p. 141)  Ultimately, Dr. Gorsche performed the left 
carpal tunnel release on June 26, 2023. (JE5, p. 144) 
Defendants denied compensability of the alleged right wrist sequelae injury prior 
to her July 10, 2023, follow-up appointment with Dr. Gorsche. (See JE5, p. 146)  Shortly 
thereafter, Maria elected to proceed with the right carpal tunnel release under her own 
insurance plan. (JE5, p. 146)  Dr. Gorsche performed the right carpal tunnel release on 
July 26, 2023. (JE5, pp. 149-150) 
Maria was released to return to work with restrictions of no lifting more than 
twenty-one pounds and no pushing or pulling more than twenty-five pounds for one 
month starting on August 9, 2023.  Dr. Gorsche relayed that Maria could return to full 
duty work, without restrictions, after one month. (JE5, p. 154) 
Dr. Gorsche placed Maria at maximum medical improvement for her left carpal 
tunnel syndrome on September 8, 2023.  Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Gorsche assigned one percent (1%) left upper 
extremity impairment due to weakness with abductor pollicis brevis. (JE5, p. 157)  It 
does not appear as though Dr. Gorsche was asked to address causation or impairment 
relating to the right upper extremity. (See id.) 
Dr. Jabbari issued an opinion letter specifically addressing Maria’s right wrist 
complaints on March 1, 2023. (Ex. A, p. 1)  In response to a question regarding the 
timing of Maria’s right wrist complaints, Dr. Jabbari provided, “Ms. Hernandez de 
Escobar has had right forearm numbness and tingling that has not resolved with 
treatments of her elbow symptoms.  Therefore, she has exhibited symptoms of carpal 
tunnel syndrome since initially being treated.” (Id.)  The letter goes on to find Maria’s 
work activities were a substantial and material cause of her complaints. (Id.) 
Dr. Jabbari provided updated answers to the same questions in a June 8, 2023, 
letter. (Ex. A, pp. 2-3)  Dr. Jabbari provided that her initial answers were incorrect. (Id.)  
She further provided that Maria did not report right hand symptoms until February 23, 
2023, after learning the EMG/NCV testing revealed right carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. 
A, p. 2)  She further opined that she could not attribute her right carpal tunnel syndrome 
to any work activity she performed at General Mills on or about August 30, 2022. (Id.) 
It is difficult to assign significant weight to Dr. Jabbari’s opinions due to the 
conflicting reports and the lack of explanation for the discrepancies between them.  This 
inconsistency raises concerns about the reliability and accuracy of Dr. Jabbari’s 
assessment.  Additionally, Dr. Jabbari does not address whether claimant’s work 
activities could have resulted in right upper extremity symptoms, or whether the right 
upper extremity symptoms could be sequela of the left upper extremity injury.  For these 
reasons, I do not find Dr. Jabbari’s opinion credible or convincing.   

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
In response to Dr. Gorsche’s impairment rating, Maria sought an independent 
medical evaluation with Farid Manshadi, M.D.  Dr. Manshadi reviewed Maria’s medical 
records and performed a physical examination of her on January 11, 2024. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 6, page 11)  Dr. Manshadi diagnosed Maria with bilateral carpal tunnel and left 
lateral epicondylitis.  Without much in the way of analysis, Dr. Manshadi causally related 
the conditions to Maria’s work activities at Blue Buffalo. (Ex. 6, p. 13)  
Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, Dr. Manshadi assigned 6 percent left upper extremity impairment for the left 
lateral epicondylitis, 10 percent left upper extremity impairment for the left carpal tunnel 
syndrome, and 5 percent left upper extremity impairment for motor deficits of the 
median nerve, for a total of 20 percent left upper extremity impairment.  Dr. Manshadi 
assigned 4 percent right upper extremity impairment for motor deficits of the median 
nerve.  According to the Combined Values Chart on page 604 of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, claimant's 20 percent left upper 
extremity impairment combines with the 4 percent left upper extremity impairment for a 
combined impairment rating of 23 percent upper extremity impairment.  Dr. Manshadi 
converted the impairment ratings for a total impairment rating of 14 percent whole 
person impairment. (Ex. 6, pp. 13-14)   
In terms of permanent restrictions, Dr. Manshadi recommended Maria avoid 
repetitious gripping or using vibratory tools with either hand, avoid activities that require 
repetitive pushing or pulling with her left hand, and avoid lifting more than 10 pounds 
with either hand. (Ex. 6, p. 14) 
Defendants subsequently met with Dr. Gorsche to discuss and review Dr. 
Manshadi’s IME report. (Ex. B, p. 11)  After the meeting, defendants drafted a letter 
summarizing the expert opinions Dr. Gorsche provided during their discussion.  The 
letter included a sign-off section for Dr. Gorsche to certify the accuracy of the summary 
without additional elaboration.  Dr. Gorsche signed the letter on March 4, 2024. (Ex. B, 
p. 13)  According to the summary, Dr. Gorsche maintained his opinion that Maria’s 
permanent impairment causally related to the work injury was 1 percent of the left upper 
extremity.  He confirmed that at the time of Maria’s final examination on August 9, 2023, 
she did not have any numbness or tingling in her left hand, wrist, or arm. (Ex. B, p. 12)  
According to the summary, Dr. Gorsche opined that the “rather dramatic change” in 
Maria’s symptoms between his final examination and Dr. Manshadi’s examination could 
not be causally related to the August 2022 work injury.  Dr. Gorsche explained that this 
was in part because Maria had not worked for General Mills in nearly three months at 
the time of Dr. Manshadi’s examination.  Lastly, Dr. Gorsche concurred with Dr. 
Jabbari’s assessment that Maria’s right carpal tunnel syndrome was not causally related 
to her work activities. (Id.) 
While I do not outright reject Dr. Gorsche’s opinions based solely on the format, I 
note that reports drafted by attorneys and subsequently signed by physicians are 
generally regarded as less persuasive than opinion letters authored directly by the 
physician.  One reason for this is that such letters often lack the thorough explanation 
and detailed rationale that a physician might otherwise provide if given the opportunity.  

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Gorche’s concurrence with Dr. Jabbari’s causation assessment underscores this 
limitation.  Having previously opined that Maria’s conditions were causally related to her 
work activities, some explanation regarding his change of opinion is necessary to 
bolster the credibility of his position.  Dr. Gorsche failed to provide such an explanation.  
For this reason, I afford no weight to his causation opinion. 
Dr. Manshadi is the only physician to physically examine Maria’s wrists following 
her return to full duty work.  While his causation opinion lacks depth, this concern is 
mitigated by his comprehensive evaluation and understanding of Maria’s claim.  His 
causation opinion is consistent with the initial opinions of Dr. Jabbari and Dr. Gorsche.  I 
do not find the left wrist condition described in Dr. Manshadi’s report to be a dramatic 
change as asserted by defendants and Dr. Gorsche.  At her final appointment with Dr. 
Gorsche, she reported occasional left wrist pain. (JE5, p. 154)  Following her final 
appointment with Dr. Gorsche, Maria returned to full duty work for one month before the 
plant closed.  When she presented to Dr. Manshadi, she again reported intermittent left 
wrist pain. (Ex. 6, p. 12)  She also reported that her grip strength had been reduced and 
she experienced numbness and tingling in the left 2nd and 3rd digits.  While this is 
certainly an increase in symptoms, it is difficult to consider this increase a “dramatic 
change.” 
I find Dr. Manshadi conducted a comprehensive evaluation at his January 17, 
2023 independent medical examination.  I find his causation opinion to be convincing 
and consistent with the other credible evidence in the record.  I similarly find his 
impairment assessment to be superior to the impairment assessment of Dr. Gorsche.  
As such, I accept Dr. Manshadi’s impairment assessment as accurate and find Maria 
sustained 14 percent functional loss of the body as a whole as a result of the August 30, 
2022, cumulative injury.   
I decline the opportunity to adopt the permanent restrictions recommended by Dr. 
Manshadi as Maria was able to return to full duty work and she did not present for a 
functional capacity evaluation or any other functional testing to demonstrate her 
capabilities. 
As a result of the injuries sustained while working for the defendant employer, 
Maria has incurred medical expenses.  The medical expenses contained in Exhibit 8 are 
related to treatment Maria received for her right carpal tunnel syndrome.  I find the 
medical expenses contained in Exhibit 8 are causally related to the August 30, 2022, 
cumulative injury.  I find the medical care and expenses were reasonable and 
necessary.   
Maria is asserting a claim for penalty benefits.  Specifically, Maria is claiming 
penalty benefits are owed for the period of delay in temporary total disability benefits 
between February 24, 2023, and April 20, 2023.  Maria asserts the defendant employer 
did not offer her light duty work, in writing, following Dr. Jabbari’s February 23, 2023, 
restrictions.  Claimant’s attorney inquired about defendants’ failure to pay temporary 
total disability benefits on March 22, 2023, April 4, 2023, and April 13, 2023.  Following 
these communications, defendants issued a lump sum payment on April 21, 2023. (Ex. 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
5, p. 10)  Maria asserts the defendants did not provide a reasonable excuse for their 
delay. 
Defendants assert benefits were delayed both because the defendant insurer 
needed to increase the reserves funding for the temporary total disability benefits and 
because Maria did not have direct deposit.  I do not find defendants’ argument 
convincing. 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143.  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
An employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury if the employee 
sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability that is a proximate 
result of the original injury. Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 5029834 (Appeal 
February 15, 2012). 
The parties stipulated that the claimant sustained a cumulative injury with a 
manifestation date of August 30, 2022; however, they dispute the nature and extent of 
such injury.  Defendants contend a greater weight of the evidence establishes that the 
claimant’s injury is limited to the left upper extremity, whereas the claimant contends her 
injury is to the bilateral upper extremities. 
Following review of the entirety of the evidentiary record and after giving 
significant consideration to the evidence in this case, I determined claimant provided 
sufficient evidence to prove she sustained injuries to both the left and right upper 
extremities.  In reaching this conclusion, I accepted the causation opinion of Dr. 
Manshadi as credible and convincing.  Having found the claimant carried her burden of 
proving she sustained a right wrist injury, I conclude the claimant’s injury is to the 
bilateral upper extremities and compensable under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s). 
I acknowledge that Dr. Manshadi did not expressly opine that the right wrist 
symptoms were a sequela of the August 30, 2022, cumulative injury or overuse 
following the same.  Nevertheless, Dr. Manshadi was aware of claimant’s complaints, 
he understood the timeline of when the complaints began, and he opined the right 
carpal tunnel syndrome was a result of Maria’s work activities while working for the 
defendant employer.  I find the claimant provided sufficient evidence to prove the right 
wrist symptoms were caused by or a sequela of the August 2022 cumulative injury. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v). The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
In this case, Maria sustained a permanent injury to the bilateral upper 
extremities.  Benefits for permanent partial disability of two members caused by a single 
accident is a scheduled benefit under section 85.34(2)(s); the degree of disability must 
be computed on a functional basis with a maximum benefit entitlement of 500 weeks. 
Simbro v. DeLong's Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 1983).  
The Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner has adopted the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, as a guide for determining 
permanent partial disabilities for injuries compensated under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2) “a” to “s”. 876 IAC 2.4.  With respect to the extent of claimant's entitlement to 
permanent disability benefits, I accepted Dr. Manshadi's impairment ratings.  Having 
accepted the impairment ratings of Dr. Manshadi, I found claimant proved a functional 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
loss equivalent to 14 percent of the whole person as a result of the injuries to her 
bilateral upper extremities.  I conclude that claimant is entitled to 70 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits, which represents 14 percent of 500 weeks of 
benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(s). 
Maria seeks an award for past medical expenses.  Defendants shall furnish 
reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical 
rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all conditions 
compensable under the workers' compensation law. The employer shall also allow 
reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services. The 
employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer has 
denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., 
Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening 
October 1975).   
Having concluded that claimant has proven a compensable work injury to her 
bilateral upper extremities, I further conclude that defendants are responsible for 
providing claimant's medical care, including payment of past medical and mileage 
expenses. Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Claimant is seeking reimbursement of the fees associated with Dr. Manshadi’s 
independent medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 
permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
permanent disability, and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low. 
Dr. Gorsche, an authorized treating physician, assessed claimant's permanent 
impairment on December 5, 2023. (JE5, p. 157)  Dr. Manshadi conducted his 
impairment assessment of claimant on January 11, 2024. (Ex. 6, p. 11)  It is clear a 
physician assessed claimant’s permanent impairment prior to her seeking out an 
alternative impairment rating from Dr. Manshadi. I find claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of Dr. Manshadi's IME under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Claimant next asserts the defendants unreasonably delayed and/or denied her 
temporary total disability benefits between February 24, 2023, and April 20, 2023. 
Under Iowa's worker's compensation scheme, penalty benefits may be imposed 
against an employer pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) under certain 
circumstances.  Under the statute's plain language, if there is a delay in payment absent 
“a reasonable or probable cause or excuse,” the employee is entitled to penalty 
benefits, of up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, delayed, or 
terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. Iowa Code § 10A.315(4); 
see also Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996) (citing 
earlier version of the statute). “The application of the penalty provision does not turn on 
the length of the delay in making the correct compensation payment.” Robbennolt v. 
Snap- On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236 (Iowa 1996). If a delay occurs without a 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
reasonable excuse, the commissioner is required to award penalty benefits in some 
amount to the employee. (Id.)  
The statute requires the employer or insurance company to conduct a 
“reasonable investigation and evaluation” into whether benefits are owed to the 
employee, the results of the investigation and evaluation must be the “actual basis” 
relied on by the employer or insurance company to deny, delay, or terminate benefits, 
and the employer or insurance company must contemporaneously convey the basis for 
the denial, delay, or termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits. Iowa Code § 10A.315(4).  
An employer may establish a “reasonable cause or excuse” if “the delay was 
necessary for the insurer to investigate the claim,” or if “the employer had a reasonable 
basis to contest the employee's entitlement to benefits.” Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
260. “A ‘reasonable basis' for denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.’”  
Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 267 (Iowa 2012). “Whether a claim is ‘fairly 
debatable’ can generally be determined by the court as a matter of law.” (Id.) The issue 
is whether the employer had a reasonable basis to believe no benefits were owed to the 
claimant. (Id.) “If there was no reasonable basis for the employer to have denied the 
employee's benefits, then the court must ‘determine if the defendant knew, or should 
have known, that the basis for denying the employee's claim was unreasonable.’” (Id.) 
Dr. Jabbari issued work restrictions on February 23, 2023.  The defendant 
employer did not offer her light duty work, in writing, following Dr. Jabbari’s February 23, 
2023, restrictions.  On or about February 23, 2023, Maria was told she could not return 
to work until she was released to full duty.  Claimant’s attorney demanded that 
defendants pay temporary total disability benefits via letter on March 22, 2023, April 4, 
2023, and April 13, 2023.  Maria did not receive any TTD benefits until April 21, 2023.  
Maria has established a delay in the payment of benefits occurred. 
Defendants assert benefits were delayed because the defendant insurer needed 
to increase the reserves funding for the temporary total disability benefits and because 
Maria did not have direct deposit.   
Iowa Code section 10A.315 mandates a penalty unless the delay in payment was 
necessary for the insurer to investigate the claim or the employer's liability was fairly 
debatable.  Neither of the two situations is applicable to the present case.  I find 
defendants acted unreasonably in failing to promptly pay claimant’s benefits.  As such, 
penalty benefits are warranted in some amount.   
The purpose of Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) is both punishment for 
unreasonable conduct but also deterrence for future cases. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 
237. In this regard, this agency is given discretion to determine the amount of the 
penalty imposed with a maximum penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or 
denied, benefits. Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 
1996). In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
the employee's injury and wages, and the employer's past record of penalties. Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996). 
Once the delay was brought to defendants’ attention, defendants investigated the 
claim and issued benefits.  While this does not excuse their delay, it mitigates the 
amount of penalty benefits owed. 
Based upon the factors identified in Robbennolt for determining the amount of 
penalty, the undersigned concludes that a penalty of one thousand five hundred and 
00/100 dollars ($1,500.00) is appropriate. This takes into consideration the length of the 
delay and lack of a timely investigation. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 10A.328.  
Claimant requests taxation of the cost of the filing fee ($125.00). The cost of the filing 
fee is appropriate and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay to claimant seventy (70) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on September 8, 2023. All weekly benefits shall be 
payable at the weekly rate of six-hundred eighty-two and 34/100 dollars ($682.34) per 
week. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity 
published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of 
injury, plus two percent, as required by Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall receive credit for all weekly benefits paid to date. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for all out-of-pocket medical expenses, 
reimburse any third-party payor for past medical expenses paid on behalf of claimant, 
and satisfy any outstanding past medical expenses by either paying those funds directly 
to claimant or to the medical providers, but in all events shall hold claimant harmless for 
the past medical expenses and mileage as directed in the above decision. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant's independent medical evaluation fee from 
Dr. Manshadi in the amount of three thousand and 00/100 dollars ($3,000.00). 
Defendants shall pay claimant one thousand five hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($1,500.00) in penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.315. 
Defendants shall pay costs as outlined in this decision. 

HERNANDEZ DE ESCOBAR V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _4th ___ day of November, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
John Pieters (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
