Case Number: 1662079.01
Case Title:  STRABALA, MARVIN V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY SERVICE
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Strabala Marvin- 1662079.01M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
MARVIN STRABALA, 
File No. 1662079.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
SPEE DEE DELIVERY SERVICE, 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
AMERICAN CASUALTY COMPANY OF 
READING, PENNSYLVANIA, 
Headnotes:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
On August 28, 2023, Marvin Strabala filed an application for alternate care under 
Iowa Code section 85.27 and agency rule 876 IAC 4.48. The defendants, employer 
Spee Dee Delivery Service and insurance carrier American Casualty Company of 
Reading, Pennsylvania, did not file an answer. Instead, they responded to the petition 
on the record during the hearing under Rule 876 IAC 4.48(12). 
The undersigned presided over an alternate care hearing held by telephone and 
recorded on September 8, 2023, at 10:30 a.m. That recording constitutes the official 
record of the proceeding under agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(12). Strabala participated 
personally and through attorney Andrew Giller. The defendants participated through 
attorney L. Tyler Laflin. The record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 2; and 
 Hearing testimony from Strabala. 
ISSU E  
The issue under consideration is whether Strabala is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of care with an orthopedic surgeon at the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics (UIHC). 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Sep-11  09:13:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STRABALA V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY SERVICE 
Page 2 
 
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
Strabala filed a petition for alternate medical care regarding alleged injuries to the 
right upper extremity and body as a whole arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Spee Dee on November 26, 2022. The defendants authorized care 
with Shirley Pospisil, M.D., at St. Luke’s Work Well Solutions. (Ex. 1) After magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of Strabala’s right shoulder, on or about June 26, 2023, Dr. 
Pospisil requested approval for him “to go to an orthopedist for evaluation and 
treatment.” (Ex. 1, p. 1) 
The defendants took no action on Dr. Pospisil’s referral and requested approval. 
Consequently, on August 14, 2023, claimant’s counsel emailed Anna Chmielecki, a 
workers’ compensation claims specialist, regarding the arrangement of care with an 
orthopedic surgeon in accordance with Dr. Pospisil’s referral and requested a response 
“by tomorrow.” (Ex. 2, p. 3) Chmielecki replied on August 16, 2023, “I will approve a 
onetime visit with the Orthopedic [sic].” (Ex. 2, p. 3) Claimant’s counsel asked if there 
was a specific surgeon they were authorizing in a reply email that same day, but there is 
an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Chmielecki replied with the 
requested information. (Ex. 2, p. 1) 
The defendants took no action after communicating their authorization of an 
appointment with an orthopedic specialist. On August 24, 2023, claimant’s counsel 
emailed Chmielecki and requested, “Please let me know if an appointment has been 
made or where [Strabala] needs to call to make an appointment.” (Ex. 2, p. 3) On 
August 28, 2023, Strabala filed the petition concerning application for alternate care 
seeking care with an orthopedic surgeon in accordance with Dr. Pospisil’s referral.  
After Strabala filed the petition, the defendants authorized care with Matthew 
Bollier, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon at UIHC. (Testimony) After learning of the referral, 
on or about September 6, 2023, Strabala telephoned UIHC to attempt to schedule the 
appointment. (Testimony) When he informed the UIHC staff person with whom he 
spoke that the care was related to a workers’ compensation claim, the staff person 
informed him that the insurance carrier would have to arrange the care and provide 
medical information relating to it and that he could not schedule the care on his own. As 
of the time of hearing, the appointment with Dr. Bollier had not been scheduled. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 

STRABALA V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY SERVICE 
Page 3 
 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4) (emphasis added). 
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties can’t 
reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and 
reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436; 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on 
the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable. Id. 
Dr. Pospisil’s referral to an orthopedic surgeon occurred on June 26, 2023, and 
the defendants took no action on it until Strabala retained claimant’s counsel, who 
inquired about whether they would act on the referral on August 14, 2023. The 
defendants communicated to claimant’s counsel on August 16, 2023, that one 
appointment would be approved but no such care was arranged between then and 
August 24, 2023, when claimant’s counsel followed up. After the defendants failed to 
respond to this follow-up inquiry, Strabala filed the petition, two months to the day of Dr. 
Pospisil’s referral.  
After Strabala filed the petition, the defendants authorized care with Dr. Bollier at 
UIHC. However, no appointment had been scheduled as of the time of hearing because 
Strabala cannot schedule an appointment under UIHC procedures;the insurance carrier 
must do this. 
The defendants argue that arranging care with a doctor at a specific provider 
satisfies their responsibilities under section 85.27(4). The defendants contend they 
cannot be held responsible for UIHC’s procedures regarding workers’ compensation 
claimants. They have authorized the care and that is enough under the law. 
Had the defendants acted promptly after receiving Dr. Pospisil’s referral, it is 
more likely than not Strabala would have already received care in accordance with the 
referral despite any additional procedures required by UIHC for workers’ compensation 
claimants. The defendants’ failure to act promptly is a significant factor in causing the 
delay in Strabala’s receipt of treatment for the work injury. Because of the two months of 
inaction by the defendants, there was no appointment scheduled for Strabala to see an 
orthopedic surgeon as of the time of hearing. And there likely will not be one for many 
more weeks. 
This is why the defendants’ position is unavailing. Section 85.27(4) provides “the 
employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured 

STRABALA V. SPEE DEE DELIVERY SERVICE 
Page 4 
 
employee” and that “the treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Authorization of care 
alone—without the arrangement of tangible services and supplies to treat the injury 
promptly and without undue inconvenience to the employee—fails to fully satisfy an 
employer’s responsibility under the statute. There is no treatment without an 
appointment, which makes authorization of care only part of the equation under the 
statute. A significant factor in Strabala not receiving care between the June 26, 2023 
referral by Dr. Pospisil and the September 8, 2023 hearing was the defendants’ inaction 
until after the petition was filed. Consequently, the defendants’ delay in authorizing and 
arranging treatment for the work injury is unreasonable under the statute. 
OR D ER  
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Strabala’s application for alternate medical care is GRANTED. 
 
2) Within 30 days of the date of this decision, the defendants shall arrange for 
an appointment with Dr. Bollier at UIHC or another orthopedic surgeon for 
treatment of Strabala’s right shoulder injury. 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in a district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 11th day of September, 2023. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Andrew Giller (via WCES) 
L. Tyler Laflin (via WCES) 
