Case Number: 21003497.02
Case Title:  HAPPEL, CINDY V. LA LEASING INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Happel Cindy - 21003497.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
CINDY HAPPEL, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 File No. 21003497.02 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A, 
  : 
SEDONA STAFFING, INC.  
  : 
 
 
  : 
          ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  :  
 
 
  :       
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  :      Headnotes:  1402.20, 1402.30,1601 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Cindy Happel, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from LA Leasing, Inc., d/b/a Sedona Staffing, employer, and ACE 
American Insurance Co., insurance carrier, as defendants.  The hearing was held on June 
3, 2024.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via videoconference using Zoom with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely.  
  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration hearing. 
On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision. The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
 
Cindy Happel was the only witness to testify live at the trial. The evidentiary record 
also contains joint exhibits 1-18, claimant’s exhibits 1-5 and amended exhibit 6, and 
defendants’ exhibits A-I.  Defendants filed a post-hearing brief on July 17, 2024.  Claimant 
submitted her post-hearing brief on July 18, 2024, at which time the case was fully 
submitted to the undersigned.   
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-25  15:12:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
 
 
The parties identified the following disputed issues on the hearing report: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of her 
employment with Sedona Staffing on March 5, 2021. 
2. Whether claimant is precluded from receiving benefits by Iowa Code section 
85.16(2).   
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability or healing period benefits 
because of the alleged injury. 
4. Whether the alleged injury resulted in any permanent disability; and if so, 
5. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
6. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded. 
7. Claimant’s average weekly wage and weekly rate. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of the medical expenses in claimant’s 
exhibit 5. 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
10. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the record, 
finds as follows: 
At the time of the hearing the claimant, Cindy Happel (hereinafter “Happel”) was 
53 years old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 16).  Happel attended English Valley High School, 
graduating in 1990. (Exhibit C, p. 56).   She later attended Kaplan University and obtained 
an associate’s degree in business. (Id. at 55).  She has also taken college courses in 
interior design, drafting and Auto Cad. (Id.).  
From 1996 to 2009, Happel worked at Whirlpool, building refrigerators. (Ex. C, p. 
55).  From 2011 to 2014, she worked as a temporary employee at Victor Manufacturing 
through Adventure Staffing, a temp agency. (Id.).  In September of 2014, Happel was 
hired for a permanent position as a press operator at Victor Manufacturing. (Id.).  She 
worked there until December 2018. (Id.).  Following that, Happel worked for Builders First 
Source, a building products supply company. (Tr., p. 62).  It is not clear how long she 
worked for Builders First Source.  Happel also worked for Transco Railroad for several 
months in 2019, and Lifeline Emergency Vehicles for approximately nine months, leaving 
in May 2020. (Ex. C, p. 56).    

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 3 
 
 
Through Sedona Staffing (hereinafter “Sedona”), Happel acquired a temporary 
position at Eastern Iowa Plastics.  (Ex. C, p. 58; Tr., p. 65).  She worked there in 
November and December of 2020. (Tr., p. 65). Sedona placed Happel in a position at 
Bachman Tool on February 17, 2021. (Tr., p. 66; Ex. C, p. 62).  That is where Happel was 
working on the alleged date of injury. (Tr., pp. 19-20; 66).  Bachman Tool makes 
component parts for semis. (Id. at 17).  Happel was hired to work on the production line 
making wheel hubs. (Id. at 18).  However, on March 5, 2021, Bachman did not have 
enough parts to run the production line, so they asked Happel to clean windows. (Tr., p. 
20-21).  Happel testified that she was standing on the second or third highest rung of a 
stepladder, washing windows with a spray bottle and a rag, when she fell, landing on the 
factory floor, and injuring her feet.  (Id. at 22-24).  According to her testimony, the owner 
of the company and another employee then carried her to a pick-up truck, loaded her into 
the backseat, and drove to the emergency room (ER) in Independence, Iowa.  (Id. at 25).   
According to the medical records, Happel presented to the ER at the Buchanan 
County Medical Center on March 5, 2021, at 9:31 a.m. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1).  The 
treatment record indicates she fell off a ladder and now had severe pain in both heels. 
(Id.).  X-rays were taken of her bilateral feet. (Id. at 7-8).  They showed a minimally 
displaced, comminuted fracture of the calcaneus in her left heel and a severely 
comminuted, widely displaced fracture in the calcaneus in her right heel.1 (Id.).  The 
attending physician applied a plaster cast to her right heel, placed her left heel in a boot, 
admitted her for observation, and referred her to orthopedics for surgery. (Id. at 12).   
On March 8, 2021, Scott Ekroth, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon at Physician’s Clinic 
of Iowa (PCI), performed an open reduction internal fixation of the right calcaneus fracture 
and a closed reduction and percutaneous screw fixation of the left calcaneus fracture. (JE 
2, pp. 79-80).  Happel was discharged from the hospital on March 11, 2021. (Id. at 95-
99).  After the surgery, she was partial weight bearing on her left foot and non-weight 
bearing on her right foot. (JE 6, p. 199).  She used a wheelchair and a knee scooter to 
ambulate. (Id.).  
Happel received follow-up care from Dr. Ekroth. (See JE 3, p. 112).  Her first post-
op appointment took place on March 24, 2021. (Id.).  Dr. Ekroth placed her right foot in a 
short non-weightbearing cast and her left foot in a walking boot. (Id.).  He also prescribed 
a home health aide and in-home physical and occupational therapy. (Id.).  Happel’s 
stitches were removed on April 7, 2021. (Id. at 118).  Her right foot was also transitioned 
to a walking boot on that date. (Id.).   
Happel started physical therapy on May 6, 2021. (JE 7, p. 241).  On June 15, 2021, 
Dr. Ekroth released her to return to regular activities without restrictions, including driving. 
(JE 3, pp. 131-133).  Happel, however, continued to attend physical therapy.  (See JE 8, 
pp. 262-333).  She was discharged from physical therapy on November 4, 2021. (Id. at 
331-333).  At that time, she was walking without any assistive devices.  (Id.).   
                                                 
1 She was also diagnosed with a left wrist sprain. (JE 1, p. 14).   

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 4 
 
 
Happel returned to PCI for bilateral foot pain on April 11, 2022. (JE 3, p. 138).  She 
was evaluated by Michelle Dole, DPM. (Id.).  Happel told Dr. Dole that she was still 
experiencing bilateral foot pain that significantly limited her activity. (Id.).  She reported 
that she could not wear regular shoes due to heel pain and was limited to crocs. (Id.).  
She also noted some tingling and burning with walking. (Id.).  Dr. Dole noted a prominent 
screw head in her right calcaneus that was painful to palpation. (Id. at 139).  She 
recommended surgical removal of the screw. (Id.).  On June 16, 2022, Dr. Dole performed 
hardware removal surgery on Happel’s right foot. (See JE 3, p. 147; JE 5, pp. 178-179).   
Happel received follow-up care from Dr. Dole after the surgery. (See JE 3, pp. 147- 
151).  On July 5, 2022, Dr. Dole indicated she could transition to weightbearing on her 
right foot as tolerated. (Id. at 151).  Happel continued to experience right foot pain after 
the hardware removal surgery. (See Id. at 153).  Dr. Dole thought the pain was caused 
by neuritis. On October 28, 2022, Dr. Dole released Happel to return to work without 
restrictions. (Id. at 154).   
On March 31, 2023, Happel returned to Dr. Dole for continued left foot pain.  (JE 
3, p. 155).  Dr. Dole recommended removal of the hardware in her left foot. (Id.).  On April 
13, 2023, Dr. Dole surgically removed the hardware in Happel’s left foot. (JE 5, pp. 180-
181). Happel again received follow-up care from Dr. Dole. (JE 3, pp. 157-160).  On April 
19, 2023, Happel told Dr. Dole the surgery had improved her pain levels. (Id. at 157, 159).  
On May 1, 2023, Dr. Dole told Happel she could transition to wearing a regular shoe on 
her left foot and released her from her care. (Id. at 160).   
 
Happel was given a post-accident urine drug screen while in the ER on March 5, 
2021.  (JE 1, pp. 33-34).  The test results indicate she had opiates and cannabinoids in 
her system at the time of the accident. (Id.).  The test states the cutoff level for a positive 
cannabinoids result was 50 ng/mL, but it does not provide the specific amount found in 
Happel’s urine. (Id.).  At the bottom of those test results, the hospital also put the following 
disclaimer:  
This drugs of abuse test provides only a preliminary analytical test result.  A 
more specific alternate chemical method must be used in order to obtain a 
confirmed analytical result (GS-MS Confirmation).  Clinical consideration 
and professional judgement should be applied to these drug of abuse test 
results.  
Please notify the laboratory if a GC-MS confirmation is required. Urine 
samples will be retained 24 hours for confirmatory testing.  
(Id. at 34).   
 
On March 12, 2021, Sedona sent Happel a termination letter. (Ex. C, p. 63).  The 
termination letter referenced Sedona’s Substance Abuse Policy which provides that 
employees may be terminated for a positive drug test.  (Id.).  According to the letter, 
Happel was notified of the policy and signed it on October 24, 2019. (Id.).  The letter then 
states, “Your drug test results were received in our office March 11, 2021. Per the positive 

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 5 
 
 
test result, you are hereby considered self-terminated.” (Id.).  Sedona’s counsel took 
Happel’s deposition on March 30, 2022. (Ex. I, p. 107).  During the deposition, Happel 
testified that she used marijuana one week prior to her injury date. (Id. at 108-109).  
Happel indicated that she was using the marijuana to treat pain in her shoulders, but did 
not have a doctor’s prescription for it.2 (Id. at 109).  At the hearing, Happel confirmed that 
she had used marijuana prior to March 5, 2021, but was unable to remember the exact 
timeframe. (Tr., p. 70).  She stated, “it could have been a week, it could have been two 
weeks.” (Id.). In 2022, Happel told Sedona’s expert that she obtained a medical marijuana 
card in October 2021, with her attorney’s help, and she uses it at night for pain.  (See Ex. 
A, pp. 11-12,14).   
 
On April 26, 2021, Happel applied for social security disability (SSDI) benefits. (Ex. 
E, p. 72).  On that application, she listed several different disabling conditions, including 
asthma, COPD, nerve damage in her head, chronic pain in both shoulders, and her 
broken heels. (Id. at 74).  Happel’s social security application was denied in August 2021. 
(Id. at 82). Happel appealed. (Id. at 85).  At the hearing, Happel testified that her social 
security application was eventually granted, and she now receives $1,970 per month in 
SSDI benefits, but it is not clear from the record when this took place. (Tr., p. 34-35).  In 
May 2023, Happel briefly worked as a front desk clerk at Comfort Inn, before quitting. (Id. 
at 74).  On May 23, 2023, she was hired by KarTay Apartment Management. (Id. at 75).  
Happel was still working there at the time of the hearing. (Id. at 31-32).  She helps disabled 
and elderly individuals apply for low-income housing. (Id.).  She testified this involves 
mainly computer work and filing papers. (Id. at 32).  Happel makes $10 an hour and works 
35 hours per week. (Id.).  
 
There are several expert opinions in the hearing record.  Happel submitted a report 
from Ronald Henson, Ph.D., dated December 12, 2023. (Cl Ex. 1, pp. 1-4).  She also 
submitted two reports from David Segal, M.D., dated June 21, 2022, and April 29, 2024. 
(Cl Ex. 2, pp. 40-85, 88-121).  Sedona obtained a report from Jonathon Fields, M.D. on 
July 17, 2022. (Ex. A, pp. 10-21).   
 
On May 18, 2022, Happel attended an independent medical examination (IME) 
with Dr. Segal at her attorney’s request. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 40).  Dr. Segal diagnosed Happel 
with the following: 1) right foot crush injury with calcaneal flattening, a severely 
comminuted widely displaced fracture of the right calcaneus status post ORIF, sural 
neuralgia, medial plantar neuralgia, superficial peroneal neuralgia, gait disturbance, and 
CRPS type syndrome; 2) left foot crush injury, a fracture of the left calcaneal body with 
subtalar joint extension status post percutaneous reduction and fixation, sural neuralgia, 
medial plantar neuralgia, superficial peroneal neuralgia, gait disturbance, CRPS type 
                                                 
2 Happel has several prior workers’ compensation claims.  In 2009, she injured her back working 
at Whirlpool. (Tr., p. 59). Happel suffered a left shoulder injury while working for Victor Manufacturing in 
2016. (See JE 13, p. 390).  In 2018, she suffered injuries to her bilateral shoulders working for Builders 
FirstSource. (Tr., p. 62). Happel has had two surgeries on her left shoulder, one in 2016 and another in 
2018, as well as a surgery on her right shoulder in November 2021. (Tr., p. 62; JE 13, p. 391).  Happel has 
permanent work restrictions from her shoulder injuries. (See JE 13, p. 395; JE 15, p. 422; JE 17, p. 439; 
JE 18, pp. 442-443).   

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 6 
 
 
syndrome; reactive depression, left greater trochanteric bursitis, left SI joint arthropathy. 
(Id. at 50-51).  Dr. Segal causally related all of these diagnoses to her fall on March 5, 
2021. (Id. at 51).  He indicated Happel reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) 
for these conditions on April 11, 2022. (Id. at 63).  Dr. Segal provided two potential 
impairment ratings. (Id. at 64).  He assigned 44 percent whole person impairment, which 
he broke down as follows:  17 percent whole person impairment for CRPS, 14 percent 
whole person impairment for motor weakness, 12 percent whole person impairment loss 
of range of motion, 3 percent whole person impairment for trochanteric bursitis, and 7 
percent whole person impairment for reactive depression.3 (Id.).  Alternatively, Dr. Segal 
provided a 44 percent whole body impairment rating for Happel’s peripheral nerve 
injuries, citing to Table 17-37 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Id. at 66).  He also suggested permanent work restrictions of 
limit standing and walking to 30 minutes at a time, with a total limit of 3 hours per day, 
limit lifting/carrying to 10 pounds rarely and 5 pounds occasionally, limit pushing/pulling 
on wheels to 20 pounds rarely and 10 pounds occasionally, rarely use stairs, occasional 
crouching/squatting, and no ladders, kneeling, and/or crawling. (Id. at 67).  Dr. Segal also 
recommended Happel get a spinal cord stimulator for her pain complaints and CRPS 
symptoms. (Id. at 68).   
 
Dr. Segal was also asked to address Happel’s positive drug test in his report.  (See 
Cl Ex. 2, pp. 33-35).  He opined that Happel was not intoxicated at the time of her work 
injury, and that intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing her injury.  (Id. at 73).  
Dr. Segal stated the positive drug test did not prove intoxication because no physician 
examined Happel specifically for cannabinoids use on the date of work injury. (Id.).  He 
also indicated that the results of the drug screen were very limited in quantification and 
could not identify a time frame for her use. (Id.).  According to his report, this is a problem 
because urine may contain carboxy THC, which is a cannabinoid metabolite, for a week 
to 10 days with moderate marijuana use or as long as a month to six weeks after heavy 
use. (Id.).  Dr. Segal opined the test results did not prove Happel had smoked marijuana 
on March 5, 2021, and therefore it was not the proximate cause of her foot injuries. (Id. 
at 74). Finally, Dr. Segal suggested that because Happel was using the marijuana for pain 
relief, it should be treated like a prescription medication for purpose of workers’ 
compensation coverage. (Id.).   
 
 Happel attended a second IME with Dr. Fields at Sedona’s request on July 7, 
2022. (Ex. A, p. 10).  Dr. Fields diagnosed her with a right foot severely comminuted, 
widely displaced fracture of the right calcaneus extending to the subtalar joint’s status 
post ORIF, and a left foot minimally displaced, comminuted fracture of the left calcaneus 
extending to the subtalar joint status post closed reduction with percutaneous screw 
fixation, as well as subsequent hardware removal in the right heel. (Id. at 16).  He causally 
                                                 
3 Dr. Segal’s report provided citations to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, for these ratings.  (Cl Ex. 2, pp. 64-66).  They are as follows: Table 13-15 for the 
CRPS, Table 17-8 for motor weakness, Tables 17-11 and 17-12 for loss of range of motion, Table 17-33 
for trochanteric bursitis, and Table 13-5 for the reactive depression. (Id.).   

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 7 
 
 
related these diagnoses to Happel’s fall on March 5, 2021. (Id.). Dr. Field’s placed Happel 
at MMI for her left heel on March 8, 2022, but indicated she had not yet reached MMI for 
her right heel because of her recent hardware removal surgery. (Id.).  He assigned 15 
percent lower extremity impairment to each of Happel’s fractures, citing to Table 17-33 of 
the AMA Guides, for a combined total of 12 percent whole person impairment. (Id.).   
 
Dr. Fields was also asked to review Dr. Segal’s IME report.  (Ex. A, p. 16).  Dr. 
Fields disagreed with Dr. Segal’s conclusion that Happel’s marijuana use was not a factor 
in her fall. (Id. at 17).  He noted that marijuana use causes drowsiness and impaired 
cognitive functions, including basic motor coordination and reaction times. (Id.).  His 
report states cannabis can continue to exert impairing effects on an individual’s cognitive 
functions even three weeks after its use. (Id.).  Dr. Fields also noted a contemporaneous 
physical examination for cannabinoids would have been difficult to perform, as well as of 
little evidentiary value, as Happel claims to have been rendered unconscious after the fall 
and indicated she was “fuzzy” in the head after the incident. (Id.).  Finally, he stated that 
Happel did not have a prescription for medical marijuana at the time of her fall, and did 
not obtain it through a regulated dispensary. (Id.).   Dr. Fields opined that Happel’s 
marijuana use placed her at an increased risk of injury due to its known effects on reaction 
time and coordination. (Id. at 18).  He also disagreed with Dr. Segal’s CRPS diagnosis, 
noting Happel did not meet the Budapest Criteria for CRPS, as she showed no signs of 
sensory, vasomotor, and/or sudomotor/edema changes during his exam. (Id. at 18-20).  
Finally, Dr. Fields noted Dr. Segal’s diagnoses of left trochanteric bursitis, left SI joint 
arthropathy, as well as injuries to Happel’s sural, medial plantar, and superficial peroneal 
nerves and mental health were not supported by her treatment records. (Id. at 20-21).   
 
Happel also obtained a records review from Ronald Henson, Ph.D., on December 
12, 2023. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).  Dr. Henson has a Ph. D. in applied management and decision 
sciences. (Id. at 10).  He works for Beron Consulting & Labworks, which focuses on drug 
and alcohol testing in the workplace. (Id.).  Dr. Henson was asked to review Happel’s 
drug test results from Buchanan County Health Center and Dr. Field’s IME report. (Id. at 
2).  Dr. Henson concluded that Happel’s drug test results were unreliable and not 
reasonable proof of any association between her marijuana usage and the work accident 
on March 5, 2021. (Id. at 4).  According to his report, the drug test results are unreliable 
because they do not specify what type of cannabinoids were detected in Happel’s urine 
and/or the time frame of her usage.4 (Id. at 2).  He also indicated the drug test only 
provided a cutoff level, in this case 50 ng/mL, and not a specific level or amount of the 
cannabinoids in Happel’s system at the time of the accident. (Id.). Dr. Henson indicates 
cutoff tests lack uncertainty measures and cannot be ruled out as false positives. (Id.).  
He opines that a more specific drug test was necessary to confirm the results.  (Id.).  
Finally, Dr. Henson notes that toxicologists should not opine on an individual’s level of 
impairment based only on the results of a quantitative test result, noting there is no 
                                                 
4 Later in his report, Dr. Henson states “there is no report to determine if THC, or what metabolite 
was screened positive in the urine sample.” (Cl Ex. 1, p. 3).  
  

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 8 
 
 
scientifically valid method to equate the presence of a drug in a patient’s urine with clinical 
level of impairment.5 (Id. at 3).   
 
Happel attended a third IME with Dr. Segal on March 29, 2024. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 88). 
Happel continued to endorse pain and tingling in her feet, difficulty with prolonged 
walking, and trouble sleeping due to pain. (Id. at 89-90).  Happel also told Dr. Segal that 
she obtained a medical cannabis card in September 2022, and it was helping her with 
pain. (Id. at 90).  In his report, Dr. Segal notes that Happel’s CRPS-type symptoms have 
been less intense since her hardware removal surgeries, and that she may not currently 
meet the criteria for a CRPS diagnosis. (Id. at 93).  He, however, believes that she suffers 
from neuropathic pain syndrome, and that it has progressed since his last evaluation. 
(Id.).  Dr. Segal states “the analysis and impairment ratings are the same regardless of 
whether Ms. Happel is diagnosed with CRPS or a more general diagnosis of neuropathic 
pain syndrome.” 6 (Id. at 94).  He, nevertheless, decreased Happel’s assigned permanent 
impairment from 44 percent of the whole body to 40 percent of the whole body. (Id. at 99). 
He attributes the difference in his ratings to a 2 percent decrease in Happel’s motor 
weakness rating, a 2 percent decrease in her range of motion rating, and 15 percent 
permanent impairment for neuropathic pain rather than 17 percent for CRPS. (Id.).  Dr. 
Segal also changed his suggested restrictions to limit standing and walking to 45 minutes 
at a time, with a total limit of 3 hours a per day, limit lifting/carrying to 20 pounds rarely 
and 10 pounds occasionally, and limit pushing/pulling on wheels to 30 pounds rarely and 
20 pounds occasionally. (Id. at 99-100).  The rest of his restrictions remained the same. 
(Id.).   
 
Happel relies upon the opinions of Dr. Segal and Dr. Henson to prove her claim.  I 
do not find either of Dr. Segal’s IME reports convincing; I decline to adopt them.  In both 
reports, Dr. Segal diagnoses Happel with several new conditions, which he causally 
relates to the March 5, 2021 date of injury.  For example, Dr. Segal diagnoses her with 
bilateral sural neuralgia, medial plantar neuralgia and superficial peroneal neuralgia , 
trochanteric bursitis and left SI joint arthropathy, as well as CRPS and neuropathic pain 
syndrome.  (Cl Ex. 2, pp. 50-51).  No other medical provider has diagnosed Happel with 
these conditions, nor has she received treatment for them.  There is also no objective 
testing, such as x-rays, MRIs, and/or EMGs, to confirm the diagnosed conditions.  I do 
not find evidentiary support for Dr. Segal’s diagnostic conclusions, and therefore, cannot 
adopt his proposed impairment ratings or suggested restrictions for these conditions.  
Additionally, Dr. Segal’s opinions on Happel’s positive drug test are not persuasive.  First, 
he suggests that Happel’s marijuana use should be treated like a prescription medication 
because she was using it to treat pain in other areas of her body. (Id. at 74).  However, 
the hearing record is very clear—Happel did not have a medical marijuana card in March 
                                                 
5 For these propositions, Dr. Henson cites to publications from the American Academy of Forensic 
Sciences, the Society of Forensic Toxicologists, and the American College of Medical Toxicology. (Cl Ex. 
1, p. 3).   
6 As support for this Dr. Segal cites to page 343 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 95).   

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 9 
 
 
2021, and obtained the marijuana she used prior to her work injury on her own, not with 
a doctor’s prescription. Happel confirmed this during her deposition, as well as at the 
hearing and in her IME with Dr. Fields. (Ex. I, p. 109; Tr., pp. 29-30; Ex. A, pp. 11-12,14).  
Second, Dr. Segal asserts that Happel’s use of marijuana was not a proximate cause of 
her injury but provides little to no evidence to support this assertion, beyond her use of a 
stepladder and a spray bottle containing water and soap. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 74).  Happel, 
however, testified that she does not know how or why she fell off the step ladder. (Tr., pp. 
23-24; Ex. A, p. 11).  Dr. Segal’s opinion lacks evidentiary support in the record; it is not 
adopted.  
 
In his report, Dr. Henson finds that Happel’s drug test results were unreliable 
because they do not specify what type of cannabinoids were detected in Happel’s urine 
and/or the time frame of her usage. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 4).  There is some support for this 
assertion in the hearing record.  The test does not provide the exact level of cannabinoids 
in Happel’s system, it only indicates it was over 50 ng/mL, nor does it specify whether the 
type detected still had hallucinogenic properties.  Additionally, the test results do include 
a disclaimer indicating that it is only a preliminary result, and a more specific test must be 
used to obtain a confirming result.  (Id. at 34).   However, this is only evidence that Happel 
may not have been intoxicated.  It is not evidence that she was not intoxicated as the 
statute requires.  I find it is not enough to meet her burden and prove her entitlement to 
benefits.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has the 
burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d at 311.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The evidence shows Happel fractured her bilateral feet while working for Sedona 
on March 5, 2021. Defendants, however, argue she is not entitled to any workers’ 
compensation benefits because she was intoxicated at the time of the injury.  Defendants 

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 10 
 
 
assert the affirmative defense of intoxication as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.16.  
During the 2017 legislative session, the Iowa legislature made a significant change to 
Iowa Code section 85.16(2).  The legislature amended it to create a presumption of 
intoxication upon a positive test result reflecting “the presence of [a] . . . hallucinogenic . 
. . drug.” More specifically, the section provides as follows:    
No compensation under this chapter shall be allowed for an injury caused:   
. . .  
(2)    (a)  By the employee’s intoxication, which did not arise out of and in 
the course of employment but which was due to the effects of alcohol 
or another narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogenic, or 
hypnotic drug not prescribed by an authorized medical practitioner, 
if the intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the injury.   
(b)  For the purpose of disallowing compensation under this 
subsection, both of the following apply:   
(1)  If the employer shows that, at the time of the injury, or 
immediately following the injury, the employee had positive 
test results reflecting the presence of alcohol, or another 
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogenic, or hypnotic 
drug which drug either was or was not prescribed by an 
authorized medical practitioner or was not used in accordance 
with the prescribed use of the drug, it shall be presumed that 
the employee was intoxicated at the time of the injury and that 
intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the injury.   
(2)  Once the employer has made a showing as provided in 
subparagraph (1), the burden of proof shall be on the 
employee to overcome the presumption by establishing that 
the employee was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, or 
that intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing the 
injury.   
 
Iowa Code § 85.16(2).  According to the hearing evidence, Happel had a positive drug 
test immediately after the injury, which demonstrated the presence of cannabinoids, a 
group of substances found in marijuana.  Iowa Code section 124.204(4)(m) lists 
marijuana as a scheduled I hallucinogenic substance.  Happel conceded that she had 
used marijuana prior to the date of injury, both in her deposition and at trial.  Additionally, 
at the time of the alleged injury Happel did not have a medical marijuana card or a doctor’s 
prescription for medicinal marijuana.  Given these findings, under the language of Iowa 
Code section 85.16(2)(b)(2), there is a presumption that Happel was intoxicated at the 
time of her injury and that the intoxication was a substantial factor in causing her injury.  

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 11 
 
 
 
“Intoxication” is not defined in chapter 85; however, the Iowa Supreme Court 
adopted the following definition for alcohol use:   
A person is “under the influence of alcohol” and therefore intoxicated 
when one or more of the following are true:  
(1) the person's reason or mental ability has been affected; (2) the 
person's judgment is impaired; (3) the person's emotions are visibly excited; 
and (4) the person has, to any extent, lost control of bodily actions or 
motions.  
Garcia v. Naylor Concrete Co., 650 N.W.2d 87, 90 (Iowa 2002) (citing Benavides v. J.C. 
Penney Life Insurance Co., 539 N.W.2d 352, 355 (Iowa 1995)).   The Court also noted 
“blood-alcohol level revealed by chemical testing is important evidence on the question 
of intoxication.” Id.  In cases involving marijuana use, the Court relies upon toxicology 
reports, showing the presence of marijuana metabolites in the person’s blood or urine, 
as well as evidence of the person’s conduct and demeanor, and circumstantial evidence 
of impairment such as having blood shot eyes, poor performance on field sobriety tests, 
and drowsiness. See State v. Meyers, 924 N.W.2d 823, 828-831 (Iowa 2019).   
 
Happel has the burden of overcoming the presumption and offering proof that she 
was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, or that her intoxication was not a substantial 
factor in causing the injury. She has offered Dr. Henson’s report, which takes issue with 
defendants’ failure to obtain a confirmatory test and concludes the test results are not 
reasonable proof of any association between her marijuana usage and the work accident 
because they do not specify the type of cannabinoids in her urine and/or the time frame 
of her usage.  This line of attack is misplaced, however, because it places the burden of 
proof on defendants to prove a connection between the initial positive drug test and the 
work accident.  Under the statutory language, once the employer shows claimant has a 
positive drug test, the law presumes a connection between the claimant’s drug usage and 
the injury; defendants do not have to provide additional evidence of that association to 
prevail.  
It should, however, be noted that defendants did not have an opportunity to obtain 
a confirmatory test in this case.  The disclaimer on Happel’s test results stated that her 
urine sample would be retained for 24 hours for confirmation testing. (JE 1, p. 34).  
Happel’s drug test was taken on March 5, 2021, and defendants were not notified of her 
positive test until March 11, 2021, six days later. (Ex. C, p. 63).  Thus, her sample had 
already been discarded by the time defendants were notified of the test results. Happel 
was the only party that had knowledge of the drug test during that 24-hour window, and 
therefore, the only party that could have requested confirmatory testing if she felt the initial 
results were incorrect.  
The Commissioner and the Iowa Court of Appeals recently addressed a similar 
argument and found confirmatory testing is not required under Iowa Code section 85.16.  
See Davis v. Gordon Food Service, Inc., File No. 1652763.01 (App., April 13, 2022); see 
also Davis v. Gordon Food Service, Inc., 5 N.W.3d 4 (Table) (Iowa Ct. App. 2024).   In 

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 12 
 
 
Davis, the claimant argued that his positive drug test result was inadmissible in his 
workers’ compensation case because he had not been offered a confirmatory test as 
required by Iowa Code section 730.5(7), a code section regulating drug-testing in private 
workplaces.  Id. at 3. Both the agency and the Court of Appeals determined that the drug 
testing restrictions in Iowa Code section 730.5 do not apply to workers’ compensation 
cases. Id. at 4.  They reasoned that the legislature was fully aware of the confirmatory 
testing requirements in Iowa Code section 730.5 when they re-wrote the workers’ 
compensation statute in 2017, and they chose not to include those requirements in Iowa 
Code section 85.16. Id. at 3 (stating “They did not include any reference to regulations for 
drug-testing, whether by cross-reference to section 730.5 or otherwise. We presume this 
omission deliberate.”).  The Commissioner and the Court of Appeals have already 
determined that confirmatory testing is not required to trigger the presumption in Iowa 
Code section 85.16.7  I am bound by that finding.  
If confirmation testing is not required by the statute, at best, Dr. Henson’s report 
can be read to conclude Happel may not have been intoxicated at the time of her injury.   
He argues her drug test is unreliable because it does not specify what type of 
cannabinoids were in Happel’s urine and/or the time frame in which she used marijuana.  
(Cl Ex. 1, p. 2).  He also states her test could be a false positive. (Id.).  Lastly, he states 
that toxicologists should not opine on an individual’s level of impairment based only on 
the results of a quantitative drug test. (Id. at 3).  These statements support an argument 
that Happel might not have been intoxicated at the time of her injury.  They, however, are 
not affirmative proof that she was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, as Code section 
85.16(2)(b)(2) requires. Happel provided the sample for the test conducted on March 5, 
2021.  She was aware the test had taken place and could have sought her own 
confirmatory test if she disagreed with the results.  She did not.  Happel has not met her 
burden to prove she was not intoxicated at the time of her work injury.   
Happel also argues her marijuana use was not a substantial factor in causing her 
injury, but she fell off a step ladder.  Dr. Segal suggests the fall was caused by the soapy 
water she sprayed on the windows, but Happel testified that she does not know how or 
why she fell off, and no one was present at the time Happel was injured.  No one saw her 
fall off the ladder.  According to Dr. Fields’ report, marijuana use can cause drowsiness 
and impaired cognitive functions, including basic motor coordination and reaction times, 
for weeks after its use. (Ex. A, p. 17).  This appears to be the type of accident in which 
intoxication could play a meaningful role.  See, e.g., Garcia v. Naylor Concrete Co., 650 
N.W.2d 87, 91 (Iowa 2002) (upholding Commissioner’s determination that claimant’s 
intoxication impaired his ability to function and was a substantial factor in causing his fall 
                                                 
7 Confirmatory testing, which identifies the amount and type of a controlled substance in a person’s 
blood or urine sample, is also required to prove the charge of operating while intoxicated (OWI) for 
marijuana, under Iowa Code section 321J.2(1)(c).  See State v. Meyer, 924 N.W.2d 823, 830 (Iowa 2019).  
However, this standard is being applied in a criminal proceeding, in which the State bears the burden of 
proof and must establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  The drafters of Iowa Code section 85.16 placed 
the burden of proof on the claimant after a positive drug test and the language of the statute gives no 
indication that it requires more than an initial test showing the presence of a controlled substance to trigger 
that statutory burden.   
 
 

HAPPEL V. LA LEASING, INC. D/B/A SEDONA STAFFING 
Page 13 
 
 
off a roof).  Neither side presented any witness testimony about Happel’s behavior before 
the work accident.  However, this cuts against Happel as she carries the burden of proof 
in this case.  The lack of testimony does not prove the negative-that Happel was not 
impaired or intoxicated at the time of the injury.  Defendants presented evidence that her 
marijuana use placed her at increased risk of injury that day due to decreased reaction 
time and coordination.  Happel has not produced evidence otherwise, showing 
intoxication was not a substantial factor in her fall.  
Happel failed to overcome the presumption and carry her burden of proof to 
establish that she was not intoxicated and/or that the intoxication was not a substantial 
factor causing her injury.  Any recovery of weekly or medical benefits is barred by Iowa 
Code section 85.16(2).  Happel’s petition should be dismissed without an award of 
benefits.   Given this finding, the remaining issues in the case are moot. 
 
ORDER  
THEREFORE, it is ordered:  
Claimant shall take nothing.  
The parties shall be responsible for their own costs. 
  
Signed and filed this __25th __ day of November, 2024. 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Thomas Wertz  
(via WCES) 
Peter Thill 
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be 
filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers ’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
