Case Number: 24002844.01
Case Title:  VAN OTTERLOO, TERESA V. STAPLES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Van Otterloo Teresa-24002844.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TERESA VAN OTTERLOO, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No. 24002844.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
STAPLES,   
  : 
           ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
   Head Notes:  1100, 1108, 1402.30, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
   1802, 1803, 2502, 2601.10, 2701,  
 
Defendants. 
  : 
   4000.2 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant Teresa Van Otterloo filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Staples, the employer, and Indemnity Insurance 
Company of North America, the insurance carrier, for an alleged work injury date of 
January 25, 2024. The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
April 24, 2025. The case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all 
participants appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through F, H, and I.  
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on April 24, 2025. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on June 2, 2025, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Oct-21  10:36:46     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 2 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment on January 25, 2024; 
2. If so, whether the injury was the cause of temporary or permanent disability; 
3. If so, the extent of disability; 
4. Payment of certain medical expenses;  
5. Alternate medical care; 
6. Penalty benefits; and 
7. Taxation of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was married and living in Orange City, Iowa. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 16) She began working for Staples, the defendant employer, 
in August of 2023. (Tr., p. 17) Prior to that she worked as a housekeeper at the 
Hampton Inn in Orange City for about two and one-half years. She left that job in order 
to provide medical benefits for herself and her husband after he became medically 
disabled and lost his job.  
 
Claimant works in “pick/pack” at Staples. (Tr., p. 18) She testified that the job 
involves picking and packing orders, and marking boxes for the carts for the orders. She 
described it as taking orders, scanning them in, making sure everything is there, and 
putting them on a shipping belt. She testified that Staples sells “a little bit of everything,” 
from small boxes of mints to tractor signs to clothing and kitchenware.  
 
Claimant has alleged a work-related injury to her right shoulder on January 25, 
2024, which was a Thursday. She testified that on that date, there had been a large ice 
storm. (Tr., p. 19) When she arrived at work, she gathered her belongings, and had her 
backpack and water bottle in her left hand. She opened her truck door, looked down, 
and saw the ground was icy. She grabbed the door handle so she would have 
something to hold onto, and stepped from her truck. She got her first foot down, but as 
she put her other foot down, both feet slid out from under her. She testified she was left 
dangling from her right arm. With her upper buttocks and lower back resting on the 
running board of her truck, and her arm pulled behind her and “wrenched up.”  
 
Claimant testified that immediately after the incident, her shoulder was burning 
and it hurt, but she proceeded into work. She said she had never seen a doctor for her 
shoulder or had any problems with the functionality of her shoulder prior to this incident. 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 3 
(Tr., pp. 19-20) When she got inside, she told everyone around her what had happened, 
including her supervisor Angela and the assistant supervisor Sierra. (Tr., p. 20) 
However, she did not file a written report that day. The next day, her shoulder was 
worse, so she went looking for Angela to fill out the proper paperwork. Claimant testified 
that Angela was out for the weekend, so she asked Sierra to fill out an incident report. 
Sierra advised she did not know how, so she was going to find another supervisor to 
help. (Tr., pp. 20-21) 
 
Claimant testified that later in the day, she asked Sierra again about the 
paperwork, and was told that the other supervisor was in a meeting, so she should rest 
her shoulder over the weekend and report back on Monday. Claimant testified that she 
was sick after that, and the following Wednesday Angela brought her the paperwork to 
complete. (Tr., p. 21) She said she told Angela that she needed to see someone about 
her shoulder because Aleve and ibuprofen were not helping. (Tr., pp. 21-22) 
 
While claimant was sick, she saw Douglas Grossmann, PA, at Orange City 
Medical Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) Her appointment was on January 30, 2024; five days 
after the work incident. The record states she presented for exposure to SARS, COVID-
19, influenza, and strep. She complained of sore throat, runny nose, nasal congestion, 
cough, diarrhea, and vomiting. It also states she had a small lesion on the left lower 
eyelid that she thought was a stye, but it was not going away. She was offered a referral 
to an ophthalmologist for the cyst on her eyelid, which she declined. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) The 
rest was thought to be viral, and she was tested for COVID-19 and influenza.  
 
There was no mention of shoulder pain in the January 30, 2024 medical record. 
Claimant testified that she did not bring up her shoulder to PA Grossmann because that 
was not the purpose of that medical visit. (Tr., p. 42) Additionally, she was trying to 
comply with Staples’ protocol for treating work injuries at that time with respect to her 
shoulder. She testified that the visit on January 30, 2024 had nothing to do with workers’ 
compensation. (Tr., p. 48) She was there because she was worried she might have had 
COVID-19, and also to get a note in order to return to work the next day. (Tr., pp. 40-41)   
 
Claimant testified that a couple of days after she completed the incident report, 
the company nurse was at Staples in Orange City, so she had an appointment. (Tr., p. 
22) She testified that the nurse told her to take Aleve, and use Biofreeze and an ice 
pack. She said that she told the nurse she thought she needed to see a doctor because 
it hurt so bad, but the nurse told her “no doctor would order x-rays” based on what she 
described. The nurse’s record of that appointment is dated February 6, 2024, and 
indicates claimant was told to take Aleve every twelve hours, use ice every three to four 
hours, and use Biofreeze. (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 13) She was to return to work with no 
restrictions, and had a follow-up appointment scheduled with the nurse for February 13, 
2024. 
 
Claimant testified that on February 8, 2024, she had been up most of the night 
due to pain. (Tr., p. 23) She was also barely able to move her arm. She went into work, 
and told Angela she was not going to be able to work that day, because she was going 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 4 
to go to the first doctor who could get her in to figure out what was wrong with her 
shoulder. She testified that Angela told her that if she went to the doctor on her own, 
workers’ compensation might not pay for it because she was not following proper 
channels. She also agreed that Angela asked her to wait 15 minutes to speak with 
Angela’s supervisor Amanda, but claimant declined to wait and left. (Tr., p. 50) 
 
There is a witness statement form in evidence that indicates it was completed by 
Angela Jasman on February 8, 2024. (Defendants’ Exhibit D, p. 12) It states that 
claimant asked Angela about taking PTO around 7:05 a.m., and when she was told she 
could not, she advised that her shoulder hurt and her arm was numb, so she could not 
work that day. Angela’s statement says claimant said “this nurse is wacked,” and she 
smelled alcohol on her breath so she asked for another supervisor to be present. Once 
the other supervisor, Vicki, arrived, she asked claimant to explain what was going on 
with her shoulder, and claimant said that the nurse was “wacked” and she had to look 
up how much aspirin to give her in a book. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 12-13) She said her 
shoulder was burning and arm was numb, so she was going to see her own doctor. 
(Def. Ex. D, p. 13) Angela’s statement says that she told claimant she could not 
guarantee that workers’ compensation would cover it if she went to her own doctor, and 
claimant said “that’s fine I’ll pay for it myself.” She then asked claimant to wait 15 
minutes for Amanda the manager and claimant said “no, she can call me if she needs 
to” and then left for the day. There is a similar statement in evidence signed by Vicki 
(last name is illegible). (Def. Ex. D, p. 14) 
 
Neither of the statements in evidence are sworn, however the contents are 
consistent with claimant’s testimony. Claimant testified at hearing that she asked about 
PTO first because if she had the chance to take the day off without being penalized, she 
would have rather done that, but “one way or another I was going to see a doctor that 
day.” (Tr., p. 50)  
 
Claimant saw Allison Sandbeck, ARNP, at Orange City Medical Clinic on 
February 8, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) She reported right shoulder pain since the incident in 
the parking lot at Staples on January 25, 2024. She mentioned that the nurse at work 
had recommended Aleve, which had not been helping. At that point, she was having 
difficulty raising her arm above waist level, making it difficult for her to brush her teeth, 
comb her hair, or feed herself. The record states that she presented to clinic guarding 
her arm and holding it close to her body. ARNP Sandbeck ordered an x-ray, which 
showed some irregularities, so she discussed it with orthopedics, who recommended 
she be seen the same day. She also recommended physical therapy, which claimant 
started that day as well. 
 
Claimant saw Joshua Locker, M.D., later in the day on February 8, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 14) Claimant testified that he is a physician at CNOS, but happened to be at the 
Orange City clinic that day so she was able to see him. (Tr., pp. 25-26) Dr. Locker 
reviewed the mechanism of injury with claimant, and reviewed the x-ray. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
14) He noted the x-ray showed flattening and cortical impaction suggestive of possible 
Hill-Sachs injury from prior dislocation, and mild to moderate AC joint arthritis. After 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 5 
physical examination, he opined she had an acute injury, concerning for possible 
dislocation with spontaneous reduction. He noted her significant loss of active motion 
was concerning for possible associated rotator cuff tear, and also consistent with 
possible biceps tendon pathology. He recommended an MRI. 
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right shoulder on February 12, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 9-
10) She returned to Dr. Locker on February 22, 2024, and noted that her symptoms 
were relatively stable at that point and she had gained some motion. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 18) 
Dr. Locker reviewed the MRI, which showed evidence of significant biceps tendon 
pathology, with severe tendinosis, split tearing longitudinally, and suspected associated 
SLAP lesion. There were potential capsular changes consistent with adhesive 
capsulitis, and low-grade tendinosis of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus without high-
grade or full-thickness tear. His assessment was right shoulder severe long head biceps 
tendinosis and longitudinal split tearing with associated SLAP lesion. They discussed 
treatment options, and since claimant had seen fairly significant improvement of her 
motion at that point, she opted to continue with physical therapy. She was to return in 
four weeks to reassess, and potentially consider surgical intervention. She was provided 
with work restrictions of no lifting, pushing, or pulling greater than five pounds with the 
right upper extremity. 
 
Claimant testified that she received a phone call letting her know the claim was 
denied, but that she did not ever receive anything in writing. (Tr., p. 52) This is reflected 
in her handwritten notes as follows: 
 
 
(Def. Ex. H, p. 18) 
 
 
There is also a letter to claimant dated March 20, 2024, from a claims specialist 
at Corvel, the third-party administrator handling the claim. (Def. Ex. I, p. 19) The letter 
states that after “review of all available information, we have determined that we are 
unable to accept your 01/25/2024 injury based on the medical documentation received 
which showed this is a chronic, personal health condition, therefore this is not a 
compensable injury.” The letter does not provide any additional information regarding 
what medical documentation was received or reviewed that led to the denial.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Locker on March 21, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) He noted 
that claimant told him she had not had any issues with her shoulder prior to the work 
injury. She also advised that she had been working on getting the injury approved 
through workers’ compensation, but it was denied. Dr. Locker noted that claimant had 
failed to see improvement in symptoms with work restrictions and a dedicated course of 
physical therapy, and recommended corticosteroid injection versus possible surgical 
intervention. He stated that claimant’s symptoms “all do seem to stem from the injury 
when she slipped and fell in the parking lot as she was not have [sic] any issues with 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 6 
her shoulder prior to this.” Due to the denial of her claim, claimant wanted to hold off on 
additional treatment pending “appeal” of her workers’ compensation claim. Dr. Locker 
told her to continue her home exercise program, and left her restrictions in place. 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Locker on April 15, 2024, reporting continued significant 
and limiting symptoms in her shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 3, p 24) Her physical therapy exercises 
were no longer helping, and had begun to exacerbate her mechanical symptoms. She 
wished to proceed with surgical intervention.  
 
 
Claimant had right shoulder surgery on April 30, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) Dr. 
Locker’s pre and post operative diagnoses were the same: right shoulder SLAP lesion 
with severe biceps tendinosis, and right shoulder AC joint arthritis. He performed right 
shoulder arthroscopy with long head biceps tenotomy and labral debridement, and right 
shoulder arthroscopic distal clavicle excision and focal subacromial decompression.  
 
 
 
Claimant saw Derrick Moss, PA, on May 16, 2024, for a post-surgical visit. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 29) She had some ongoing stiffness and soreness, but felt things were starting 
to improve. She had recently started physical therapy. She was to continue with work 
restrictions of one-arm duty with her right arm in a sling, and continue physical therapy. 
She saw PA Moss again on June 13, 2024, and reported things had continued to go 
well. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 32) She reported improvement in pain compared to her presurgical 
level. PA Moss advised she could transition out of the sling as tolerated, but wanted her 
to avoid heavy lifting, pushing, or pulling with the right arm. She was also encouraged to 
continue to work with physical therapy on range of motion and strength.  
 
 
Claimant attended an independent medical evaluation with Edward Fehringer, 
M.D., on June 24, 2024. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) Dr. Fehringer noted that claimant denied any 
history of shoulder issues before the January 25, 2024 work incident, although she did 
report some prior neck issues. Dr. Fehringer described the incident as claimant reported 
it, and reviewed her treatment history and medical records. She advised that her pain 
had improved since surgery, but she was still stiff and working with physical therapy.  
 
 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Fehringer noted claimant had full cervical motion 
and no trapezial tenderness. She had limited passive motion due to shoulder stiffness, 
and tenderness in the rotator interval with mildly decreased shoulder strength, 
presumably due to pain. He noted some resolving ecchymosis in her anterior right arm, 
and a subtle right biceps muscle belly deformity.  
 
 
Dr. Fehringer authored a letter to defense counsel following his IME in response 
to her questions. (Def. Ex. A, p. 3) His diagnosis was right shoulder post-surgical 
stiffness, status-post long head of the biceps tenotomy and subacromial 
decompression. He opined that claimant’s January 25, 2024 injury may have or might 
not have caused the long head of the biceps longitudinal split noted on the MRI. He said 
it was difficult to ascertain whether the long head of the biceps split was present prior to 
the work incident, or was a possible age-related change. It was also difficult to 
ascertain, since she was post-operative, whether the actual work injury was a shoulder 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 7 
capsular strain, from which she began developing stiffness not long after as a source of 
her shoulder pain.  
 
 
Dr. Fehringer was asked whether the January 25, 2024 incidence lit up, 
accelerated, or permanently aggravated claimant’s right shoulder condition. He replied 
that it “may have done any of these.” Similarly, he said it was plausible that the incident 
served as a substantial and material cause that brought about the need for surgery. 
With respect to future treatment, he recommended continued physical therapy to restore 
full flexibility to her stiff right shoulder. He opined that claimant would likely reach 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) in another three months, or six months after 
surgery. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 3-4)  
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Locker on July 25, 2024, and reported overall, she was doing 
okay. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 35) She still had some stiffness, and some discomfort at night that 
improved with changing positions. Dr. Locker recommended continued physical therapy 
and home stretching to help with her stiffness. He stated she was unable to perform 
overhead reaching activities at work, and assigned a ten-pound lifting restriction for the 
right arm. She next saw PA Moss on October 10, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 37) She reported 
having good days and bad days, and continued limitations with certain movements, 
especially reaching over head, pulling, and reaching behind her back. She was still 
working with physical therapy but was concerned her range of motion had not improved 
any more. She had not returned to work as she was unable to return with restrictions, 
and did not feel she would be able to work full duty. She reported that she was planning 
an appointment with an occupational therapist for a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE), but did not know the date. PA Moss recommended she continue with physical 
therapy and return after the FCE. She was kept on a ten-pound lifting restriction for the 
right arm.  
 
 
On August 26, 2024, Dr. Fehringer wrote a brief letter to defense counsel, 
indicating he had reviewed additional medical records, and his opinions as expressed in 
his prior June 24, 2024 letter were unchanged. (Def. Ex. A, p. 5) 
 
 
Claimant testified that she continues to have pain in her shoulder. (Tr., pp. 29-30) 
She said where Dr. Locker cut the tendon in her biceps muscle into her shoulder still 
gives her issues, and she cannot put any pressure on her shoulder for any amount of 
time. Her shoulder clicks and “locks up,” and at times her hand goes numb. (Tr., p. 30) 
This causes her to drop things. She testified that when it locks up and then finally 
unlocks, “the pain, it drops you almost to your knees…” She testified that she last saw 
Dr. Locker in November of 2024. At that time, he told her that her only option remaining 
was cortisone injections through pain management, which she is unable to afford. (Tr., 
pp. 30-31) Formal physical therapy also ended in November of 2024, after which she 
was told to continue at home. (Tr., p. 31) 
 
 
On January 3, 2025, claimant attended an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) He reviewed medical records, and claimant provided him 
with a description of the January 25, 2024 work incident. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-6) Dr. Bansal 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 8 
noted that Dr. Locker had recommended cortisone injections at his last visit with 
claimant in November 2024, but she could not afford them due to her insurance bring 
canceled due to her extended leave of absence. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) Claimant described her 
current symptoms at the time of the IME as mainly involving problems with range of 
motion and strength, as well as pain. (CL. Ex. 1, p. 7) 
 
 
Dr. Bansal performed a physical examination, and took measurements of 
claimant’s range of motion in both shoulders. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) He then provided answers 
to questions posed by claimant’s attorney. His diagnosis was right shoulder SLAP lesion 
with severe biceps tendinosis, acromioclavicular joint arthritis; status post right shoulder 
arthroscopy with long head of the biceps tenotomy, labral debridement, distal clavicle 
excision, and focal subacromial decompression; supraspinatus and infraspinatus 
tendinosis. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9) He opined her prognosis was fair.  
 
 
With respect to causation, Dr. Bansal opined that the January 25, 2024 work 
incident was the direct cause of claimant’s right shoulder pathology, necessitating 
surgical intervention. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) He explained that the incident involved slipping 
on ice while exiting her truck, and while she did not completely fall, she braced herself 
by grabbing the truck door with her right arm. Her buttocks hit the running board while 
her arm was extended behind her head, bearing much of her body weight. Dr. Bansal 
stated that this mechanism created substantial tensile, torsional, and shear forces 
through the shoulder complex. He explained that this forceful extension of her arm 
behind her head created extreme tension in the anterior shoulder structures, particularly 
the biceps tendon and its superior labrum attachment. The sudden loading produced 
distraction forces at the glenohumeral joint and rotational forces at the biceps-labral 
complex. He stated this is a “classic mechanism” for causing a SLAP lesion.  
 
 
Dr. Bansal also stated that medical evidence supporting direct causation included 
an absence of pre-existing shoulder pathology, immediate pain following the incident 
with prompt reporting, and progressive worsening as documented in early February 
2024. Imaging followed by surgery confirmed the diagnoses. Dr. Bansal concluded that 
there was a clear causal relationship between the January 25, 2024 workplace incident 
and claimant’s right shoulder pathology, as the injury mechanism was biomechanically 
sound, the temporal relationship immediate without intervening causes, and the 
objective findings directly correlated with the mechanism. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 10-11) As such, 
he opined that the SLAP lesion and biceps tendon pathology were directly caused by 
the described workplace incident. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
 
 
Dr. Bansal opined claimant had reached MMI as of the date of his evaluation, 
January 3, 2025. Using the fifth edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, he provided a 19 percent upper extremity rating, which is equal 
to 11 percent of the whole body. The rating was based on 10 percent of the upper 
extremity due to decrements in range of motion, with an additional 10 percent for the 
distal clavicle resection per Table 16-27. With respect to future medical care, he opined 
that claimant would benefit from intermittent steroid injections. 
 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 9 
 
At defendants’ request, Jeffrey Westpheling, M.D., performed a records review 
and provided an opinion on causation. (Def. Ex. B, p. 6) His letter is dated February 25, 
2025. He reviewed some of the medical records, although it does not appear he was 
provided with the note from the Staples nurse dated February 6, 2024. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 
6-7) He also noted that the February 12, 2024 MRI of the right should was “essentially 
unremarkable.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 7)  
 
 
In the discussion portion of his letter, Dr. Westpheling appears to focus on 
claimant’s January 30, 2024 visit with PA Grossmann. He notes that claimant expressed 
a “myriad” of specific complaints, but no mention of an injury or pain in the right 
shoulder due to a slip and fall at work. He stated that the standard review of systems 
was noted to be negative, and although the shoulder and upper extremity were not 
specifically examined, there was no mention of abnormal posturing, guarding, or holding 
the right upper extremity near the body, nor wincing in pain with movement of the right 
shoulder. Dr. Westpheling notes that the first mention of an injury occurring at work in 
the records provided to him was the clinic note dated February 8, 2024. He noted on 
that date claimant was reporting pain at a level 9 out of 10, that she was having 
difficulties with movement and activities of daily living, and the physical therapist noted 
pain behaviors including wincing, guarding, and holding the arm close to her body. The 
pain was severe enough to require narcotic medication and a same-day evaluation by 
physical therapy and orthopedics.  
 
 
Dr. Westpheling opined, based on his experience, that it was unlikely that a 
medical evaluation five days post injury would not elicit any mention of shoulder injury or 
pain. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 7-8) He opined that it was unlikely there would be no suggestive 
physical examination findings such as abnormal resting posture of the right shoulder, 
guarding, holding the upper extremity near the body during examination, or winces of 
pain with movement, even if the right upper extremity and shoulder were not specifically 
examined. (Def. Ex. B, p. 8) He stated that many times, he is able to find 
musculoskeletal abnormalities on routine physical exam for purposes such as 
preemployment screening and/or DOT examinations by simply observing the natural 
mannerisms of the examinee.  
 
 
In conclusion, Dr. Westpheling stated that claimant alleges an injury to her right 
shoulder occurring at work on January 25, 2025, which was significant enough to cause 
difficulty with activities of daily living, guarding, holding it close to her body, pain at a 
level 9 to 10 out of 10, winces of pain, need for narcotic pain medication, and need for 
same-day orthopedic evaluation, yet there was “no subjective nor objective evidence of 
this injury during a medical history and physical examination for a work-related 
complaint on January 30, 2024.” Based on that, Dr. Westpheling stated that he could 
not conclude that claimant’s right shoulder condition and the need for right shoulder 
arthroscopy was causally related to the work injury on January 25, 2024. 
 
There are several problems with Dr. Westpheling’s opinion. First, he did not 
examine or speak with claimant. (Tr., pp. 37-38) He purportedly reviewed the right 
shoulder MRI, but recorded it as “essentially unremarkable,” which is inaccurate. (Def. 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 10 
Ex. B, p. 7) The only portion of the MRI report that uses the word “unremarkable” 
involves the acromioclavicular joint. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10) The remainder of the report found 
significant biceps tendon pathology, a suspected extensive longitudinal biceps tendon 
tear, a possible SLAP tear, possible adhesive capsulitis, and low grade tendinosis of 
supraspinatus and infraspinatus. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10)  
 
Additionally, Dr. Westpheling’s focus on the January 30, 2024 visit with PA 
Grossmann is misplaced, especially considering he did not speak with claimant 
regarding the context of the visit, or the progression of her symptoms following the 
January 25 incident. Claimant’s credible, unrebutted testimony is that her shoulder 
began to hurt right away after the January 25 incident, but the pain progressed. She did 
not have the problems with motion and activities of daily living immediately after the 
injury. (Tr, p. 47) She also became ill shortly after the injury and missed work, which 
delayed her ability to have her supervisor Angela complete the written incident report. 
(Tr., p. 21) She testified that by February 8, when she sought care on her own with 
ARNP Sandbeck, her condition had worsened to the point that she could not even lift 
her arm. (Tr., p. 47) The fact that she did not mention shoulder pain to PA Grossmann 
on January 30 is not surprising or significant in that context. Additionally, she was not 
seeing Grossmann for a “work-related complaint” on January 30. Rather, she was there 
to get tested for COVID-19 and influenza, and get a note so she could return to work. 
(Tr., pp. 40-41) She also asked him about the lesion on her eye, and testified that he 
asked her where she worked, and told her to ask her ophthalmologist what it was. (Tr., 
p. 48)  
 
Finally, Dr. Westpheling’s comparisons of his own examinations with that of PA 
Grossmann on January 30 are irrelevant. Dr. Westpheling is a board-certified 
occupational medicine physician who has “treated thousands of injured workers.” (Def. 
Ex. B, p. 7) Grossmann is a physician’s assistant, and there is no other information in 
the record regarding his experience or training. Regardless, performing a 
preemployment physical or DOT examination, as Dr. Westpheling regularly does, is 
quite different from seeing a patient who presents with symptoms of an upper 
respiratory illness. Dr. Westpheling appears to assume that if claimant’s shoulder was 
injured on January 30, PA Grossmann would have certainly noticed it and also recorded 
it in his clinical notes. This assumes too much, and is not a credible basis to find 
claimant’s shoulder injury is not work related. It also fails to consider the progression of 
claimant’s symptoms up until February 8, 2024, and her complete lack of any shoulder 
issues prior to the January 25, 2024 work incident. 
 
When reviewing the records as a whole, as well as claimant’s testimony and the 
remaining evidence in the record, I find that claimant has met her burden to prove she 
sustained a right shoulder injury arising out of and in the course of her employment on 
January 25, 2024. I find Dr. Bansal’s opinion regarding causation to be the most 
credible. He provided a detailed analysis and explanation regarding the mechanism of 
injury and how it resulted in the pathology found on the MRI and in surgery. He 
reviewed the medical records and interviewed and examined claimant. His opinions are 
also consistent with Dr. Locker’s findings that claimant had an acute injury, (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 11 
14) Even Dr. Fehringer, who examined and spoke with claimant, said the injury could 
have caused or materially aggravated claimant’s shoulder condition. (Def. Ex. A, p. 3) 
Dr. Westpheling is the only doctor who opined otherwise, and his opinion is problematic 
as explained above. As such, I conclude that claimant has proven a work-related injury. 
 
Because I found claimant’s injury to be work-related, she is entitled to temporary 
disability benefits. The evidence establishes that claimant was off work due to her 
shoulder injury beginning February 8, 2024. (Tr., pp. 50-51) As such, she is entitled to 
healing period benefits beginning that date, until the date of MMI. 
 
I further find that claimant’s work injury resulted in permanent disability, based on 
Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating. The ten percent upper extremity rating related to lost 
range of motion is accepted. However, with respect to the distal clavicle excision, Dr. 
Bansal did not apply the 25 percent modifier as required by the AMA Guides. As such, I 
find that Dr. Bansal’s 10 percent rating for the distal clavicle excision should be reduced 
to 2.5 percent through application of the modifier. Using the combined values chart, 
claimant’s total shoulder impairment comes to 13 percent. As such, claimant is entitled 
to 52 weeks of permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits. 
 
Claimant alleged the date of MMI to be January 3, 2025, which is the date put 
forth by Dr. Bansal. Defendants presented no alternative date. Claimant’s date is 
accepted based on Dr. Bansal’s opinion. As such, claimant is entitled to healing period 
benefits from February 8, 2024 to January 2, 2025, followed by 52 weeks of PPD 
benefits commencing January 3, 2025. 
 
Given the compensability of the injury, claimant is also entitled to medical 
benefits as discussed further below. Finally, I find that defendants did not have a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse for denial of the claim until February 25, 2025, 
when Dr. Westpheling provided his opinions. As such, claimant is entitled to a 50 
percent penalty, as discussed further below. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 12 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). A 
possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. Blue Bird 
Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce Motor 
Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
 
In this case, I found claimant has met her burden to prove she sustained a right 
shoulder injury arising out of and in the course of her employment. Defendants argue 
that claimant did not meet that burden, based largely on Dr. Westpheling’s opinions. 
Defendants also argue that Dr. Locker’s records do not establish causation, and note 
AC joint arthritis, which is not an acute condition. Finally, defendants argue Dr. Bansal’s 
report is not credible, because it is based on claimant’s description of the mechanism of 
injury, and claimant is not credible. 
 
I found claimant to be a credible witness. Her description of the mechanism of 
injury has never changed. Defendants argue that claimant’s handwritten notes prove 
she received the denial letter dated March 20, 2024, but claimant has repeatedly stated 
that she received a phone call regarding the denial, and the letter never arrived. (Tr., pp. 
52-53) In fact, her handwritten notes support that, as she wrote “no papers” next to the 
entry for March 20. (Def. Ex. H, p. 18) It also appears from the way the entry is written 
that she added in “they said it was cronic (sic)” later, as it appears she left a blank line 
there initially. In any event, there is no evidence that the January 25, 2024 incident did 
not happen exactly how claimant has repeatedly explained. There is no evidence of any 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 13 
other incident or injury that could have caused claimant’s shoulder condition. There is 
no evidence that claimant had preexisting shoulder issues or any treatment for shoulder 
pain prior to January 25, 2024. Dr. Bansal’s report is based on credible information, and 
is accepted as accurate. 
 
Because claimant has proven an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment, I found that she is entitled to both temporary and permanent disability 
benefits. I found the appropriate date of MMI to be January 3, 2025, as suggested by 
Dr. Bansal. The evidence supports that claimant was off work due to her shoulder 
beginning February 8, 2024. As such, she is entitled to healing period benefits from 
February 8, 2024 until January 2, 2025. 
 
With respect to permanent partial disability, claimant has sustained an injury to 
the shoulder. A shoulder is a scheduled member, which is evaluated functionally based 
on 400 weeks. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). For functional loss determinations, Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2)(x) states the following, in pertinent part: 
 
. . . when determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A.  
  
In April 2008, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner adopted the AMA 
Guides 5th Edition (“AMA Guides”) for determining extent of loss or percentage of 
impairment for permanent partial disabilities not involving a determination of reduction in 
an employee’s earning capacity. 876 IAC 2.4; Iowa Admin. Code Supp. r. 2.4 (April 28, 
2008).  
 
Table 16-27 of the AMA Guides governs impairment of the upper extremities 
after arthroplasty of specific bones and joints. Under Table 16-27, a distal clavicle 
excision is assigned ten percent impairment.   
 
Page 498 of the AMA Guides directs the examining physician as follows: 
  
Conditions not previously described that can contribute to impairments of 
the hand and upper extremity include bone and joint disorders (Section 
16.7a), presence of resection or implant arthroplasty (Section 16.7b), 
musculotendinous disorders (Section 16.7c) and tendinitis (Section 16.7d), 
and loss of strength (Section 16.8). The severity of the impairment due to 
these disorders is rated separately according to Tables 16-19 through 16-
30 and then multiplied by the relative maximum value of the unit involved 
as specified in Table 16-18. . . . 
 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 14 
Under Table 16-18, the appropriate multiplier for the acromioclavicular joint is 25 
percent.  
  
Claimant underwent a distal clavicle excision. The AMA Guides direct the 
physician to assign a rating for a distal clavicle excision. The AMA Guides also require 
application of a 25 percent multiplier. Dr. Bansal did not apply the multiplier when 
calculating claimant’s total impairment rating. While I accept his 10 percent rating 
related to lost range of motion, I found that the additional 10 percent assigned for the 
distal clavicle excision should have been reduced by application of the 25 percent 
multiplier. This results in a 2.5 percent impairment for a distal clavicle excision under the 
plain text of the AMA Guides. Using the Combined Values Chart at page 604 of the 
AMA Guides, claimant has sustained 13 percent permanent impairment of the right 
shoulder. As such, claimant is entitled to 52 weeks of PPD benefits, commencing 
January 3, 2025. 
 
  
Claimant is also entitled to medical benefits related to the right upper extremity 
injury, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement 
for medical bills unless claimant shows that they were paid from her own funds. See 
Caylor v. Employers Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). 
Otherwise, claimant is entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendant to 
make such payments directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 
(Iowa 1988). Where medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did 
not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service 
v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the 
commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical 
expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of 
any employer contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323. 
 
There is no argument that the medical treatment claimant received was not 
reasonable or beneficial. Defendants do argue that they should not be responsible for 
claimant’s treatment because it was not authorized care, however. Defendants argue 
that claimant deliberately circumvented the worker’s compensation process by seeking 
her own care, despite being told it may not be covered if she did so. However, the only 
care defendants had offered to claimant by the time she sought care on her own on 
February 8, 2024, was one visit with the company nurse, who recommended ice, Aleve, 
and Biofreeze. Claimant reported those measures were not helping and her condition 
was getting worse on February 8, but no care was immediately offered, and claimant 
was told she would have to wait for another manager. Rather than waiting, claimant 
sought care on her own due to the level 9 or 10 pain she was experiencing and her 
difficulties lifting her arm. X-rays taken that day were serious enough to warrant a same 
day evaluation with physical therapy and orthopedics. As such, it was reasonable for 
claimant to seek immediate care on her own that day, and the care she received was 
reasonable and beneficial. Following the February 8, 2024 medical care, defendants 
made no further offers of care, and as of March 20, 2024, the claim was officially 
denied. Defendants are precluded from asserting an authorization defense as to any 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 15 
medical treatment for claimant’s alleged injuries during the period of denial, and 
defendants lose the right to direct medical care claimant seeks related to the alleged 
injuries during the period of denial. Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 
2018); Bell Bros.Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 
2010). 
 
  
As such, defendants are responsible for all causally related medical expenses, 
including the Optum lien as found in claimant’s exhibit 2, and outstanding medical bills 
in claimant’s exhibit 3. Defendants shall make any outstanding payments to the 
providers. Claimant has also alleged out of pocket expenses for one visit to Orange 
County Health on February 14, 2025, and mileage for 9 trips to Orange City Health. (Cl. 
Brief, p. 13) In review of the exhibits, it appears the only payment claimant made out of 
pocket to Orange City Health was for $169.00 on February 14, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
As such, defendants shall reimburse claimant for that $169.00 payment, in addition to 
reimbursing claimant for her mileage. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 46) 
 
Claimant is also entitled to ongoing medical care for her continued symptoms. 
Claimant seeks to have Dr. Locker continue providing authorized treatment, which is a 
reasonable request given that he has been her primary treating physician and is familiar 
with her case. Defendants shall authorize ongoing treatment with Dr. Locker for the 
work-related right shoulder injury, including referral to pain management and/or 
cortisone injections if so recommended. 
 
The next issue to determine involves claimant’s claim for penalty benefits. 
Claimant contends that defendant did not have a reasonable basis for denial of her 
shoulder claim. Defendants disagree, arguing the shoulder claim was denied based on 
“medical documentation demonstrating that claimant’s right shoulder injury was a 
chronic, personal health condition, per the results of her imaging and physicians’ 
diagnoses.” Defendants further argue the basis for the denial was contemporaneously 
conveyed to claimant, both via telephone and letter. 
 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this subchapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 16 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits 
were owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
In Pettengill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, 875 N.W.2d 740, 747 (Iowa Ct 
App. 2015), the Iowa Court of Appeals held that Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c)1 
“creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in showing it had a ‘reasonable 
or probable cause or excuse’ for the termination of benefits.” The Pettengill Court 
explained that timeline: 
 
First, the employer’s excuse for the termination must have been preceded 
by an investigation. Id.; § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the 
investigation were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” relied on by 
the employer in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.”  Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3) 
 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
 
“Defendant has the burden to show compliance with this statutory provision in 
order to avoid the mandatory assessment of a penalty.” Id. at 745. To carry defendant’s 
burden of proof: 
 
The law requires proof of a prompt investigation and that factual basis be 
provided to the injured worker at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. Herein, defendant must show a timely investigation 
. . . and that there was a timely communication to claimant of the reasons 
for the denial. 
 
Id.  “In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse under 
paragraph ‘b,’ an excuse shall satisfy the three criteria listed in paragraph ‘c.’”  Id. at 
747. 
                                                 
1 Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c) has been renumbered to 10A.315(4). There were no textual changes to 
the code section. 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 17 
 
 
There is no dispute that there was a denial of benefits related to the alleged 
shoulder injury. As such, it is defendant’s burden to demonstrate the denial was 
reasonable. It is clear the fact that the claim was denied was communicated to claimant 
via telephone on or around March 20, 2024. That being said, claimant testified that she 
was not advised of the reason for the denial during that call, and she stated that she did 
not receive the letter from the claims adjustor dated March 20, 2024. Whether claimant 
received the letter or not, I find that defendants have failed to prove that the denial was 
preceded by a reasonable investigation, and have failed to prove that the results of the 
reasonable investigation and evaluation were the actual basis by which the denial was 
based. 
 
There is nothing in the record to indicate what investigation was performed by 
defendants in reaching the conclusion that claimant’s right shoulder condition was a 
“chronic, personal health condition.” (Def. Ex. I, p. 19) There are no medical records in 
evidence that indicate claimant ever had any problems with her right shoulder prior to 
the work incident. Claimant has testified that she had never had issues with her 
shoulder before. That testimony is supported by the medical records that predate the 
denial, in which she repeatedly denied prior shoulder problems, and related her pain to 
the work incident. The x-ray taken on February 8, 2024, showed pathology that “may be 
associated with impact injury.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) Dr. Locker opined after his initial 
evaluation on February 8, 2024, that claimant had “an acute injury concerning for 
possible dislocation with spontaneous reduction.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) There is no mention 
of arthritis or a chronic condition in any of the medical records that predate the March 
20, 2024 denial, and the imaging showed no significant degenerative changes, but an 
extensive biceps tear and possible SLAP tear. The claim that medical documentation 
led to the March 20 conclusion that claimant’s condition was chronic and personal is not 
supported by the evidence. As such, defendants have not proved that they conducted a 
reasonable investigation, or that the investigation was the actual basis for the denial of 
the claim. 
 
Additionally, this claim was denied on March 20, 2024, and defendants did not 
send claimant for an IME until June 24, 2024, after she had already had surgery. (Def. 
Ex. A, p. 3) Dr. Fehringer’s opinions at that time did not support ongoing denial of the 
claim, as he expressly stated that the work injury could have caused or permanently 
aggravated claimant’s shoulder condition. He was unable to provide an opinion that her 
condition was not related to the work incident. Despite his inconclusive opinion, there is 
no evidence that defendants engaged in additional investigation or reconsidered their 
denial of the claim until February 20, 2025, when defense counsel emailed Dr. 
Westpheling for a medical record review. (Def. Ex. B, p. 6) While I found Dr. 
Westpheling’s opinions to lack merit, his report would have provided a reasonable basis 
for the ongoing denial of the claim, but there is no evidence defendants 
contemporaneously conveyed that his report was the basis for the ongoing denial.  
 
Because defendants’ denial of benefits occurred without a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse, claimant is entitled to penalty benefits. Given that defendants 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 18 
continued to deny the claim following Dr. Fehringer’s inconclusive report, and did not 
have a reasonable basis for the denial until Dr. Westpheling’s February 25, 2025 report, 
a 50 percent penalty is appropriate. Defendants shall pay a penalty of 50 percent of all 
healing period and permanent partial disability benefits unreasonably denied or delayed. 
 
The final issue for consideration is assessment of costs. Under Iowa 
Administrative Rule 876-4.33, costs are taxed at the discretion of the commissioner. 
The only item submitted as a cost is Dr. Bansal’s IME fee. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13) However, 
the hearing report also indicates reimbursement of IME under Iowa Code section 85.39 
is an issue. Neither party addressed Dr. Bansal’s IME fee in their briefing.  
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  
 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen 
physician’s opinion that there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). 
 
In this case, the claim was denied prior to a physician’s opinion that there was no 
causation. However, defendants sent claimant to Dr. Fehringer for an IME and 
causation opinion on June 24, 2024. While he was unable to definitively state whether 
the injury was causally connected to the work incident, defendants continued their 
denial of the claim. I find his report was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating, 
as defendants used it as the basis for continued denial of the claim. This triggered 
claimant’s right to an IME under section 85.39. As such, defendants shall reimburse 
claimant for Dr. Bansal’s IME in the amount of $3,598.00. 
 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 19 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
All benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of four hundred fifty-three and 
72/100 dollars ($453.72). 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits from February 8, 2024 until 
January 2, 2025. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant fifty-two (52) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits, commencing January 3, 2025. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
 
 
Defendants shall pay a 50 percent penalty on all healing period and permanent 
partial disability benefits awarded herein. 
 
 
Defendants are responsible for all causally related medical expenses, including 
out of pocket expenses and mileage, as outlined above. 
 
 
Defendants shall authorize ongoing treatment with Dr. Locker for the work-
related right shoulder injury, including referral to pain management and/or cortisone 
injections if so recommended. 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal’s IME in the amount of three 
thousand five hundred ninety-eight and 00/100 dollars ($3,598.00), pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ___21st __ day of October, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

VAN OTTERLOO V. STAPLES 
Page 20 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Al Sturgeon   
(via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
