Case Number: 5068353
Case Title:  BUCHANAN, JAMES V. MIDWEST MANUFACTURING
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Buchanan James-5068353D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JAMES BUCHANAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5068353 
MENARD, INC./MIDWEST 
  : 
MANUFACTURING, 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
XL INSURANCE AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
1403.30, 1802, 1803, 2501, 2803, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
James Buchanan, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Menard, 
Inc./Midwest Manufacturing (“Midwest Manufacturing”), as the employer and XL 
Insurance America as the insurance carrier.  Mr. Buchanan passed away before the 
date of the trial and his surviving spouse, Tina Buchanan, pursued his claim.  This case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on May 27, 2020.   
Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, all 
in-person hearings were precluded as of the date of this hearing due to the pandemic 
currently affecting the state of Iowa.  Accordingly, this case was heard via 
videoconference using CourtCall.  Claimant appeared remotely from his attorney’s 
office.  Each of the other participants for the hearing appeared remotely via CourtCall, 
including the court reporter. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 12, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through K.  It should be noted that an objection 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jun-29  08:10:48     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 2 
 
 
was raised to Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pages 3 and 4 as untimely produced.  After 
discussion with counsel at the commencement and end of the hearing, the undersigned 
ultimately sustained the defendants’ objection in part.  Claimant’s Exhibit 1 was 
received, while the second paragraph after the first sentence and the third paragraph on 
page three were excluded from the evidentiary record.  All other exhibits were received 
without objection. 
Claimant called Michael Buchanan and Tina Buchanan to testify.  Defendants 
called Michael Wise, Adam Molander, and Jordan Tingley to testify.  The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on May 27, 2020.   
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on 
June 12, 2020.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that 
date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether James Buchanan sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment on February 5, 2019. 
2. Whether this claim is barred for claimant’s failure to give timely notice of the 
injury. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of temporary total disability, or 
healing period, benefits from March 22, 2019 through May 14, 2019. 
4. Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability. 
5. Whether the alleged permanent disability should be compensated as a 
scheduled member disability to the right foot or a scheduled member disability 
to a toe other than the great toe. 
6. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability, if any. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to payment, reimbursement, or repayment of a 
third-party for past medical expenses associated with the alleged February 5, 
2019 injury. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation fees. 
9. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 3 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
James Buchanan worked for Midwest Manufacturing in the winter of 2018-2019.  
In his position with Midwest Manufacturing, claimant drove a forklift and worked outside.  
Claimant alleges Mr. Buchanan sustained a frostbite injury to his right foot while working 
outside on February 5, 2019.  Mr. Buchanan worked second shift in the evening and into 
the early morning hours of the next day.  Wage records confirm that Mr. Buchanan was 
working on the evening of February 5, 2019 and into the morning of February 6, 2019. 
Both parties put weather data into evidence.  Neither party produced expert 
evidence to explain their weather data or to clearly determine whether the weather data 
has significant relevance to the alleged injury.  Nevertheless, I gather that it was a 
relatively cold day in Iowa on February 5, 2019 with high temperatures that day at 21.9 
degrees Fahrenheit and the low temperature on the morning of February 6, 2019 of 19.9 
degrees Fahrenheit.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 10, pages 1-3) 
Claimant primarily operated a Hyster 80 lift when he worked for Midwest 
Manufacturing.  His son, Michael Buchanan, testified that the lift claimant used was 
missing a rubber floor mat that was supposed to cover the bottom floor of the cab on the 
lift.  Mike Wise, claimant’s supervisor for Midwest Manufacturing, confirmed that the 
rubber floor mat was missing from the lift during the time period of the alleged injury.  
(Transcript, p. 78) 
Michael Buchanan testified that the floor of the lift had holes in it to permit drainage.  
However, without the rubber floor mat installed, the holes allowed cold air to come into 
the cab of the lift and made it more difficult for the driver to keep his/her feet warm.  
Defendants neither confirmed nor rebutted the idea that cold air came into the cab through 
holes in the bottom of the lift floor without the rubber floor mat installed. 
Prior to the February 5, 2019 shift, James Buchanan had some difficulties and 
sought medical treatment for his right foot.  His wife, Tina Buchanan, confirmed that 
claimant sought emergency medical care on January 19, 2019, after a dog jumped on his 
right foot.  She confirmed that he had to ice his right foot after the incident.  However, 
there was no ongoing treatment after that injury and claimant apparently returned to work. 
Michael Buchanan also testified to an encounter between James Buchanan and 
Adam Molander at the end of claimant’s shift in the very early morning hours of 
February 6, 2019.  Michael Buchanan testified that his father inquired of Adam Molander 
about the symptoms of frostbite after his shift on February 5, 2019.  Michael Buchanan 
testified that he was present for this encounter and testified that his father, James 
Buchanan, asked Mr. Molander what the signs of frostbite were.  (Tr., p. 20)  Michael 
Buchanan also testified that Adam Molander conceded, “[T]here’s no doubt in my mind 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 4 
 
 
you have frostbite and do what you have to do.”  (Tr., p. 21)  Mr. Molander denies this 
conversation occurred.  However, Mr. Molander conceded at trial that an operator’s feet 
would get cold when operating a lift outside in the cold.  (Tr., pp. 80-81) 
Michael Buchanan testified that, after speaking with Mr. Molander, claimant went 
to the supervisor’s desk and spoke with Mike Wise.  Michael Buchanan testified that an 
injury report was started at that time, but that Mr. Wise made claimant feel like a burden 
asking for treatment in the early morning hours of February 6, 2019.  Michael Buchanan 
testified that his father agreed to forego emergency treatment given the late hour.  
Instead, Michael Buchanan testified, Mr. Wise told claimant they would “figure out a later 
date.”  (Tr., p. 23)  Once again, Mr. Wise denies that an injury report was started or 
completed for this alleged injury.  Mr. Wise denies that the alleged conversation occurred 
with James Buchanan. 
After the conversation with Mr. Wise, Michael Buchanan testified that his father 
again spoke with Adam Molander.  During this conversation, Michael Buchanan testifies 
that Mr. Molander uttered the phrase that he had no doubt in his mind that claimant 
sustained frostbite.  (Tr., p. 24)  Again, Mr. Molander denies this conversation occurred. 
James Buchanan did seek medical attention for his right foot prior to the alleged 
injury date.  Specifically, claimant sought medical care at the emergency room for his right 
foot on January 19, 2019.  At that appointment, bruising was noted on the right foot, 
including the right fifth toe.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1)  Claimant’s wife testified that there were no 
complaints, suspicions, or treatment for frostbite of the right foot or toe on January 19, 
2019.  Instead, claimant complained that the family dog jumped on his foot.  X-rays were 
taken of the foot to ensure that no fractures were present and claimant was allowed to 
return to work.  (Joint Ex. 1, pp. 2-4) 
Following the alleged February 5, 2019 injury date, claimant again sought medical 
care.  Specifically, he reported to the emergency room on February 10, 2019.  At that 
time, he complained of a skin rash and tenderness on the dorsum of his right foot and at 
the fifth toe.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 7)  Emergency room personnel diagnosed claimant with 
cellulitis on February 10, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 8)   
The emergency room personnel prescribed Augmentin for the cellulitis and 
referred claimant to a podiatrist, Matthew McKnight, DPM.  Unfortunately, it took some 
time to get an appointment with Dr. McKnight.  Dr. McKnight first evaluated claimant’s 
right foot on March 5, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 1) 
Claimant’s supervisor, Mike Wise, made certain concessions at trial.  While he 
denied that claimant ever mentioned frostbite to him or that he completed an injury report 
for claimant, Mr. Wise acknowledged that claimant complained about having cold feet 
while working outside and that he told claimant to take breaks inside if he got cold.  (Tr., 
pp. 80-81, 90)  Mr. Wise also testified, “He just always said his feet were cold, which 
obviously would be understandable, because it is really cold outside.”  (Tr., p. 92)  

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 5 
 
 
Mr. Wise also offered claimant foot warmers and told him, “just wiggle those toes, Jim.   
Feet are getting cold, that’s what you do.”  (Tr., p. 93) 
The employer denies timely notice of the alleged injury.  However, Mr. Wise’s 
testimony makes it clear that the employer knew it was cold outside, knew that a worker’s 
feet could get cold working outside, that the employer offered tips to Mr. Buchanan about 
keeping his feet warm, and that the employer knew claimant complained of cold feet when 
working outside.  The employer also knew that the floor mat in claimant’s lift was missing 
during the winter of 2018-2019. 
Adam Molander, the assistant plant manager for second shift, also acknowledged 
he knew about claimant’s foot complaints.  He noted claimant had a profound limp and 
discussed his foot issues with Mr. Buchanan once a week.  Mr. Molander indicated that 
he encouraged claimant to stay warm.   
Ultimately, I find the testimony of Michael Buchanan to be convincing on issues 
related to notice.  The employer, through its supervisory personnel, acknowledged 
knowing it was cold outside, that workers could get cold feet operating lifts outside, that 
Mr. Buchanan complained of cold feet, that they offered him breaks to warm up, that the 
supervisory staff offered claimant tips to keep his feet warm, and that the lift claimant used 
was missing a rubber floor mat.  Yet, in spite of its knowledge and claimant’s complaints, 
somehow the employer proclaims it had no idea that Mr. Buchanan may have been 
exposed to cold on his feet or sustained frostbite at work.  In this sense, the testimony 
and position taken by the employer is not credible or convincing.   
Michael Buchanan’s version of events seems more likely and credible.  Therefore, 
I find that the employer knew claimant was exposed to cold and that he had foot 
complaints after working in the cold.  I also find that James Buchanan inquired about the 
symptoms of frostbite and specifically talked with the employer and gave notice of his 
injury during the early morning hours of February 6, 2019.  I find that the employer had 
actual and reported notice on February 6, 2019. 
Three medical experts have offered opinions about claimant’s condition and its 
causal connection to his work at Midwest Manufacturing.  The first to offer an opinion is 
claimant’s treating podiatrist, Matthew C. McKnight, DPM.  Dr. McKnight’s initial medical 
records are not entirely clear that he believes the frostbite was work-related.  However, 
Dr. McKnight provided written clarification in a subsequent office note.  On April 30, 2019, 
Dr. McKnight noted: 
They stated that the insurance company is considering this is a diabetic 
complication initially with the 5th digit.  I believe my first words before talking 
to James about his foot at the first office visit was how did you frostbite your 
5th toe.  This has been a clear-cut from the beginning that this was a frostbite 
injury to the right forefoot the patient states he sustained at work due to 
alterations in his skid loader that allowed cold air to blow in on the foot. 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 6 
 
 
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 10) 
 
Unfortunately, James Buchanan died of an unrelated medical condition in 
September 2019.  Therefore, no other physician was able to evaluate claimant’s foot.  
Defendants instead obtained a records review and medical opinion from Charles D. 
Mooney, M.D.  Dr. Mooney authored a report dated April 26, 2020.  Dr. Mooney opines 
that there was no evidence of a thermal injury (frostbite) at claimant’s initial emergency 
room visit on February 10, 2019.   
Dr. Mooney notes that the treating medical professional at the emergency room 
diagnosed claimant with cellulitis in the right foot.  Dr. Mooney opined that, if claimant had 
frostbite as of February 10, 2019, his foot would have demonstrated blistering at the 
emergency room visit.  Instead, Dr. Mooney opines that claimant’s right foot injury and 
issues are the result of personal risk factors and cannot be proved to be related to frostbite 
occurring on February 5, 2019 at work.  (Defendants’ Ex. A) 
 
Claimant responded to Dr. Mooney’s report by seeking a record review and opinion 
from Sunil Bansal, M.D.  Dr. Bansal did not provide any significant analysis of the 
diagnosis of frostbite, whether the mechanism of injury alleged by claimant is consistent 
with the alleged injury, or other analysis to provide significant credible evidence to support 
either that claimant did sustain or did not sustain frostbite at work on February 5, 2019.  
While Dr. Bansal appears to assume, or accept claimant’s version of events in his 
causation opinion, I find Dr. Bansal’s opinion to be less thorough in the review of frostbite, 
its symptoms, and causal connection to claimant’s work duties.  I do not find Dr. Bansal’s 
report to be helpful or convincing on the issue of causation. 
Defendants produce payroll, or attendance, records to demonstrate that 
Mr. Buchanan worked only sporadically due to a pre-existing health condition that 
prevented him from working full-time.  Defendants contend that claimant’s initially alleged 
injury date was a date that he did not work.  Defendants urge a finding that claimant 
cannot prove the actual date of injury, if any, due to the confusion and modification of the 
injury date after James Buchanan’s death.  Michael Buchanan urges that he identified 
February 5, 2019 as the proper injury date after reviewing claimant’s attendance records 
and medical records during the discovery process. 
 
Ultimately, I acknowledge the defendants’ arguments.  It is somewhat troubling 
that claimant could not identify the specific date that his frostbite occurred.  On the other 
hand, it is apparent from the medical records that the frostbite likely was not present on 
January 19, 2019 and likely was present on February 10, 2019.  
I find the opinions of Dr. McKnight to be convincing and find that claimant sustained 
frostbite.  According to Michael Buchanan, claimant did not perform outside chores at 
home and was not exposed to significant cold other than at work.  At work, James 
Buchanan worked outside.  Even his supervisor acknowledged that an operator’s feet 
could get cold operating a lift outside.   

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 7 
 
 
Dr. Mooney’s opinion seems to ignore that claimant worked outside in the winter, 
his complaints of cold feet, and instead blames the injury on his underlying personal 
issues.  While I believe claimant’s underlying health issues, such as diabetes, may have 
had a significant contributing effect on his development of frostbite, the frostbite did not 
occur unless and until claimant worked outdoors in the cold.   
Claimant was not going to develop frostbite due to diabetes or other health 
conditions while sitting inside a warm office.  He developed frostbite on his right foot 
because he worked outside at Midwest Manufacturing.  The most likely explanation for 
James Buchanan’s frostbite injury and resulting medical treatment is his work at Midwest 
Manufacturing.  Therefore, I find that claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence 
that he sustained a frostbite injury as a result of his work activities on February 5, 2019. 
Dr. McKnight describes the surgery he performed as an amputation of the right 
fifth digit at the metatarsophalangeal (MPJ) joint.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 16)  There does not 
appear to be any permanent functional impairment to any other part of Mr. Buchanan’s 
right foot.  There is no medical evidence in this record to decipher specifically where the 
amputation occurred, whether solely on the toe side of the joint or the foot side of the 
joint.  Therefore, I find that claimant has proven only injury to the right fifth toe.  
This record is also limited in the permanent functional impairment ratings to be 
assigned for this injury.  Dr. Bansal opines that Mr. Buchanan sustained a seven percent 
impairment of the right foot as a result of this work injury. Dr. Mooney disputes causation, 
but also assigns the equivalent of seven percent of the right foot, or five percent of the 
right lower extremity, for permanent functional impairment according to the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
While I acknowledge that the physician’s impairment ratings are similar, I also note 
that neither physician offers an opinion about functional impairment loss of the fifth toe.  
Having found that claimant did not prove a permanent injury extending beyond the right 
fifth toe, I turn to the functional loss of the right fifth toe.  Considering that claimant’s right 
fifth toe was amputated, I find that he sustained 100 percent functional loss of the right 
fifth toe as a result of his frostbite injury of February 5, 2019.  Claimant has not proven 
injury beyond the right fifth toe. 
 
Claimant seeks an award of healing period benefits following his work injury.  
Specifically, claimant seeks an award of healing period benefits between March 22, 2019 
and May 14, 2019.  Defendants offered reasonable stipulations that claimant was off work 
and entitled to the claimed healing period if he proved his injury arose out of and in the 
course of his employment.  I accepted those stipulations and find, based on defendants’ 
stipulations, that claimant’s claimed medical expenses at Claimant’s Exhibit 5 are causally 
related to the February 5, 2019 work injury, that said charges were fair and reasonable, 
and that the treatment offered was reasonable and necessary to treat the February 5, 
2019 injury.  (Hearing Report) 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 8 
 
 
 
With respect to claimant’s claim for an independent medical evaluation, I find that 
Dr. Bansal did not evaluate claimant.  Similarly, I find that Dr. Bansal’s report was issued 
on April 22, 2020.  Dr. Mooney’s impairment rating was issued after that date and 
defendants did not have an impairment rating from a physician of their choosing prior to 
April 22, 2020. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 9 
 
 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. McKnight most credible and convincing.  
Accordingly, I found that claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that 
James Buchanan sustained frostbite to his fifth toe on his right foot as a result of 
operating a lift outside during his employment on February 5, 2019.  I conclude claimant 
has established that he sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of his 
employment with Midwest Manufacturing on February 5, 2019.   
Having reached this conclusion, I must also consider the employer’s notice 
defense.  The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act imposes time limits on injured 
employees both as to when they must notify their employers of injuries and as to when 
injury claims must be filed. 
In this case, I found that James Buchanan reported his foot problems to his 
superiors, Adam Molander and Mike Wise, during the very early morning hours of 
February 6, 2019 at the end of his shift.  I also found that the employer knew it was cold 
outside, that Mr. Buchanan complained about his feet being cold, that the employer told 
claimant to take breaks to warm up, his supervisor offered him tips to avoid frostbite 
such as wiggling his toes, and offered him toe warmers.  The employer, therefore, had 
knowledge that claimant worked in cold conditions, that he complained his feet were 
cold, that the floor mat in the lift claimant operated was missing, and that claimant 
complained of potential frostbite at the end of his shift on February 6, 2020.  Therefore, I 
conclude that claimant reported the alleged injury and that the employer had actual 
knowledge of the injury on February 6, 2019.  For this reason, I conclude that the 
employer failed to affirmatively prove its notice defense.  Claimant is entitled to benefits 
in some amount.  
Mr. Buchanan’s first claim for benefits is for temporary total, or healing period, 
benefits.  Specifically, claimant seeks award of healing period benefits from March 22, 
2019 through May 14, 2019.  Defendants stipulate that claimant was off work during this 
period of time and entitled to benefits if he proves his injury arose out of and in the 
course of his employment.  (Hearing Report)  Having already concluded that claimant 
did prove an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment, I accepted the 
parties’ stipulations and similarly conclude that claimant is entitled to award of healing 
period benefits from March 22, 2019 through May 14, 2019.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(1). 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 10 
 
 
Claimant also seeks an award of permanent disability benefits.  Claimant asserts 
that he sustained a scheduled member disability to the right foot as a result of the 
February 5, 2019 injury.  Claimant contends he should be compensated with permanent 
disability benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(o) for the loss of a foot.  
Defendants contend that claimant’s injury is limited to the right fifth toe and should be 
compensated as an injury to a toe other than the great toe pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(i). 
Having found that claimant did not prove his injury extended beyond the fifth digit 
of the right foot, I conclude claimant’s injury should be compensated as an injury to a 
toe other than the great toe.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(i), the loss of one 
toe other than the great toe is compensated based upon a fifteen-week schedule. 
Considering that claimant sustained an amputation of the right fifth toe, I found that 
claimant sustained a 100 percent functional impairment of the right fifth toe.  
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant is entitled to an award of 15 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits as a result of the February 5, 2019 work injury.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(i). 
Claimant also asserts a claim for past medical expenses.  The employer shall 
furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all 
conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The employer shall also 
allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services.  
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer 
has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., 
Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening 
October 16, 1975). 
Defendants reasonably stipulated that the medical providers would testify that 
their charges were fair and reasonable and that the medical care they rendered to 
claimant was reasonable and necessary.  While disputing causal connection of the 
injury, defendants also reasonably and appropriately stipulated that the medical charges 
were related to the disputed injury.  (Hearing Report)  Having concluded that claimant 
established a compensable work injury on February 5, 2019 and having accepted the 
parties’ stipulations, I conclude that claimant is entitled to an award of his claimed past 
medical expenses. 
In addition to past medical expenses for treatment, claimant also seeks award of 
his independent medical evaluation fees.  (Hearing Report)  Section 85.39 permits an 
employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.  
The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the 
subsequent examination. 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 11 
 
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
In this instance, Dr. Bansal did not perform an evaluation on claimant because 
claimant was deceased.  Presumably, claimant is seeking the charges for Dr. Bansal’s 
record review and report.  However, the language of Iowa Code section 85.39 is specific 
and only requires reimbursement for an “evaluation.”   
Additionally, Dr. Bansal’s report was issued before defendants obtained or 
possessed a permanent impairment rating from a physician of their choosing.  A 
prerequisite of reimbursement pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 is that defendants 
obtain an impairment rating prior to claimant’s subsequent evaluation and permanent 
impairment rating.  Therefore, for either of these reasons, I conclude that claimant 
cannot prove entitlement to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s charges pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Claimant has prevailed and specifically asks for assessment of his costs.  
Claimant’s costs are contained at Claimant’s Exhibit 9 and include claimant’s filing fee 
($100.00), Dr. Bansal’s review and report fee ($784.00), and charges for a conference 
with Dr. McKnight ($125.00). 
It is reasonable to assess claimant’s filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  
However, I did not rely upon Dr. Bansal’s opinions.  I do not find it reasonable to assess 
his fees for review or his report.  Similarly, there is no basis in Agency Rule 4.33 to 
assess the cost of a medical conference with Dr. McKnight.  Accordingly, the only costs 
I assess are claimant’s filing fee ($100.00). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits for the period from 
March 22, 2019 through May 14, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay claimant fifteen (15) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on May 15, 2019. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated weekly rate of four hundred 
seventy-two and 02/100 dollars ($472.02) per week. 

BUCHANAN V. MENARD, INC./MIDWEST MANUFACTURING 
Page 12 
 
 
Interest shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File 
No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for all out-of-pocket medical expenses 
detailed in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, and shall reimburse any third-party payor, directly pay 
any medical charges, and/or hold claimant harmless for all medical expenses contained 
in Claimant’s Exhibit 5. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for costs totaling one hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($100.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this       29th     day of June, 2020. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
Charles A. Blades (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
