Case Number: 5066991.01
Case Title:  REED, ERICA V. FRITO LAY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Reed Erica-5066991.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ERICA REED, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       File No. 5066991.01 
PEPSICO d/b/a FRITO LAY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS CO OF N AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1402.40, 
 
 
  : 
 
    1803, 2206, 2701, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Claimant Erica Reed filed a petition in arbitration on September 3, 2019, alleging 
she sustained an injury to her left leg and body as a whole on September 7, 2018, while 
working for the defendant, Pepsico, d/b/a Frito Lay (“Frito Lay”).  Frito Lay and its 
insurer, the defendant, Indemnity Insurance Company of North America (“Indemnity 
Insurance”), filed an answer on September 12, 2019, admitting Reed sustained an injury 
to her left lower extremity, but denying she had sustained an injury to her body as a 
whole. 
 
 
An arbitration hearing was held via CourtCall video conference on November 6, 
2020.  Attorney Channing Dutton represented Reed.  Reed appeared and testified.  
Attorney Kent Smith represented Frito Lay.  Joint Exhibit (“JE”) 1 and Exhibits 1 through 
13, and A through H were admitted into the record.  The parties submitted a hearing 
report, listing stipulations and issues to be decided.  Frito Lay waived all affirmative 
defenses.  
The record was held open until December 11, 2020, for the receipt of post-
hearing briefs and for the taking of additional depositions.  No additional depositions 
were received.  The briefs were received, and the record was closed.   
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Frito Lay and Reed 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Feb-11  14:26:31     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 2 
 
 
2. 
Reed sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment with Frito Lay on September 7, 2018. 
 
3. 
The alleged injury was a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
4. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute. 
 
5. 
The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
6. 
The disability is a scheduled member disability to the leg. 
 
7. 
The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is July 
26, 2019. 
 
8. 
At the time of the alleged injury Reed’s gross earnings were $677.64 per 
week, she was single and entitled to one exemption, and the parties believe her weekly 
rate is $429.62. 
 
9. 
Prior to the hearing Reed was paid 22 weeks of compensation at the rate 
of $429.62 per week. 
 
10. 
Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
What is the extent of disability? 
 
2. 
Is Reed entitled to alternate medical care for her left knee under Iowa 
Code section 85.27? 
 
3. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Reed lives in Urbandale, Iowa, with her boyfriend of fifteen years, Fred Jones.  
(Transcript, pages 14, 41; Exhibit 10)  At the time of the hearing she was thirty-eight.  
(Tr., p. 14)   
From March 2013 through April 2018, Reed worked as a front desk clerk and 
assistant general manager at the Marriott Fairfield Inns in Urbandale and Ankeny.  (Exs. 
D, p. 23; 7, p. 33; 11)  The job was physical in nature and required Reed to be on her 
feet for an eight-hour shift.  (Exs. D, p. 23; 11)  Reed assisted with all aspects of  
running the hotels, including cleaning the rooms, cooking and serving breakfast, and 
performing landscaping duties and property maintenance, including cutting the grass 
and shoveling the snow.  (Ex. 11; Tr., pp. 17-20)  According to her manager, Thressy 
Jones, the job required Reed to engage in frequent bending, squatting, and standing.  
(Ex. 11)  Marriott does not allow employees to use chairs at the front desk and Reed 
had to stand for hours during her shift.  (Ex. 11; Tr., p. 19)  Thressy Jones never heard 
Reed complain of any problems with her knee and never observed Reed had any 
problems with her knee during the five years she worked with Reed.  (Ex. 11)  Reed 
denied sustaining any physical injuries while working for the Marriott.  (Tr., p. 20)   

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 3 
 
In June 2018, Frito Lay hired Reed as a full-time customer service merchandiser 
specialist, where she was responsible for stocking Frito Lay products in stores, lifting 
boxes weighing up to forty pounds, and using a three-step ladder to reach the top 
shelves in the chip aisles in stores.  (Exs. D, p. 23; 2, 21; 7, p. 33; Tr., pp. 24-27)  Reed 
worked in two to four stores per day, going up and down and using her ladder 
approximately three-quarters of the time she spent at each store.  (Exs. D, p. 23; 7, p. 
33)  Reed stocked product up high and down to her shin level, which required her to 
bend, stoop, and kneel.  (Tr., pp. 26, 29)  The position job description provides the 
position requires the ability to climb, push, pull, bend, stoop, and kneel for extended 
periods of time, frequent standing, walking, and stooping, and occasional kneeling on 
one knee, crouching or squatting, and crawling on the knees.  (Ex. 2, pp. 21, 24-26)   
 
Reed testified while she was working on September 7, 2018, 
I was using the two step ladder method.  I basically got up on the 
stepladder and was starting to fill Doritos.  I had Doritos in one hand, and 
my other hand on top of the actual ladder.  I put in the Doritos.  Coming 
down off the ladder, I believe there was [sic] groceries that kind of flew by 
me and kind of startled me.  But when I came down, I twisted the wrong 
way and went down.  
(Tr., pp. 30-31)  Reed relayed her knee hurt right away and before the incident her left 
knee was working fine.  (Tr., p. 31)  During her deposition, Reed testified after the 
incident she felt sharp pain, “a pop on the inner left side of [her] knee, and a sharp pain 
underneath.  Like right underneath [her] kneecap,” as soon as she twisted.  (Ex. A, p. 
10) 
Reed informed her supervisor of her work injury and that she was going to see 
her family medical physician, G. Eric Hockett, M.D.  (JE 1, p. 22; Tr., p. 31)  Reed was 
unable to finish her shift and went to Dr. Hockett’s office.  (Tr., p. 32)  Dr. Hockett 
documented Reed had chronic bilateral knee pain and that she was complaining of 
acute worsening of left knee pain from the day before.  (JE 1, p. 22)  Dr. Hockett noted 
Reed had been going up and down ladders several times at work with “[n]o specific 
injury,” and that she had been told she had advanced arthritis in the past.  (JE 1, p. 22)  
Reed testified she told Dr. Hockett the injury happened that day.  There was no 
evidence presented at hearing supporting an earlier date of injury or that Reed was not 
credible in reporting when she sustained the work injury.  As analyzed below in the 
conclusions of law, I find Reed to be a credible witness.  I find Dr. Hockett’s record 
contains an error.   
Reed called her manager after her appointment with Dr. Hockett and her 
manager told Reed she needed to be examined by DoctorsNow.  (Ex. D, p. 24; Tr., pp. 
31-32)  That afternoon Reed attended an appointment with Ashley Ebert, ARNP with 
DoctorsNow, complaining of constant left knee pain that developed after she twisted her 
left knee when coming down from a ladder while stocking chips at work.  (JE 1, p. 9)  
Reed reported she noticed pain and abnormal mild swelling, and relayed she had 
experienced a similar problem in the past.  (JE 1, p. 9)  Ebert noted on physical exam 
Reed had an abnormal gait, she was favoring her right lower extremity, and she had 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 4 
 
mild swelling along the medial and lateral left knee joint lines.  (JE 1, pp. 9-10)  Ebert 
released Reed to return to work with restrictions of avoiding kneeling, squatting, 
twisting, and climbing ladders entirely, and to avoid prolonged standing.  (JE 1, p. 10)  
Ebert ordered Reed to take a fifteen minute sit-down break every two to three hours, to 
use proper lifting techniques, and to ice and elevate her leg.  (JE 1, p. 10) 
Reed had a history of bilateral knee pain, obesity, and diabetes before the work 
injury.  She also smokes tobacco. 
 
During an appointment with Gary Hudson, PA-C, at Broadlawns on October 2, 
2013, Hudson documented Reed had a history of bilateral knee pain dating back to high 
school when she was active in basketball and track.  (JE 1, p. 1)   
 
On February 26, 2014, Reed attended an appointment with Ian Lin, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon, complaining of right knee pain with a catching sensation.  (JE 1, p. 
3)  Dr. Lin documented Reed reported she injured her right knee in 1997 or 1998 while 
playing basketball or running track and that she injured her left knee in Oklahoma in 
2005 when she fell and smacked her knee on the ground while running to close a gate.  
(JE 1, p. 3)  Reed testified the incident in Oklahoma happened in 1995, not in 2005, and 
that when she fell she landed on her left side.  (Tr., p. 53)  Dr. Lin documented Reed’s 
knee swelled after the injury, and while the swelling went down, Reed reported she 
continued to have some pain in her left knee following the incident, but relayed “[i]t just 
is not nearly as bad as the right knee.”  (JE 1, p. 3)   
On exam, Dr. Lin noted Reed had more medial joint space crepitus in her left 
knee than in her right knee, but her right knee was much more tender in the medial joint 
space compared to the left knee.  (JE 1, p. 4)  Dr. Lin documented x-rays of her knees 
showed tricompartmental osteoarthritis in her left knee with more narrowing in the knee 
joint space and that the right knee “actually looks quite normal on standing AP knees, 
lateral and merchant of the right knee,” assessed Reed with right knee pain, most likely 
medial meniscus tear by history with mechanical symptoms and tenderness in the 
medial joint space and left knee osteoarthritis, and recommended magnetic resonance 
imaging.  (JE 1, pp. 4-5)   
 
On April 4, 2017, Reed attended an appointment with Dan Craig, PA-C, in Dr. 
Lin’s office, complaining of left greater than right knee pain.  (JE 1, p. 6)  Craig 
documented Reed relayed the pain had been on and off over the past few years with 
mainly anterolateral with some medial symptoms and some swelling in the left more 
than the right, with a decrease in range of motion and some crunching and popping.  
(JE 1, p. 6)  Craig listed an impression of left knee mild medial compartment 
osteoarthritis and right knee pain, noting he told Reed she did not have any specific 
degenerative change in her right knee, but she had a significant degenerative change in 
her left knee.  (JE 1, p. 7)  Craig recommended Reed continue taking anti-
inflammatories and continue with weight loss.  (JE 1, p. 7) 
A week after her work injury, on September 14, 2018, Reed returned to 
DoctorsNow and was examined by Nicholas Ford, PA-C.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Reed reported 
she had no improvement in her left knee swelling and pain, noting she was still standing 
and walking a lot, but someone was working with her performing the kneeling and 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 5 
 
ladder climbing functions of her job.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Reed relayed she had been taking 
800 milligrams of ibuprofen, which was not helping with the pain, and that her knee was 
giving out and locking up on her.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Ford continued Reed’s work restrictions 
and added lifting restrictions of no lifting from waist to shoulder, below waist, or pulling 
or pushing greater than fifteen pounds, and to engage in sit-down work only, and 
recommended magnetic resonance imaging.  (JE 1, pp. 13-15)  DoctorsNow ordered 
physical therapy for Reed.  (JE 1, pp. 34-36).   
On November 10, 2018, Reed attended a follow-up appointment with Ebert, 
reporting another work injury.  (JE 1, pp.1, 6)  Reed relayed she was coming down off a 
ladder at work that day when her left knee gave out, she hit the floor, and she was 
unable to bear full body weight and experiencing severe pain with swelling.  (JE 1, p. 
16)  Ebert diagnosed Reed with a sprain of the medial collateral ligament of the left 
knee, sequela, continued Reed’s restrictions, and also ordered Reed to avoid jumping 
and running entirely, and to continue elevating and icing her knee.  (JE 1, pp. 17-18)   
Reed underwent left knee magnetic resonance imaging on November 12, 2018.  
(JE 1, p. 32)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of horizontal tear through 
the medial meniscus with an adjacent parameniscal cyst, chronic rupture of the anterior 
cruciate ligament, and medial and patellofemoral compartment osteoarthritis 
accelerated for the patient’s age.  (JE 1, pp. 32-33)  Upon receiving the imaging, 
DoctorsNow referred Reed to orthopedic surgery.  (JE 1, p. 19) 
 
On November 16, 2018, Reed returned to DoctorsNow and was examined by 
Elisabeth Jeffords, PA-C.  (JE 1, p. 20)  Reed reported she was performing office work, 
her swelling was down, she was using a cane while ambulating at home and a crutch at 
work, and she using a TENS unit.  (JE 1, p. 20)  Jeffords diagnosed Reed with a 
meniscus tear and chronic instability of her left knee and continued her restrictions.  (JE 
1, p. 21) 
 
On December 18, 2018, Reed attended an appointment with Scott Neff, D.O., an 
orthopedic surgeon, for an independent medical examination.  (JE 1, p. 37)  Dr. Neff 
noted he had reviewed Reed’s medical records, but he was not provided with any 
imaging of her left knee.  (JE 1, p. 37)  Dr. Neff observed Reed walked with a significant 
antalgic gait and she used a cane to protect her left knee.  (JE 1, p. 39)  Dr. Neff 
documented Reed reported she had experienced aching and soreness in her knee in 
the past dating back to 2012 when she played basketball, and that she could not recall 
a specific injury, but she had never had pain like she was currently experiencing or 
activity limitations.  (JE 1, pp. 38-39)  Reed told Dr. Neff that in 2017 Des Moines 
Orthopedic Surgeons told her she had arthritis.  (JE 1, p. 37)  Dr. Neff opined Reed’s 
work injury aggravated, accelerated or lighted-up a preexisting condition in her left knee 
and recommended a left knee arthroscopy.  (JE 1, pp. 41-42)   
 
The last day Reed worked for Frito Lay was January 7, 2019.  (Tr., p. 44)  
 
During an appointment on February 5, 2019, Dr. Neff assessed Reed with 
chronic left knee pain, restricted her from working, and ordered magnetic resonance 
imaging.  (JE 1, pp. 43-45)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of: 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 6 
 
1. 
Horizontal tear of the medial meniscus with adjacent parameniscal 
cyst. 
2. 
Chronic anterior cruciate ligament rupture. 
3. 
Tricompartmental osteoarthritic changes/chondromalacia, 
advanced for the patient’s age.  This is most pronounced in the medial 
compartment where there is moderate chondral thinning/loss.   
(JE 1, p. 33) 
Dr. Neff reviewed the imaging and noted the imaging showed a horizontal tear of 
the medial meniscus with parameniscal cyst and a chronic anterior cruciate ligament 
rupture.  (JE 1, p. 46)  In a letter to the third-party administrator, Dr. Neff documented: 
[a]s anticipated, the MR scan shows a horizontal tear of the medial 
meniscus with parameniscal cyst.  She has a chronic anterior cruciate 
ligament rupture.  It is hard to know when the chronic ACL rupture 
occurred.  She also has tricompartmental osteoarthritic changes and 
chondromalacia, which are fairly advanced for her age of only 37. 
 
I think we have a complex mixture of circumstance and she is going 
to be administratively difficult.  She injured her knee in 9/2018.  She has 
had trouble with the knee before that, but was using Motrin or Advil and 
said she had aching, but no swelling and no pain.  Now she is having pain, 
I do not think the pain she is experiencing is coming from the chronic ACL 
rupture and it is certainly possible that the ACL rupture predated her 
injury.  Her pain is mostly in the medial hemijoint and this is likely 
associated with the meniscal tear.  Superimposed on that are 
osteoarthritic changes, which we commonly see in a young patient who is 
as morbidly obese as she is. 
 
I think the next course of action is diagnostic and surgical 
arthroscopy to look carefully at her medial meniscus and see if we can 
saucerize or trim out the torn part.  We will look indeed at the ACL.  
Sometimes a chronic ACL can be rounded and misshapen and appear 
really old and sometimes a “chronic” ACL tear can look more fresh.  Her 
injury is not consistent with an ACL tear.  She simply twisted her knee as 
she was coming down the ladder and this in my opinion is not typical 
causative circumstance for ACL rupture. 
(JE 1, p. 46)   
 
On April 18, 2019, Dr. Neff performed the left knee arthroscopy with partial 
medial and partial lateral meniscectomy and debridement of ACL eminence fracture.  
(JE 1, pp. 50-51)   
Reed testified after the surgery her left knee felt worse.  (Tr., p. 35)  Before the 
surgery, she used a cane at times, but she was able to walk some without it.  (Tr., p. 35)  

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 7 
 
After the surgery, she could not move much without using crutches, a walker, or a 
walking stick inside or outside her home.  (Tr., p. 35)   
During an appointment on May 1, 2019, Dr. Neff documented, 
[t]his is a complex unfortunate situation.  This patient is morbidly obese.  
She is in a wheelchair today.  She says she is not able to walk or stand. 
 
Her partner with her says she needs something more for pain. 
 
At surgery, we looked in her left knee and found grade I to grade II 
patellofemoral chondromalacia with chronic fracture of the cartilage in the 
trochlear notch.  There is no way to tell whether this was anyway acute 
with her injury history of 9/2018. 
 
Lateral meniscus showed an anterior horn tear extending about 
one-third.  There was a bare spot of complete loss of articular cartilage on 
the tibial surface of the lateral tibial plateau.  This is a result of arthritis and 
not injury.  We saucerized the medial meniscus. 
 
This is a complex circumstance in someone who is only 37 years of 
age.  She fell off a ladder at work.  She likely has pre-existent significant 
arthritic disease and is morbidly obese.  In retrospect, it would have been 
easier to give an accurate diagnosis as to what was related to injury and 
what was arthritis had arthroscopy been done sooner after her injury. 
(JE 1, p. 49)  Dr. Neff recommended Reed be transferred to a tertiary center such as 
the University of Iowa for consideration of a chondroplasty, a mosaicplasty, or an OATS 
type procedure, but also noted most orthopedic surgeons would not perform that type of 
procedure on a person who is morbidly obese.  (JE 1, p. 49)  Dr. Neff prescribed pain 
medication, ordered physical therapy and a walker or crutches, and restricted Reed 
from working.  (JE 1, p. 49) 
 
Dr. Neff referred Reed to the Broadlawns Pain Management Center for treatment 
with Morgan Brown, ARNP.  (JE 1, pp. 52-55)  Brown recommended topical lidocaine, 
Tylenol, and ibuprofen for pain management, with icing and elevation.  (JE 1, p. 54) 
 
On July 25, 2019, Reed attended an appointment with Matthew Bollier, M.D., at 
the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (“UIHC”).  (Ex. B, p. 2; Tr., p. 36)  Thressy 
Jones, her former manager and friend, drove Reed to the UIHC and attended the 
appointment with Reed.  (Ex. 11; Tr., pp. 37-38)  Dr. Bollier’s nurse came into the room 
and touched Reed’s swollen knee to try to feel the swelling.  (Tr., p. 36)  Dr. Bollier 
came in.  Reed testified, and Thressy Jones reported, Dr. Bollier did not touch Reed or 
examine her and he told Reed he did not know why she was there because she had 
preexisting disease, which was not related to a workers’ compensation injury.  (Tr., pp. 
36-37; Ex. 11)  Reed relayed Dr. Bollier did not discuss her work history and he met 
with her for approximately five minutes.  (Tr., p. 37)  Thressy Jones reported Dr. Bollier 
told Reed he had seen her condition before and there was nothing he could do for her 
because she just had arthritis.  (Ex. 11)   

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 8 
 
Dr. Bollier reviewed Reed’s medical records and documented she was a poor 
historian.  (Ex. B)  Dr. Bollier assessed Reed with chronic left knee pain, opined Reed’s 
work injury caused a temporary aggravation of her underlying arthritis, finding a fall at 
work “did not cause the ACL rupture which is chronic in nature and did not cause 
osteoarthritis.”  (Ex. B, p. 5)  Dr. Bollier recommended an injection, which Reed 
declined.  (Ex. B, p. 5)  Dr. Bollier documented Reed would likely need a knee 
arthroplasty that would improve her pain, but opined Reed’s need for an arthroplasty 
was not related to the work injury, and he placed Reed at maximum medical 
improvement.  (Ex. B, p. 5)  Using the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001) (“AMA Guides”), Dr. Bollier assigned Reed a 
permanent partial impairment rating of two percent as a result of Reed’s partial medial 
meniscectomy under Table 17-33.  (Ex. B, p. 5)  Based on Dr. Bollier’s opinion, Frito 
Lay and Indemnity Insurance terminated Reed’s care and temporary benefits.  (Ex. 3, p. 
27)  
 
On August 26, 2019, Reed attended an appointment with her primary care 
provider, Lindsay Nees, PA-C, and requested a referral to an orthopedic surgeon for 
chronic left knee pain.  (JE 1, p. 31)   
 
On January 27, 2020, Reed attended an appointment with Richard Goding, M.D., 
an orthopedic surgeon with Capital Orthopaedics, complaining of knee pain that can be 
moderate to severe and sharp with weightbearing, associated with clicking, catching, 
grating, grinding, and swelling.  (JE 1, p. 57)  Reed relayed at times it was very difficult 
for her to bend her knee.  (JE 1, p. 57)  Dr. Goding assessed Reed with left knee 
osteoarthritis, noted she was obese and diabetic, recommended a Visco 
supplementation injection, and noted Reed may be a candidate for knee replacement in 
the future, but she needed to work on losing weight and controlling her diabetes.  (JE 1, 
p. 57)  Dr. Goding performed an injection on February 5, 2020.  (JE 1, p. 59)  Reed 
reported the injection did not help her.  Reed did not seek additional treatment from Dr. 
Goding after the Covid-19 Pandemic developed.  As of the hearing, Dr. Goding had 
moved his practice to a new location more than an hour from Reed’s home. 
 
On September 1, 2020, Sunil Bansal, M.D., an occupational medicine physician, 
conducted an independent medical examination for Reed.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Bansal reviewed 
Reed’s medical records and performed his examination through Zoom and telephone 
given the Covid-19 Pandemic.  (Ex. 1)  During her meeting with Dr. Bansal Reed 
reported she continues to have constant pain and swelling in her left knee and her 
patella pops out.  (Ex. 1, p. 14)  Reed relayed she has difficulty bending her knee, she 
cannot kneel or squat, she has difficulty climbing stairs, and needs assistance with 
showering and getting into bed.  (Ex. 1, p. 14)   
Dr. Bansal diagnosed Reed with a left knee medial meniscus tear, lateral 
meniscus tear, and chronic anterior cruciate ligament tear, noting she was status-post a 
left knee examination under anesthesia, arthroscopy with partial medial and lateral 
meniscectomies and debridement of an anterior cruciate ligament eminence fracture.  
(Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal documented Reed injured her left knee when she was coming 
down a ladder and slipped, and she came down on her knee.  (Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal 
opined the mechanism of slipping off the ladder caused left knee medial and lateral 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 9 
 
meniscal tears, as well as an anterior cruciate ligament tear, and “set in motion a series 
of biochemical events [that] led to aggravation and acceleration of her left knee 
arthritis.”  (Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal opined: 
[i]n fact, x-rays taken of her left knee before and after the September 7, 
2018 injury indicate that an extreme acceleration of the arthritic changes 
to her knee took place after the injury consistent with the above analysis, 
and cannot be explained by any other personal factor, including age or 
weight in that timeframe. 
Date of service April 4, 2017, Daniel Craig, PA-C 
X-RAYS:  The bilateral knees show no acute fractures or bony 
abnormalities.  The left knee has a slightly narrowed medial joint space 
VERSUS: 
Date of service February 5, 2019.  X-rays of the left knee. 
IMPRESSION:  Moderate degenerative change, with the most narrowing 
in the medial tibiofemoral compartment 
This accelerated arthritic change to the left knee secondary to the 
September 7, 2018 injury has now necessitated a left knee replacement. 
(Ex. 1, p. 16) (emphasis in original)  Dr. Bansal recommended permanent restrictions of 
no kneeling or squatting, to avoid standing or walking for more than fifteen minutes at a 
time, and to use an assistive device for walking, as needed.  (Ex. 1, p. 16) 
 
Using Table 17-33 of the AMA Guides, Dr. Bansal assigned Reed a ten percent 
lower extremity impairment for the medial and lateral meniscectomies and a “projected” 
seven percent lower extremity impairment for the anterior cruciate ligament laxity 
secondary to her tear for a combined sixteen percent lower extremity impairment.  (Ex. 
1, p. 17)   
 
Benjamin Beecher, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon, conducted an independent 
medical examination of Reed for Frito Lay and Indemnity Insurance on September 24, 
2020.  (Ex. C)  Dr. Beecher noted Reed was a no-show to the clinic twice for an 
independent medical examination.  (Ex. C, p. 8)  Reed reported she did not want to 
attend the appointment in-person because of the Covid-19 Pandemic and that she 
offered to appear by video.  Dr. Beecher ultimately performed a records review only, 
and he did not speak with Reed before issuing his report. 
Dr. Beecher opined the work injury aggravated Reed’s underlying arthritis and 
that he could not determine if she suffered a meniscal tear at the time of the injury or if 
she had a degenerative meniscal tear.  (Ex. C, p. 10)  He further opined Reed’s work 
injury “did slightly aggravate her underlying arthritis” and without examining her, it was 
difficult to tell how significantly her arthritis affected her prior to her injury.  (Ex. C, p. 10)  
He also opined “her work injury with uncertainty of meniscal pathology of being acute or 
chronic potentially would lead to the need for knee arthroscopy.”  (Ex. C, p. 11)  Dr. 
Beecher found Reed reached maximum medical improvement when she recovered 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 10 
 
from surgery and did not assign any permanent restrictions as a result of the work 
injury.  (Ex. C, p. 11)  Using the AMA Guides, Dr. Beecher assigned Reed a ten percent 
lower extremity permanent impairment rating given she underwent a knee arthroscopy 
with partial medial and partial lateral meniscectomies and opined Reed did not need any 
further treatment for her work injury.  (Ex. C, p. 11)   
Reed testified her left knee has not gotten any better form the time she injured it.  
(Tr., p. 32)  Reed relayed she has not improved since Dr. Neff operated on her knee 
and that her condition has become worse.  (Tr., pp. 35-36)  Reed reported her knee 
locks up, swells, and is painful.  (Tr., p. 41)  Reed testified she cannot stand long and 
she has to use a crutch, cane, or walker when walking and standing.  (Tr., p. 42)  Reed 
needs assistance from her boyfriend, Fred Jones, when getting in and out of bed and in 
and out of the shower.  (Tr., p. 40, 41, 43)  Before her work injury, Reed was active in 
her church and enjoyed cooking, which are activities she does not engage in now due to 
her mobility problems and pain.  (Tr., p. 42)   
In a video statement, Fred Jones reported he has lived with Reed for fifteen 
years and that before her work injury she was very active and busy eighteen hours per 
day and she did not like sitting and “doing nothing.”  (Ex. 10)  He noted Reed has a 
difficult time getting in and out of the car and has a hard time walking to the car.  (Ex. 
10)  Fred Jones relayed Reed’s mobility problems and pain worsened after Dr. Neff 
performed surgery on her.  (Ex. 10) 
 
Thressy Jones has known Reed since they were children and she reconnected 
with Reed when she was her manager at the Marriott, starting in 2013.  (Ex. 11)  
Thressy Jones reported she and Reed enjoyed riding bikes together, going to the gym, 
and camping before her work injury.  (Ex. 11)  Thressy Jones relayed Reed did not have 
any difficulty performing her job duties for the Marriott due to her knee, weight, or body 
size.  (Ex. 11)  Thressy Jones reported the work injury at Frito Lay changed Reed and 
she has never recovered.  (Ex. 11)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Applicable Law 
This case involves the issues of nature and extent of disability, alternate medical 
care, and costs under Iowa Code sections 85.27, 85.34, and 86.40.  In 2017, the Iowa 
Legislature enacted changes to Iowa Code chapters 85, 86, and 535 effecting workers’ 
compensation cases.  2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 (amending Iowa Code sections 85.16, 
85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 85.70, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, 86.42, and 
535.3).  Under 2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 section 24, the changes to Iowa Code 
sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, and 86.42 
apply to injuries occurring on or after the effective date of the Act.  This case involves an 
injury occurring after July 1, 2017, therefore, the provisions of the new statute involving 
nature and extent of disability under Iowa Code section 85.34 apply to this case.   
The calculation of interest is governed by Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 5052008 
(Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re: 
Interest Rate Issue), which holds interest for all weekly benefits payable and not paid 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 11 
 
when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, is payable at the rate of ten percent; all 
interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, is 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  Again, given this case concerns an injury occurring after July 1, 2017, the 
new provision on interest applies to this case. 
II. 
Nature and Extent of Disability 
 
The parties agree Reed sustained an injury to her left knee.  The parties disagree 
on the nature and extent of the injury to her left knee.  Reed relies on the opinion of Dr. 
Bansal.  Frito Lay and Indemnity Insurance rely on the opinion of Dr. Bollier.  Multiple 
experts have given differing opinions in this case, including Drs. Bansal, Beecher, 
Bollier, and Neff.  The disagreement involves an issue of causation.   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert 
opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the 
claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the 
examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other 
factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., 
Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 
It is well-established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to 
finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment 
and the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the 
employment was a proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).  The 
Iowa Legislature did not modify this standard in 2017.   
 
On April 18, 2019, Dr. Neff performed a left knee arthroscopy with partial medial 
and partial lateral meniscectomy and debridement of ACL eminence fracture on Reed.  
(JE 1, pp. 50-51)  Drs. Neff, Bollier, and Beecher are orthopedic surgeons and have 
superior training to Dr. Bansal, an occupational medicine physician.  Frito Lay and 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 12 
 
Indemnity Insurance selected Dr. Neff to provide an opinion and treatment and selected 
Drs. Bollier and Beecher to conduct independent medical examinations.  Reed retained 
Dr. Bansal for an independent medical examination only.   
Dr. Neff was the first orthopedic surgeon to examine Reed, he treated her over 
time, and he performed surgery on Reed’s left knee.  Before surgery Dr. Neff opined he 
did not believe Reed’s pain was coming from a chronic ACL rupture, which may have 
predated the injury, noting her pain was mostly in the medial hemijoint and was likely 
associated with the meniscal tear.  (JE 1, p. 46)  Dr. Neff recognized the case was 
complex, noting when he performed surgery he “found grade I to grade II patellofemoral 
chondromalacia with chronic fracture of the cartilage in the trochlear notch.”  (JE 1, p. 
49)  Dr. Neff opined “[t]here is no way to tell whether this was anyway acute with her 
injury history of [September 2018].”  (JE 1, p. 49)  Dr. Neff further opined Reed’s lateral 
meniscus showed an anterior horn tear extending one-third with a complete loss of 
cartilage on the tibial surface of the lateral tibial plateau that was the result of arthritis 
and not injury.  (JE 1, p. 49)   
Dr. Bollier is also an orthopedic surgeon specializing in the knee and shoulder at 
the UIHC, a tertiary medical center.  Dr. Bollier reviewed Reed’s medical records and 
documented she was a poor historian.  (Ex. B)  Dr. Bollier assessed Reed with chronic 
left knee pain, opined Reed’s work injury caused a temporary aggravation of her 
underlying arthritis, finding her fall at work “did not cause the ACL rupture which is 
chronic in nature and did not cause osteoarthritis.”  (Ex. B, p. 5)  Dr. Bollier found the 
work injury did not cause the ACL rupture or osteoarthritis.  No physician has opined the 
work injury caused Reed’s osteoarthritis.  Dr. Bollier did not address whether the work 
injury could have accelerated or lighted up Reed’s osteoarthritis.  He did not explain his 
bare conclusion by citing to any medical journals supporting his contention.  Dr. Bollier 
also assigned a two percent permanent impairment rating under the AMA Guides.  (Ex. 
B, p. 5)  The parties agree the appropriate rating is at least ten percent.   
Reed testified, and Thressy Jones stated, Dr. Bollier did not examine Reed’s 
knee, touch her, or discuss her work history.  (Tr., pp. 36-37; Ex. 11)  This raises an 
issue of credibility.  During the hearing I assessed Reed’s credibility and the Zoom video 
interview of Thressy Jones by considering whether Reed’s testimony and Thressy 
Jones’s statement are reasonable and consistent with other evidence I believe, whether 
they have made inconsistent statements, their “appearance, conduct, memory and 
knowledge of the facts,” and their interest in the case.  State v. Frake, 450 N.W.2d 817, 
819 (Iowa 1990).  Reed has an obvious interest in the outcome of this case.  Thressy 
Jones is Reed’s friend.  During Reed’s testimony, I found she engaged in direct eye 
contact, her rate of speech was appropriate, and she did not engage in any furtive 
movements.  Contrary to the statement of Dr. Bollier, I did not find Reed to be a poor 
historian or witness.  Her memory was clear and consistent during hearing and during 
her deposition.  I also found Thressy Jones’s recorded statement persuasive.  She, 
likewise, engaged in direct eye contact, her rate of speech was appropriate and she did 
not engage in any furtive movements.  I find Dr. Bollier performed a records review of 
Reed’s case, but did not physically examine her or discuss her work injury or symptoms 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 13 
 
predating and following the work injury.  I do not find his opinion persuasive for these 
reasons and for the reasons listed above and my credibility determinations.   
 
Dr. Beecher, an orthopedic surgeon, conducted a records review for Frito Lay 
and Indemnity Insurance in September 2020.  (Ex. C)  Dr. Beecher’s opinion is 
equivocal.  He opined the work injury aggravated Reed’s underlying arthritis and that he 
could not determine if she suffered a meniscal tear at the time of the injury or if she had 
a degenerative meniscal tear.  (Ex. C, p. 10)  He further opined Reed’s work injury “did 
slightly aggravate her underlying arthritis,” and without examining her, it was difficult to 
tell how significantly her arthritis affected her prior to her injury.  (Ex. C, p. 10)  He also 
opined “with uncertainty of meniscal pathology of being acute or chronic potentially 
would lead to the need for knee arthroscopy,” yet he recommended no additional 
treatment or surgery related to the work injury.  (Ex. C, p. 11)  While Reed missed two 
appointments with Dr. Beecher, she offered to meet with him by video, given the Covid-
19 Pandemic.  . 
Dr. Bansal performed a records review and conducted his exam by video and 
telephone due to the Covid-19 Pandemic.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed Reed with a 
left knee medial meniscus tear, lateral meniscus tear, and chronic anterior cruciate 
ligament tear, noting she was status-post a left knee examination under anesthesia, 
arthroscopy with partial medial and lateral meniscectomies and debridement of an 
anterior cruciate ligament eminence fracture.  (Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal opined the 
mechanism of slipping off the ladder caused left knee medial and lateral meniscal tears, 
as well as an anterior cruciate ligament tear and “set in motion a series of biochemical 
events [that] led to aggravation and acceleration of her left knee arthritis.”  (Ex. 1, p. 15)  
To support his opinion, Dr. Bansal documented x-rays taken of her left knee before and 
after the work injury showed an “extreme acceleration of the arthritic changes” that 
could not be explained by any other personal factor.  (Ex. 1, p. 16)  Dr. Bansal noted an 
x-ray ordered by Craig from April 4, 2017 showed “[t]he left knee has a slightly narrowed 
medial joint space,” and an x-ray from February 5, 2019, showed “[m]oderate 
degenerative change, with the most narrowing in the medial tibiofemoral compartment.”  
(Ex. 1, p. 16) (emphasis in original)  Dr. Bansal also cited to the medical literature to 
support his conclusions.  No other physician discussed or attempted to refute Dr. 
Bansal’s findings based on the x-rays and other medical evidence.   
Dr. Bansal’s findings are also supported by Reed’s testimony, by the recorded 
statements of Thressy Jones, Reed’s former boss and friend, and Fred Jones, her 
boyfriend of fifteen years.  In her deposition, Reed noted that after the incident she felt 
sharp pain, “a pop on the inner left side of [her] knee, and a sharp pain underneath.  
Like right underneath [her] kneecap” as soon as she twisted.  (Ex. A, p. 10)   
Reed worked with Thressy Jones for five years until April 2018, or approximately 
six months before the work injury.  Reed testified about the physical nature of her job for 
the Marriott, which Thressy Jones confirmed.  Reed stood constantly and frequently 
engaged in bending and stooping.  Reed never complained about her knee or reported 
her knee was interfering with her ability to perform her job when she worked at the 
Marriott.  Thressy Jones stated she never observed that Reed had any problems 
performing her job functions at the Marriott, a physical job, or that she had any problems 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 14 
 
with her knee before the work injury in this case.  I find, based on all of the record 
evidence, Dr. Bansal’s opinion is most persuasive and that the mechanism of slipping 
off the ladder caused Reed’s left knee medial and lateral meniscal tears, as well as an 
anterior cruciate ligament tear and set in motion a series of biochemical events, which 
led to an aggravation and acceleration of her left knee arthritis.  (Ex. 1, p. 15)   
Frito Lay and Indemnity Insurance assert Reed has only sustained a ten percent 
permanent impairment to her leg, relying on the opinion of Dr. Beecher.  As noted 
above, I found his opinion equivocal, and the opinion of Dr. Bansal to be most 
persuasive.  Using Table 17-33 of the AMA Guides, Dr. Bansal assigned a ten percent 
lower extremity impairment for the medial and lateral meniscectomies and a “projected” 
seven percent lower extremity impairment for the anterior cruciate ligament laxity 
secondary to her tear for a combined sixteen percent lower extremity impairment.  (Ex. 
1, p. 17)  A projected impairment is in the future, and is not based on Reed’s 
presentation at the time of Dr. Bansal’s examination.  I find Reed has sustained a ten 
percent permanent impairment to her left lower extremity.  I also find Dr. Bansal’s 
permanent restrictions of no kneeling or squatting, to avoid standing or walking for more 
than fifteen minutes at a time, and to use an assistive device for walking as needed to 
be Reed’s permanent restrictions.  (Ex. 1, p. 16) 
Knee impairments are included as scheduled losses.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(p) 
(2018); Caylor v. Employers Mut. Cas. Co., 337 N.W.2d 890, 894 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983) 
(citing earlier version of statute).  The schedule provides a maximum award of 220 
weeks of compensation.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(p).  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) 
provides when determining functional disability under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(l), 
“the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by 
utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the 
American medical association [sic], as adopted by the workers’ compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.”  The Commissioner has adopted the 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001).  876 
IAC 2.4. Under the schedule, Reed is entitled to twenty-two weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, at the rate of $429.62 per week.  The parties stipulated Reed was 
paid twenty-two weeks of compensation at the rate of $429.62.  I do not find Reed is 
entitled to any additional weekly benefits. 
III. 
Alternate Medical Care 
Frito Lay and Indemnity Insurance ceased providing medical care to Reed based 
on Dr. Bollier’s opinion that Reed had reached maximum medical improvement and that 
her need for a knee replacement is unrelated to the work injury.  Reed is requesting 
Frito Lay and Indemnity Insurance be ordered to designate a treating physician to 
provide care for her left knee and to follow the treating physician’s plan, including any 
recommendation for surgery.  As discussed above, I did not find Dr. Bollier’s opinion 
persuasive.  I found Dr. Bansal’s opinion to be the most persuasive.  Dr. Bansal found 
Reed is in need of a knee replacement.  (Ex. 1, p. 15)  No physician had agreed to 
perform the surgery at the time of the hearing.   

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 15 
 
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  Id.  “The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id. § 85.27(4).  If the 
employee is dissatisfied with the care, the employee should communicate the basis for 
the dissatisfaction to the employer.  Id.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on 
alternate care, the commissioner “may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Id.  The statute requires the employer to 
furnish reasonable medical care.  Id. § 85.27(4); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (noting “[t]he employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability”).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
the employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer 
has denied liability for the injury, or has abandoned care.  Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).   
 
I found the work injury caused Reed to develop left knee medial and lateral 
meniscal tears, as well as an anterior cruciate ligament tear and led to an aggravation 
and acceleration of her left knee arthritis.  Dr. Bansal has opined Reed needs additional 
care.  Frito Lay and Indemnity Insurance are responsible for ongoing medical care 
related to Reed’s left knee condition, which may include a total knee replacement.  Frito 
Lay and Indemnity Insurance shall designate a treating orthopedic surgeon to provide 
ongoing care to Reed, other than Drs. Neff, Bollier, and Beecher, within sixty days of 
this decision, and shall follow the treating orthopedic surgeon’s treatment 
recommendations. 
IV. 
Costs 
Reed seeks to recover the $100.00 filing fee and the $6.47 cost of service.  (Ex. 
13, p. 46)  Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing before 
the commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 876 IAC 
4.33(6), provides 
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons reviewing 
health service disputes.  
I find Reed is entitled to recover the filing fee and cost of service. 

REED V. PEPSICO D/B/A FRITO LAY 
Page 16 
 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
 
Claimant shall take nothing further with respect to additional permanent partial 
disability benefits.   
 
Within sixty (60) days of this decision, Defendants shall designate a treating 
orthopedic surgeon to provide ongoing medical care to Claimant for her left knee 
condition, other than Drs. Neff, Bollier, and Beecher, and shall follow the treating 
orthopedic surgeon’s recommendations.   
Defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($100.00) for the filing fee and six and 47/100 dollars ($6.47) for service. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this   11th   day of February, 2021. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dutton Channing (via WCES) 
Kent Smith (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
