Case Number: 22000458.01
Case Title:  CORBETT, JAMES V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Corbett James-21700535.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
JAMES CORBETT, 
File Nos. 22000458.01, 21700535.01 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY, 
 
HEADNOTES:  1108, 1803, 2501 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
 
Defendant. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C ASE . 
Claimant James Corbett filed two petitions in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from the defendant, self-insured employer MidAmerican Energy 
Company (MidAmerican): 
 Under No. 22000458.01, alleging a work injury to the right lower extremity on 
July 10, 2019; and 
 
 Under No. 21700535.01, alleging a work injury to the left lower extremity on 
September 28, 2020. 
The agency consolidated the claims into one contested case proceeding for 
administrative convenience pursuant to Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.6 and 
scheduled an arbitration hearing. The undersigned presided over the hearing, which 
was held using internet-based video by order of the Commissioner on December 14, 
2022. Corbett participated personally and through attorney John P. Dougherty. 
MidAmerican participated by and through attorney Lori N. Scardina Utsinger. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues with respect 
to each alleged injury as detailed below. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jul-27  14:37:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 2 
 
A .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 0 4 5 8. 0 1 :  R i g h t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  J u l y  1 0 ,  
2 0 1 9 .  
1) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
stipulated work injury? 
2) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded? 
3) Is Corbett entitled to payment of the medical expenses listed in Exhibit 4? 
4) Is Corbett entitled to taxation of costs against MidAmerican? 
B . 
N o .  2 1 7 0 0 5 3 5. 0 1 :  L e f t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  S e p t e m b e r  2 8 ,  
2 0 2 0 .  
1) What is the extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the stipulated 
work injury? 
2) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded? 
3) Is Corbett entitled to payment of the medical expenses listed in Exhibit 4? 
4) Is Corbett entitled to taxation of costs against MidAmerican? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
In the hearing reports, the parties entered into a series of stipulations as detailed 
below. The parties’ stipulations in the hearing reports are accepted and incorporated 
into this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
A .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 0 4 5 8. 0 1 :  R i g h t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  J u l y  1 0 ,  
2 0 1 9 .  
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Corbett and 
MidAmerican at the time of the stipulated injury. 
2) Corbett sustained an injury on July 10, 2019, which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with MidAmerican. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, but Corbett’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits is 
no longer in dispute. 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 3 
 
4) If the extent of permanent disability is ripe for determination, such disability is 
to the right lower extremity (knee), a scheduled member. 
5) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Corbett’s gross earnings were $2,300.98 per week. 
b) Corbett was single. 
c) Corbett was entitled to one exemption. 
B . 
N o .  2 1 7 0 0 5 3 5. 0 1 :  L e f t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  S e p t e m b e r  2 8 ,  
2 0 2 0 .  
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Corbett and 
MidAmerican at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Corbett sustained an injury on September 28, 2020, which arose out of and 
in the course of his employment with MidAmerican. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, but Corbett’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits is 
no longer in dispute. 
4) If the extent of permanent disability is ripe for determination, such disability is 
to the left lower extremity (knee), a scheduled member. 
5) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Corbett’s gross earnings were $2,314.07 per week. 
b) Corbett was single. 
c) Corbett was entitled to one exemption. 
6) Prior to hearing, MidAmerican paid to Corbett 4.4 weeks of compensation at 
the rate of $1,282.96 per week. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE-1 through JE-7; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5;  
 Defendant’s Exhibits A through G; and 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 4 
 
 Hearing testimony by Corbett; Dave Requet, Jr., a MidAmerican supervisor; 
and Tyler Waterhouse, a MidAmerican employee who worked with Corbett.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
Corbett was 63 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) He graduated 
from high school in 1978. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) Corbett did not obtain any postsecondary 
credential or degree after graduating high school. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) 
Corbett injured his right knee while playing basketball when he was in his 
twenties, about 35 years before the date of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20; Ex. JE-1, p. 1) He 
underwent surgery to repair the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in his right knee. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 20; Ex. JE-1, p. 1) After surgery, Corbett recovered to the point that he had no 
functional limitations relating to his surgically repaired knee with respect to physical 
activities such as playing sports, jogging, and skiing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20)  
Corbett did not experience symptoms or seek care for his surgically repaired right 
knee in the decades between when he reached maximum medical improvement and the 
stipulated work injury to his right knee on July 10, 2019. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 20–21) Likewise, 
prior to the stipulated work injury of September 28, 2020, Corbett did not seek care for 
his left knee. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) After recovering from his right ACL repair, Corbett’s knee 
joints did not bother him until the work injuries at the center of this case. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) 
Before Corbett sustained the stipulated 2019 work injury, he would go on walks 
of approximately two or three miles in distance without issue. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) He also 
liked to ride a bicycle on trails for as long as fifteen miles and experienced no physical 
problems doing so. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) Corbett worked out using treadmills, stationary 
bikes, and weights without causing symptoms. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) During a trip to Colorado, 
Corbett hiked a loose gravel trail for one or two miles to a mountain peak with no 
physical complaints. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 22–23) 
MidAmerican hired Corbett in 1984. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) Corbett started working in the 
gas department in 1990. (Hrg. Tr. p. 54–55) He began as a gas journeyman. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
55) In or around 2010, MidAmerican promoted Corbett to the position of crew leader. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 55) As a crew leader, Corbett typically supervised a crew of one to four 
workers. (Hrg. Tr. p. 55) The work varied based on the job assignment. (Hrg. Tr. pp.55–
56)  
Before the stipulated work injury in 2019, the job of gas crew leader at 
MidAmerican required Corbett to work a minimum of forty hours per week with regular 
mandatory overtime. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) Consequently, Corbett averaged 57 hours per 
week over the 13-week period before the stipulated injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) Corbett 
worked in the field, which entailed a lot of shovel work to access gas lines laid in the 
ground, climbing in and out of trenches, kneeling to work on gas lines, and carrying 
materials that weighed as much as fifty pounds. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 23–25, 39) During the 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 5 
 
weeks leading up to July 10, 2019, Corbett did not experience issues with his knees that 
impacted its functionality or seek care for either knee. (Hrg. Tr. p. 25) 
On July 10, 2019, Corbett was standing near the edge of an excavation that was 
three or four feet deep. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) There was sand in the ground underneath the 
edge, which caused it to cave in from beneath Corbett’s feet. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) The cave-
in caused him to fall into the excavation. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) Corbett twisted his knee up 
against a pipe that was in the excavation, causing him to experience pain, see stars, 
and feel light-headed. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26–27)  
Waterhouse, a coworker of Corbett’s at the time in question, testified at hearing. 
Waterhouse was in the hole when the side of the trench collapsed, causing Corbett to 
fall. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) Corbett was unable to get out of the collapsed trench by himself, so 
Waterhouse assisted him. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) Within about thirty minutes, his knee swelled 
up and became tight and more painful. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) 
MidAmerican arranged care at Genesis Occupational Health. (Ex. JE-5, pp. 53–
56) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of Corbett’s right knee showed medial and 
lateral meniscal tears and joint effusion. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1; Hrg. Tr. p. 28; Ex. JE-2, pp. 43–
44) Ryan Taylor, D.O., performed a right-knee aspiration and pulled 15 to 20 cubic 
centimeters of fluid out of Corbett’s knee. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1; Ex. JE-2, pp. 60–61; Hrg. Tr. 
p. 28) He also performed a cortisone injection and platelet rich plasma treatment, but 
they provided little relief and Corbett’s pain progressively worsened. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1; Ex. 
JE-2, pp. 57–73; Hrg. Tr. p. 28) Corbett also participated in physical therapy at Genesis. 
(Ex. JE-6, pp. 86–89) 
Because of Corbett’s worsening pain, Dr. Taylor referred him to John Hoffman, 
M.D., a surgeon at Orthopaedic Specialists. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28; Ex. JE-1, p. 1) Dr. Hoffman 
saw Corbett on November 19, 2019, and discussed with him that x-rays showed severe 
medial compartmental degenerative changes and potential treatment options. (Ex. JE-1, 
p. 2) Dr. Hoffman also addressed the “work comp issue” with Corbett, noting that in his 
opinion the work injury did not cause his arthritis; rather, it “exacerbated his medial knee 
pain secondary to his severe arthritic changes.” (Ex. JE-1, p. 2) They discussed a two-
stage total knee replacement consisting of removal of tibial metallic hardware from his 
decades-old ACL reconstruction about three months prior to a right total knee 
replacement. (Ex. JE-1, p. 2)  
Ashley Walker was a case manager with Carlisle & Associates, an entity with 
“Serving the Workers’ Comp Industry Since 1980” on its letterhead, which makes it 
more likely than not MidAmerican contracted with it for services relating to Corbett’s 
claim. (Ex. B, pp. 3–4) Walker sent Dr. Hoffman a letter dated December 20, 2019, in 
reference to his evaluation of Corbett on November 19, 2019. (Ex. B, pp. 3–4) The letter 
consisted of three questions with spaces for short answers. (Ex. B, pp. 3–4) Dr. 
Hoffman wrote by hand the following answers to the following questions: 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 6 
 
1. You diagnosed Mr. Corbett with unilateral primary osteoarthritis of the 
right knee. In your medical opinion, did Mr. Corbett’s industrial injury 
cause primary osteoarthritis? Please explain. 
No, the osteoarthritis was preexisting. 
2. You have recommended Mr. Corbett undergo a two-stage right total 
knee replacement. In your medical opinion, should this surgery be 
covered under workers’ compensation? Please explain. 
No. 
3. Your response to the causation letter indicated that Mr. Corbett’s 
industrial injury exacerbated his medial knee pain secondary to severe 
arthritic changes. Please outline your treatment plan for the medical 
[sic] knee pain that should be covered under the workers’ 
compensation claim. 
We feel cortisone [and] viscosupplementation (Euflexxa) injections to 
relieve exacerbation of pain. 
(Ex. B, pp. 3–4) Dr. Hoffman signed the letter and dated his response January 9, 2020. 
(Ex. B, pp. 3–4) 
While the undersigned respects Dr. Hoffman’s right to have an opinion on what 
should and should not be covered with respect to care for an injury under Iowa workers’ 
compensation law, there is no indication he has any legal training, has ever been 
admitted to practice law in Iowa, or has an understanding of what Iowa law is with 
respect to what constitutes an injury arising out of and in the course of employment. 
Therefore, his belief that Corbett’s total right knee replacement surgery should not be 
covered under workers’ compensation is given no weight—especially, when the opinion 
calls for the application of Iowa law to facts all of which are not addressed in the 
opinion. 
The contents of Exhibit B do not allow for the conclusion that Carlisle & 
Associates or Dr. Hoffman had a complete understanding of Corbett’s physical condition 
before the stipulated work injury to his right knee. There is an insufficient basis in the 
record from which to conclude that Dr. Hoffman understood at the time of this opinion 
that Corbett was largely asymptomatic in his right knee before the stipulated work injury 
and did not seek care for it or have any issues performing his job duties at 
MidAmerican. Further, Dr. Hoffman did not address whether Corbett’s symptoms—
which he previously opined the stipulated work injury “exacerbated”—necessitated the 
total right knee replacement surgery. This makes Dr. Hoffman’s January 9, 2020 
answers of little probative value. 
Dr. Hoffman administered a cortisone injection in an attempt to provide Corbett 
with pain relief. (Ex. JE-1, p. 2) Corbett had been working without restrictions prior to the 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 7 
 
appointment. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1) Dr. Hoffman did not change this and signed off on Corbett 
returning to full-duty work. (Ex. JE-1, p. 3) 
On February 25, 2020, Corbett reported to Dr. Hoffman that his pain and 
instability had resolved but his range of motion was still decreased. (Ex. JE-1, p. 4) 
Corbett estimated he was experiencing 90 percent relief after the cortisone injection the 
previous November that was still lasting. (Ex. JE-1, p. 5) Corbett received another 
cortisone injection and Dr. Hoffman maintained his full-duty status at work. (Ex. JE-1, p. 
5)  
Corbett had a follow-up exam with Dr. Hoffman on June 25, 2020. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 
7–8) He reported occasional aching medial right knee pain, stiffness, swelling, and 
decreased range of motion that was painful. (Ex. JE-1, p. 7) Corbett also shared that his 
pain was exacerbated by walking on uneven ground and going up and down hillsides. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 7) Dr. Hoffman discussed treatment options with Corbett, who wanted to 
avoid another cortisone injection because the previous shots had caused his blood 
sugar to fluctuate due to his diabetes. (Ex. JE-1, p. 8) Dr. Hoffman decided to seek 
authorization for hyaluronic acid Euflexxa injections as an alternative to cortisone and 
scheduled Corbett to return in two weeks. (Ex. JE-1, p. 8) 
MidAmerican asked questions of Dr. Hoffman regarding Corbett’s injury and 
condition, which he answered in a letter dated June 25, 2020. (Ex. JE-1, p. 6) Dr. 
Hoffman identified Corbett’s “current work[-]related diagnosis” as “exacerbation of pre-
existing degenerative joint disease of the right knee.” (Ex. JE-1, p. 6) He further opined 
that Corbett had not reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) and stated that he 
needed additional care in the form of Euflexxa injections in his right knee. (Ex. JE-1, p. 
6) 
Corbett next saw Dr. Hoffman on July 23, 2020. (Ex. JE-1, p. 9) Dr. Hoffman 
noted that Corbett received 90 percent pain relief in his right knee for about three 
months following his February 25, 2020 cortisone injection. (Ex. JE-1, p. 9) He further 
noted Corbett reported pain at a level of two on a one-to-ten scale. (Ex. JE-1, p. 9) They 
discussed treatment options and Corbett received the first of multiple Euflexxa 
injections. (Ex. JE-1, p. 10) Corbett returned a week later for a second such injection 
and a third on August 8, 2020. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 10–12) 
On September 3, 2020, Corbett followed up with Dr. Hoffman reporting pain relief 
of 70 percent from the Euflexxa injections and the ability to be more active because of 
its beneficial effects. (Ex. JE-1, p. 13) He rated his pain at one out of ten. (Ex. JE-1, p. 
13) Dr. Hoffman discussed treatment options with Corbett and they decided to plan on 
another round of Euflexxa injections in February 2021 with the understanding that if 
Corbett experienced increased pain prior to that, he would return for a cortisone 
injection. (Ex. JE-1, p. 14) They also discussed a two-step total right knee replacement 
again, with Dr. Hoffman informing Corbett that “we do not feel the knee arthroplasty will 
be covered by work[ers’] comp[ensation]” and Corbett voicing understanding. (Ex. JE-1, 
p. 14) Dr. Hoffman did not include an explanation in his notes of why he and his staff felt 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 8 
 
MidAmerican would not cover the procedure and he did not share such with Corbett. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 14; Hrg. Tr. pp. 31–32) 
On September 28, 2020, Corbett was at work for MidAmerican, performing job 
duties, when he felt a pop in his left knee while kneeling. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32; JE-1, p. 15) 
Corbett felt instant pain and soreness. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) He experienced difficulty walking. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 32) 
Corbett reported the injury to MidAmerican. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) Corbett first received 
care at Genesis Occupational Health and underwent x-rays and an MRI of his injured 
left knee. (Ex. JE-1, p. 15; Ex. JE-2, pp. 45–47; Ex. JE-5, pp. 74–85) Imaging showed a 
torn meniscus in his left knee. (Ex. JE-1, p. 15; Ex. JE-2, pp. 45–47)  
Corbett saw Dr. Hoffman on November 10, 2020, for his left-knee pain. (Ex. JE-1, 
p. 15) Dr. Hoffman noted Corbett’s pain was aggravated by stairs, prolonged sitting, and 
prolonged standing. (Ex. JE-1, p. 15) He also noted swelling, stiffness, weakness, and 
instability in Corbett’s left knee. (Ex. JE-1, p. 15) 
Dr. Hoffman discussed with Corbett the need for a left-knee arthroscopy with 
medial meniscectomy. (Ex. JE-1, p. 16) He also advised that while the imaging showed 
minimal arthritic changes in Corbett’s left knee, there was the possibility of finding more 
arthritic changes at the time of surgery. (Ex. JE-1, p. 16) Dr. Hoffman informed Corbett 
that the injury may require lateral meniscectomy, chondroplasty, debridement of loose 
bodies, or synovectomy, based on what they found in his injured knee during the 
surgery. (Ex. JE-1, p. 16) 
Dr. Hoffman performed surgery on Corbett’s left knee on December 16, 2020, 
consisting of a partial medial meniscectomy, chondroplasty of the lateral patellofemoral 
joint, partial synovectomy, and excision of the medial synovial plica. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 48–
49) After the surgery, Dr. Hoffman prescribed physical therapy to help Corbett 
rehabilitate. (Ex. JE-1, p. 19) He released Corbett to return to work on December 21, 
2020, with the work restriction to perform only sit-down duties for three weeks. (Ex. JE-
1, p. 20) 
Corbett followed up with Dr. Hoffman on December 23, 2020. (Ex. JE-1, p. 21) 
Dr. Hoffman reviewed imaging from the procedure with Corbett and discussed 
treatment. (Ex. JE-1, p. 21) He released Corbett from performing only sit-down work 
and assigned the restrictions of no walking on uneven ground or climbing on ladders. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 21) Dr. Hoffman sunset that limitation effective January 4, 2021, at which 
time Corbett was released to full-duty work. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 21, 23)  
On December 28, 2020, Corbett started physical therapy with Kevin Swanson, 
PT. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 24–25) Swanson noted Corbett walked with an antalgic gate. (Ex. JE-
1, p. 24) He also noted “significant loss of functional [range of motion] and strength due 
to reflex inhibition from pain and edema.” (Ex. JE-1, p. 25)  

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 9 
 
Corbett participated in physical therapy on December 30, 2020, complaining of 
symptoms aggravated by kneeling, squatting, and work activities. (Ex. JE-1, p. 26) 
Swanson noted he walked with a mild antalgic gait. (Ex. JE-1, p. 26) He described his 
functional limitations as unchanged from their initial appointment two days earlier. (Ex. 
JE-1, p. 27) 
In a note from Corbett’s January 5, 2021 physical therapy session, Jason 
Schultz, PTA, states that Corbett was scheduled for a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) later that day for his return to work, but he did not feel ready to return to full duty. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 28) Schultz documented Corbett had a mild antalgic gait posture. (Ex. JE-
1, p. 28) Schultz advised Corbett to talk to Dr. Hoffman about his return to work. (Ex. 
JE-1, p. 29) 
Corbett underwent the FCE at Athletico Physical Therapy as scheduled. (Ex. JE-
1, pp. 51–52) Shauna Oyler, PT, performed the FCE and concluded Corbett 
demonstrated capabilities and functional tolerances within the medium-heavy physical 
demand level. (Ex. JE-1, p. 51) This meant Corbett showed the ability to meet the 
demands of his job at MidAmerican despite Oyler noting biomechanical changes when 
lifting 70 pounds from floor to waist and him reporting discomfort in his left knee with the 
task. (Ex. JE-1, p. 51) The job description detailing the physical demands of Corbett’s 
job at MidAmerican identifies 70 pounds as the maximum amount he would have to lift 
in the position. (Ex. A, p. 1) 
On January 8, 2021, Corbett had a physical therapy session with Brian Schaaf, 
PTA, who observed he walked with a mild antalgic gait. (Ex. JE-1, p. 30) He also noted 
Corbett’s symptoms were aggravated by kneeling, squatting, and work activities. (Ex. 
JE-1, p. 30) Further, Schaaf documented significant suprapatellar swelling. (Ex. JE-1, p. 
30) Corbett was able to complete all of his physical therapy exercises without an 
increase in pain. (Ex. JE-1, p. 31) 
Corbett saw Dr. Hoffman for a follow-up exam on January 19, 2021. (Ex. JE-1, p. 
32) He had completed his physical therapy regimen, but had complaints of tenderness 
when kneeling and minimal pain and stiffness. (Ex. JE-1, p. 32) Dr. Hoffman noted on 
examination Corbett had no signs of infection, redness, drainage, or edema. (Ex. JE-1, 
p. 32) He also found Corbett able to return to full-duty work effective the next day. (Ex. 
JE-1, pp. 32–33) 
On February 23, 2021, Corbett again saw Dr. Hoffman for a post-surgery exam. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 34) Corbett was experiencing minimal pain, tightness, and stiffness, but no 
swelling. (Ex. JE-1, p. 34) He also shared that he had tenderness in his left knee when 
kneeling. (Ex. JE-1, p. 34) Because of the “irritability” in Corbett’s left knee, Dr. Hoffman 
administered a cortisone injection to address his ongoing symptoms, despite the effect 
on his blood sugar levels. (Ex. JE-1, p. 34) 
Two days later, Corbett returned to Dr. Hoffman to receive care for his right knee. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 35) Dr. Hoffman noted that Corbett received about 70 percent relief from 
his right-knee symptoms for about three months after his Euflexxa injection on August 6, 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 10 
 
2020. (Ex. JE-1, p. 35) He rated his pain as a three out of ten that day. (Ex. JE-1, p. 35) 
Corbett shared with Dr. Hoffman he had experienced increased pain over the preceding 
months and wanted to discuss the total right-knee arthroplasty they had earlier identified 
as a potential treatment. (Ex. JE-1, p. 35) Dr. Hoffman placed Corbett at “MMI status 
post exacerbation of his degenerative condition of his right knee on the job” and 
removal of the tibial hardware from his ACL reconstruction with the plan for total right-
knee arthroplasty two months later. (Ex. JE-1, p. 36) 
McCain sent a letter dated March 5, 2021, to Dr. Hoffman. (Ex. JE-1, p. 37) 
McCain details the care Corbett received for his right knee and then asks, “If M[r]. 
Corbett has reached maximum medical improvement as of 2/25/2021 concerning the 
right knee injury, would he have any permanent impairment according to the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition, that you would equate to being causally related to his work injury 
on 7/10/2019 or, would his injury be a temporary aggravation with no permanent 
impairment?” (Ex. JE-1, p. 37) In a letter dated March 9, 2021, Dr. Hoffman replies: 
James Corbett injured his right knee on July 10, 2019[,] while at work. 
James was first seen in our office on November 19, 2019. X-rays revealed 
severe degenerative joint disease about the right knee. At that time, the 
patient was informed that we felt he exacerbated his degenerative 
changes with his work injury. Patient has been treated conservatively and 
was placed at maximum medical improvement for his work injury on 
February 25, 2021. No impairment rating was given to the patient for this 
injury. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 38) Thus, Dr. Hoffman did not directly answer McCain’s question by 
opining as to what, if any, permanent impairment Corbett sustained from the work injury. 
On April 1, 2021, Corbett followed up with Dr. Hoffman for his left knee, 
estimating that the cortisone injection provided 75 percent relief of his pain. (Ex. JE-1, p. 
39) Corbett said he was still experiencing the pain relief from the shot to that day and 
rated it two out of ten. (Ex. JE-1, p. 39) His left knee pain was located in the medial 
aspects, sharp in nature, and aggravated by prolonged walking, standing, sitting, stairs, 
and activities of daily living. (Ex. JE-1, p. 39)  
On examination, Dr. Hoffman found Corbett’s range of motion in his left knee 
restricted due to pain. (Ex. JE-1, p. 40) His active range of motion on flexion was 143 
degrees and three on extension. (Ex. JE-1, p. 40) Dr. Hoffman placed Corbett at MMI 
following his left knee surgery and assigned no permanent work restrictions. (Ex. JE-1, 
p. 40) 
In a letter dated April 9, 2021, McCain asked Dr. Hoffman if Corbett had 
sustained any permanent impairment in his left knee related to his September 28, 2020 
work injury. (Ex. JE-1, p. 41) Dr. Hoffman responded in a letter dated April 19, 2021. 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 42) In it, he opined that using Table 17-33 on page 546 of the Guides, 
Corbett had a permanent impairment to the left lower extremity of 2 percent or 1 percent 
to the whole person. (Ex. JE-1, p. 42) 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 11 
 
At hearing, Corbett testified that the cortisone and Euflexxa injections did not 
help his symptoms. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30) In the records documenting exams closer in time to 
the injections, Dr. Hoffman notes that Corbett informed him the injections gave him relief 
from his symptoms and increased his functionality. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 4–8, 13–14) However, 
as time passed, the benefit wore off, leaving Corbett in pain, as documented at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). (Ex. JE-7, p. 92) This is also in line with 
Waterhouse’s testimony regarding Corbett’s description of how the injections affected 
him when he was working. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) Thus, the weight of the evidence establishes 
the injections provided partial relief of Corbett’s pain for months, but did not permanently 
eliminate it, and his pain worsened with time. This led him to seek care at UIHC. (Ex. 
JE-7, p. 95) 
Nicolas Noiseux, M.D., saw Corbett at UIHC on January 4, 2022. (Ex. JE-7, p. 
92) He noted Corbett’s left knee symptoms worsened such that he tried using assistive 
devices when walking that included knee sleeves, shoe wedges, and a cane. (Ex. JE-7, 
p. 95)  On January 4, 2022, Dr. Noiseux noted: 
His left knee pain is causing him difficulty with his quality of life and 
activities of daily living. Notes start up pain after periods of sitting and 
being recumbent. Has intermittent left knee pain at rest and endorses left 
knee pain at night regularly. Pain has increased most significantly over the 
last year after he underwent a left meniscus repair after suffering a hyper 
flexion injury at work. Pain is worsened by weightbearing activities and 
ambulating to the point where he is unable to walk long distances without 
needing to rest. Has previously undergone multiple injections to the left 
knee including corticosteroid injections, Synvisc injections, and PRP 
without relief. States that Aleve and ibuprofen provide him minimal pain 
relief. He did not have any significant pain relief after undergoing 
postoperative physical therapy for the left knee. 
(Ex. JE-7, p. 92)  
Dr. Noiseux recommended a robotic total left knee arthroplasty for Corbett’s 
ongoing symptoms. (Ex. JE-7, p. 95) Corbett underwent the procedure on June 16, 
2022. (Ex. JE-7, pp. 103–06) During a follow-up televisit on August 3, 2022, he reported 
he was ambulating independently and doing well in his recovery. (Ex. JE-7, p. 99) 
Claimant’s counsel spoke with Dr. Noiseux regarding his treatment of Corbett 
and sent a letter dated July 12, 2022, in follow-up summarizing his understanding of Dr. 
Noiseux’s opinions with respect to causation and the necessity of the surgery he 
performed: 
For purposes of this report you are to assume that a judge determines that 
Mr. Corbett had not sought treatment and was asymptomatic in his left 
knee prior to the injury of 9-28-20. Additionally, you are to assume that a 
judge finds that on that date he felt a pop in his knee while standing from a 
crouched position. This caused immediate pain. This pain was not 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 12 
 
alleviated by a meniscus repair or various injections. Specifically, Mr. 
Corbett never returned to his baseline from prior to the date of injury and 
as a result was then referred to your care. 
Given these facts you would have the following opinions. Since the knee 
never returned to baseline you would opine that he either had a pre-
existing degenerative arthritis which was materially aggravated, lighted-up 
or accelerated as a result of the injury or that as a result of the injury there 
was damage to the knee which lead [sic] to post-traumatic arthritis. In 
either case if the judge finds the above facts to be accurate you would 
opine that the necessity for your care and treatment arose from the 9-28-
20 date of injury. 
(Ex. JE-7, p. 107) Dr. Noiseux signed the letter, indicating his agreement with the 
substance of the letter’s contents and dated his signature July 13, 2022. (Ex. JE-7, p. 
107) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Corbett to undergo an IME with Jacqueline 
Stoken, D.O., in West Des Moines, Iowa, on July 12, 2022, with respect to both knee 
injuries. (Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Stoken performed a medical records review and physical 
examination of Corbett and then issued a report dated July 25, 2022. (Ex. 1, pp. 1–10) 
Dr. Stoken diagnosed Corbett with: 
1. History of bilateral knee osteoarthritis. 
2. Status post work injury 07/1[0]/20191 to the right knee with tear of the 
posterior horn of the medi[]al meniscus and tear of the posterior horn 
of the lateral meniscus. 
3. Status post work injury on 09/28/2020 with left meniscal tear. 
4. Status 1. Partial medial meniscectomy. 2. Chondroplasty of the lateral 
patellofemoral joint. 3. Partial synovectomy. 4. Excision of medial 
synovial plica post left knee on 12/16/2020, done by Dr. John Hoffman. 
Postoperative diagnosis was 1. Medial meniscus tear. 2. 
Chondromalacia of the patella. 3. Large thickened medial synovial 
plica. 
5. Status post robotic total knee arthroplasty, left knee on 06/16/2022 
done by Dr. Nicholas [sic] Noiseux. Postoperative diagnosis was 
primary osteoarthritis of the left knee. 
                                                 
1 In Corbett’s petition, he alleged an injury date of July 11, 2019. MidAmerican denied this was 
the date of injury in its answer and asserted the injury date was July 10, 2019. Consequently, the record 
contains some references to an injury date of July 11, 2019, instead of the stipulated date of July 10, 
2019. Because the parties stipulated to an injury date of July 10, 2019 in the hearing report and for clarity, 
the undersigned has altered such references using brackets so they reflect the stipulated injury date. 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 13 
 
6. Chronic pain of the bilateral lower extremities. 
(Ex. 1, p. 11)  
On the question of causation, Dr. Stoken opined her diagnoses are causally 
related to the stipulated work injuries. (Ex. 1, p. 11) Dr. Stoken did not elaborate on the 
reasoning behind this opinion. (Ex. 1, pp. 1–12) She did not expressly address the 
question of aggravation. (Ex. 1, pp. 1–12) Nor did she opine on whether the work injury 
to either knee more likely than not caused the need for total knee arthroplasty. (Ex. 1, 
pp. 1–12) Therefore, Dr. Stoken’s causation opinion is of little probative value. 
Dr. Stoken opined on what, if any, permanent impairment Corbett sustained to 
the right knee as follows: 
Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, Chapter 17, table 17-10, page 537, he is allowed 35% Lower 
Extremity Impairment or 14% Whole Person Impairment due to flexion 
contracture (extension) of 20 degrees of the right knee. 
(Ex. 1, p. 11) 
Dr. Stoken opined Corbett had not reached MMI following the left total knee 
arthroplasty he underwent at UIHC. (Ex. 1, p. 11) Nonetheless, she opined on his 
impairment level at the time using the Guides. (Ex. 1, pp. 11–12) Because the weight of 
the evidence demonstrates Corbett had not reached MMI, a fact with which Dr. Stoken 
concurred in the report, her July 13, 2022 impairment rating of Corbett’s left knee is not 
persuasive. 
During a follow-up appointment with Dr. Noiseux on September 20, 2022, Corbett 
reported he was satisfied with his range of motion and stability and experiencing 
minimal pain. (Ex. JE-7, p. 109) Further, he was full weightbearing without the use of 
any assistive devices. (Ex. JE-7, p. 109) Corbett stated he was prepared to move 
forward with a right total knee arthroplasty. (Ex. JE-7, p. 109) 
Defense counsel sent a letter dated September 27, 2022, to Dr. Hoffman that 
summarized Corbett’s care and posed two questions: 
1. In regard to Mr. Corbett’s left knee diagnosis of osteoarthritis, 
particularly in the patellofemoral medical [sic] compartments with areas 
of deep partial thickness cartilage loss, in your medical opinion, did Mr. 
Corbett’s September 28, 2020 left knee injury cause or materially 
aggravate the osteoarthritis? Please explain. 
 
2. In terms of Mr. Corbett’s left total knee replacement, in your medical 
opinion, is this surgery related to the September 28, 2020 [w]orkers’ 
[c]ompensation injury? Please explain. 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 14 
 
(Ex. B, pp. 5–6) 
In the blank provided on defense counsel’s letter for a response, Dr. Hoffman 
handwrote the following: 
The Sept. 28, 2020 caused an exacerbation of the preexisting knee 
osteoarthritis which was treated with cortisone and viscosupplementation. 
The work injury was not the reason for the knee replacement. He had 
significant preexisting severe osteoarthritis which is the reason for the 
[total knee arthroplasty]. 
(Ex. B, p. 6) Dr. Hoffman signed and dated his response September 30, 2022. (Ex. B, p. 
6) 
Claimant’s counsel again conferenced with Dr. Noiseux. (Ex. JE-7, p. 111) He 
sent Dr. Noiseux a follow-up letter dated September 28, 2022, summarizing his 
understanding of Dr. Noiseux’s causation opinion with respect to Corbett’s right knee 
based on their earlier conversation as follows: 
For purposes of your opinion you are asked to assume that a judge finds 
that prior to this date of injury Mr. Corbett was not having problems with 
the right knee and in fact was doing his day in and day out work involving 
ladder climbing, bending, squatting and kneeling all day without limitation. 
Assuming the judge also finds that on July 1[0], 2019, Mr. Corbett was 
standing on the edge of an excavation trench which collapsed and during 
this collapse he twisted his right knee causing significant and instant pain. 
Finally, if the judge finds after the date of injury of July 1[0], 2019, despite 
cortisone injections and [E]uflexxa injections, that Mr. Corbett’s right knee 
never returned to anywhere close to his baseline from the day before the 
injury that you would then opine that the procedure that you have now 
recommended, the total knee arthroplasty, would be causally related to 
this trench cave in. Specifically, you believe that the injury of July 1[0], 
2019, materially aggravated, lighted up or accelerated Mr. Corbett’s 
preexisting degenerative condition in the right knee or this event caused 
injury to Mr. Corbett’s right knee which led to post-traumatic arthritis 
therefore necessitating your recommended surgical procedure. 
(Ex. JE-7, p. 111) Dr. Noiseux signed the letter, indicating his adopting of the opinion, 
and dated his signature September 29, 2022. (Ex. JE-7, p. 111) 
Defense counsel arranged for William Jacobson, M.D., to perform a records 
review relating to Corbett’s July 10, 2019 right knee injury. (Ex. C, pp. 7–8) In a letter 
dated November 1, 2022, defense counsel summarized events relating to the stipulated 
work injury, the care for it, and opinions from other doctors. (Ex. C, pp. 7–8) With 
respect to Corbett’s medical history regarding the injured knee, defense counsel wrote, 
“Additionally, of note, prior to the July 10, 2019, injury, Mr. Corbett did have a previous 
right knee surgery which involved an ACL repair approximately 30 years prior.” (Ex. C, 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 15 
 
p. 7) The letter to Dr. Jacobson does not include information about Corbett’s lack of 
symptoms or that he did not seek care for his right knee between reaching MMI for his 
ACL reconstruction over 30 years earlier and the time of the work injury. (Ex. C, pp. 7–
8)  
Defense counsel asked Dr. Jacobson to answer the following questions: 
1. In your medical opinion, what are the diagnoses concerning Mr. 
Corbett’s right knee? More specifically, which diagnoses are work 
related or, are any conditions personal, degenerative, or related to 
non-injury conditions 
2. Does Mr. Corbett require any further treatment as causally related to 
the alleged injury date as to his right knee? Please opine on whether 
the need for a right total knee replacement is work related. 
(Ex. C, p. 8) 
After reviewing documents relating to the care and litigation stemming from the 
stipulated work injury to his right knee, Dr. Jacobson authored a letter dated November 
13, 2022. (Ex. C, pp. 13–15) In the letter, Dr. Jacobson states he did not “perform[] a 
history with Mr. Corbett or a physical examination on him.” (Ex. C, p. 13) Dr. Jacobson 
addresses Corbett’s medical history thusly: 
It should also be noted that Mr. Corbett has a history of prior right knee 
surgery. Due to a basketball injury to his right knee, he had an ACL 
reconstruction approximately 30 years ago. I do not believe there are 
records to review for this. 
(Ex. C, p. 14) Dr. Jacobson’s letter contains no discussion of Corbett’s symptomology or 
functional capabilities between reaching MMI following the ACL reconstruction surgery 
and the stipulated work injury. (Ex. C, pp. 13–15) 
Dr. Jacobson answered defense counsel’s questions as follows: 
In response to your first question, regarding Mr. Corbett’s diagnosis 
regarding his right knee, it would be right knee severe degenerative 
osteoarthritis with underlying medial and lateral menisci tears and an 
effusion. It is my opinion that the diagnosis of severe degenerative 
osteoarthritis is a pre-existing condition. This is based on the imaging 
studies that were performed, including the MRI in August 2019 and the x-
rays performed in November 2019. The x-rays show essentially bone-on-
bone arthritis of the right knee. This clearly would have pre-dated his injury 
in July 2019. I cannot state with any certainty when the menisci tears may 
have occurred. 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 16 
 
In response to your second question, regarding future treatments or 
further treatment for the right knee in regards to the work injury from July 
2019, it is my opinion, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, 
that the right knee ongoing treatment is due to the pre-existing severe 
degenerative osteoarthritis and not a result of the work injury from July 
2019. It is my opinion that this was a temporary aggravation of a pre-
existing condition. This is consistent with the opinion of Dr. Hoffman, the 
initial treating physician. It is reasonable that Mr. Corbett would need a 
total knee arthroplasty at this point; however, as stated above, it is my 
opinion that it is not related to the July 2019 work injury. 
(Ex. C, pp. 14–15) 
Dr. Jacobson’s letter contains no discussion of Corbett’s lack of symptoms before 
the stipulated work injury to his right knee. Based on the record, it appears more likely 
than not Dr. Jacobson did not understand at the time of the November 13, 2022 opinion 
that Corbett had no complaints, was able to perform his work duties without issue, was 
able to participate in physically demanding activities in his free time without issue, and 
had not sought any care for his right knee between reaching MMI following ACL 
reconstruction about three decades earlier and the date of the stipulated work injury. 
The failure to address Corbett’s symptoms and functional ability before the stipulated 
work injury undermines the credibility of Dr. Jacobson’s opinion because he had an 
incomplete understanding of Corbett’s medical history or lack thereof with respect to the 
right knee. 
Moreover, Dr. Jacobson did not address the question of whether it is more likely 
than not that the stipulated work injury to Corbett’s right knee aggravated, exacerbated, 
or lighted up the underlying osteoarthritis that had not caused him symptoms or 
functional limitation before July 10, 2019, the date the parties stipulated that he injured it 
while working for MidAmerican. (Ex. C, pp. 13–14) The question of causation under 
Iowa workers’ compensation law includes aggravation. The failure to consider or 
discuss aggravation on the question of causation with respect to Corbett’s right-knee 
symptoms limits the probative value of Dr. Jacobson’s opinion on whether the stipulated 
work injury was a significant factor in causing the need for a right total knee 
replacement. 
Defense counsel arranged for Dr. Jacobson to perform a records review with 
respect to Corbett’s left knee. (Ex. C, pp. 7–8) The letter contains no discussion of 
Corbett’s lack of symptoms in the left knee before the stipulated work injury or his ability 
to perform his job duties and participate in physically demanding activities in his free 
time without complaint before the stipulated work injury to his left knee. (Ex. C, pp. 7–8) 
On November 2, 2022, defense counsel sent Dr. Jacobson a letter posing the following 
questions: 
1. In your medical opinion, did Mr. Corbett’s osteoarthritis pre-date the 
September 28, 2020 work injury? More specifically, did the September 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 17 
 
28, 2020 work injury cause the osteoarthritis found within Mr. Corbett’s 
left knee? 
2. Given the osteoarthritis contained within Mr. Corbett’s left knee, would 
it have been possible and/or likely that Mr. Corbett would have needed 
a knee replacement whether or not he had a work related injury? 
(Ex. C, p. 10) 
Dr. Jacobson authored a letter dated November 13, 2022, addressing defense 
counsel’s questions about Corbett’s left knee and the care for it. (Ex. C, pp. 11–12) In 
the letter, Dr. Jacobson states that he performed a records review and did not perform a 
history or physical examination of Corbett before reaching his opinions. (Ex. C, p. 11) 
Dr. Jacobson does not discuss Corbett’s lack of symptoms before the stipulated work 
injury to his left knee on September 28, 2020, or his ability to perform his work duties 
and engage in physically demanding activities outside work without complaint before the 
work injury. (Ex. C, pp. 11–12) 
Dr. Jacobson answered defense counsel’s questions regarding Corbett’s left 
knee as follows: 
In response to your first questions, Mr. Corbett did have underlying pre-
existing osteoarthritis of the left knee. This was pre-existing to the work 
injury from September 28, 2020, specifically. Specifically, it is my opinion 
that the September 28, 2020, work injury did not cause the underlying 
arthritis in Mr. Corbett’s left knee. 
In response to your second question, based on the MRI findings and Dr. 
Hoffman’s intraoperative findings at the time of the left knee arthroscopy in 
December 2020, it is possible that Mr. Corbett would have progressed to 
severe left knee degenerative arthritis and the need for a total knee 
arthroplasty whether or not he had a work-related injury. 
(Ex. C, p. 12)  
Dr. Jacobson did not address the question of whether it is more likely than not 
that the stipulated work injury to Corbett’s left knee aggravated, exacerbated, or lighted 
up the underlying osteoarthritis that had not caused him symptoms or functional 
limitation before September 28, 2020, the date the parties stipulated that he injured it 
while working for MidAmerican. (Ex. C, pp. 11–12) The question of causation under 
Iowa workers’ compensation law includes aggravation. The failure to consider or 
discuss aggravation on the question of causation with respect to Corbett’s right-knee 
symptoms limits the probative value of Dr. Jacobson’s opinion on whether the stipulated 
work injury was a significant factor in causing the need for a right total knee 
replacement. 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 18 
 
Further, Dr. Jacobson opines “it is possible” the degenerative arthritis in Corbett’s 
left knee could have progressed to the point of needing a total knee arthroplasty 
independent of the work injury. Causation in workers’ compensation cases is based on 
probability, not possibility. Consequently, Dr. Jacobson positing a counterfactual was 
“possible” is not persuasive. Rather, it reinforces the finding that the evidence reflecting 
the actual events in question shows it is more likely than not the work injury was 
significant factor in necessitating the surgery. 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Corbett to undergo a second IME with Dr. 
Stoken on November 2, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 36) Dr. Stoken performed a records review 
regarding the care Corbett underwent between his first IME with her and the November 
2, 2022 IME and physical examination of Corbett. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 36–39) On the question 
of what, if any, permanent impairment Corbett sustained to his left knee, Dr. Stoken 
opined: 
Using the Guides, Chapter 17, table 17-35, he has 62 points in rating his 
left knee replacement results. 
Using the Guides, Chapter 17, table 17-33, page 547, he fits into the Fair 
Results category, 50–84 points. This allows him 50% Lower Extremity or 
20% Whole Person Impairment due to the Left Total Knee Replacement. 
(Ex. 1, p. 40) 
The weight of the evidence establishes Corbett had pre-existing osteoarthritis in 
both knees. The condition produced little in the way of pain or other symptoms in either 
knee. Corbett was able to perform his daily job duties for decades without complaint or 
limitations. The same is true of physically demanding activities in his free time such as 
bicycle riding, jogging, and hiking. There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from 
which to conclude Corbett developed worsening symptoms with age or heavy usage in 
either knee prior to the stipulated work injuries. Rather, each injury was a significant 
factor in causing the need of a total knee replacement. The evidence shows it is more 
likely than not the osteoarthritis he had in both knees was asymptomatic and did not 
limit him physically until he sustained the stipulated work injuries at the center of this 
case. 
As found above, Drs. Jacobson, Hoffman, and Stoken are unpersuasive on the 
question of whether the stipulated work injury to his left knee was a significant factor in 
causing the need for Corbett to undergo a left total knee replacement. None of the 
doctors addressed Corbett’s lack of symptoms or not needing care for his left knee prior 
to the stipulated work injury. For these reasons, their opinions on the causal link 
between the stipulated work injury and the left total knee replacement surgery are 
unpersuasive and of little probative value in this case. 
MidAmerican argues that Dr. Noiseux had an incorrect understanding of how 
Corbett’s symptoms manifested themselves after surgery and injections to the left knee. 
MidAmerican contends he made his opinions “contingent on the assumption that 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 19 
 
Claimant did not reach ‘anywhere close to his baseline’ following the injections and left 
knee surgery.” (Def. Brief, p. 24 (citing Ex. JE-7, pp. 107, 111)). However, the letter 
regarding Corbett’s left knee that Dr. Noiseux signed on July 13, 2022, says, “Mr. 
Corbett never returned to his baseline from prior to the date of injury and as a result was 
then referred to your care.” (Ex. JE-7, p. 107) While somewhat similar, the wording in 
the letter is different. Moreover, the wording in the letter is in line with the bulk of the 
evidence in this case. 
The weight of the evidence establishes Corbett did not return to his baseline—
largely asymptomatic, with little if any limitation on physical function—with respect to his 
left knee prior to seeing Dr. Noiseux. Thus, Dr. Noiseux’s understanding of Corbett’s 
injury and symptoms in his left knee is accurate overall. The evidence shows Dr. 
Noiseux had the most complete and accurate understanding of Corbett’s left knee 
symptoms, both before and after the stipulated work injury, which makes his opinion on 
the causal link between the need for a left total knee replacement surgery and the work 
injury most persuasive. 
On the question of whether Corbett has reached MMI in his left knee following 
the total knee arthroplasty, neither Dr. Noiseux nor Dr. Hoffman opined. Dr. Jacobson 
opined it was too close to the time of surgery to find Corbett at MMI even though he did 
not examine him personally and only reviewed records. Dr. Stoken did not discuss the 
reasoning behind her apparent conclusion that he was at MMI. Thus, there is an 
insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Corbett had reached MMI at the 
time of hearing from the total left knee replacement surgery. 
As with Corbett’s left knee, Drs. Jacobson, Hoffman, and Stoken do not address 
Corbett’s lack of symptoms in his right knee before the stipulated work injury or his 
ability to function without issue prior to the injury. The record as a whole shows these 
doctors had an incomplete understanding of Corbett’s symptoms and functional ability 
before the stipulated work injury to his right knee. For these reasons, their opinions on 
the causal connection between the stipulated work injury to Corbett’s right knee and the 
need for a total right knee arthroplasty are not persuasive and are given little weight. 
In MidAmerican’s post-hearing brief, it accurately states the contents of the letter 
Dr. Noiseux signed with respect to Corbett’s right knee injury. The letter states that, 
“despite cortisone injections and [E]uflexxa injections, that Mr. Corbett’s right knee 
never returned to anywhere close to his baseline from the day before the injury.” (Ex. 
JE-7, p. 111) The record as a whole shows this statement is accurate. Before the 
stipulated work injury, Corbett did not experience symptoms in his right knee anywhere 
close to those he experienced in the years following the work injury. Likewise, Corbett 
did not experience any functional limitations in the right knee before the stipulated work 
injury, let alone limitations anywhere close to those that followed it.  
While the care Corbett received may have helped to reduce his symptoms and 
increased his function relative to the time period immediately after the work injury, it did 
not return him to his pre-work-injury baseline. The weight of the evidence establishes 
Dr. Noiseux had the most complete and accurate understanding of Corbett’s symptoms 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 20 
 
and functional ability in his right knee both before and after the stipulated work injury. 
Dr. Noiseux’s opinion on the causal link between the stipulated work injury to Corbett’s 
right knee and the need for a total knee arthroplasty is adopted. 
The right total knee replacement surgery recommended by Dr. Noiseux had not 
occurred at the time of hearing. Therefore, Dr. Stoken’s opinion on permanent partial 
disability is premature. It would be inappropriate to reach a finding on permanent 
disability caused by the work injury of July 10, 2019, when Corbett has yet to undergo a 
procedure necessitated by his ongoing symptoms from that injury and that is intended to 
help alleviate those symptoms and increase his functional capacity.   
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injuries at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, No. 
5067766, 2020 WL 7489048 (Iowa Work. Comp. Comm’r, Dec. 11, 2020) (App. 
Decision). 
A .  
C a u s a t i o n.  
“In order for an injury to be compensable in Iowa, there must be ‘a connection 
between the injury and the work.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 
2007) (quoting Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 221 (Iowa 2006)). An employer’s 
duty to furnish reasonable care for an injury under Iowa Code section 85.27(1)(a) is 
based on the requirement that the injury is “compensable” under Iowa Code chapter 85 
or 85A. In this case, the parties dispute whether there is a casual connection between 
the stipulated work injury to Corbett’s left knee and the left total knee arthroplasty he 
underwent and the stipulated injury to his right knee and the need for a right total knee 
arthroplasty. 
The answer to this question lies “‘essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.’” Id. at 845 (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire. & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 
853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency may accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in 
part. Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 752 (Iowa 2002)). In doing so, the 
agency “has the duty to determine credibility of the witnesses and to weigh the 
evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and circumstances, and then to accept 
or reject the opinion.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853.  
When determining which expert opinion is most persuasive, the agency may 
consider the: 
 Expert’s employment in connection with litigation; 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 21 
 
 Timing of the expert’s examination relative to the injury date; 
 Extent and nature of the expert’s examination of the claimant; 
 Expert’s education, training, and area of practice; 
 Accuracy of the facts upon which the expert relied; 
 Completeness of the premise which the expert is given; and 
 Other surrounding circumstances. Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 
N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010); Rockwell Graphic Sys. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 
187, (Iowa 1985); Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
“Medical causation presents a question of fact.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. 
Pease, 807 N.W2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2011). “A cause is proximate if it is a substantial 
factor in bringing about the result. It only needs to be one cause; it does not have to be 
the only cause.” Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 354 (Iowa 1980) 
(internal citations omitted).  
“[W]here an accident occurs to an employee in the usual course of [the 
employee’s] employment, the employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and 
proximately flow from the accident.” Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 266 
N.W. 480, 482 (1936). Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, a claimant “would 
not be entitled to compensation or care for the results of a pre-existing injury or disease, 
but “the mere existence thereof at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.” 
Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 812, 815 (1962). 
However, a claimant is entitled to recover if the claimant “had a pre-existing condition or 
disability that was aggravated, accelerated, worsened or ‘lighted up’” by an incident at 
work. Id.  
1 .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 0 4 5 8. 0 1 :   R i g h t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  J u l y  1 0 ,  
2 0 1 9 .  
As found in Section IV above, the opinion of Dr. Noiseux is most persuasive. The 
evidence is insufficient to establish Dr. Stoken, Dr. Hoffman, and Dr. Jacobson, the 
other doctors who opined on the question of whether there is a causal link between the 
stipulated work injury to Corbett’s right knee and the total right knee replacement 
surgery, had a complete and accurate understanding of Corbett’s symptoms and 
function before and after the work injury. The evidence shows it is more likely than not 
that Dr. Noiseux had the most complete and accurate understanding of Corbett’s 
complaints and functional abilities relative to his right knee from before and after the 
work injury. 
The weight of the evidence shows Corbett had the pre-existing condition of 
osteoarthritis in his right knee, which was aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or lighted 
up by falling into the excavation on July 10, 2019. The need for a total knee arthroplasty 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 22 
 
naturally and proximately flows from the accident. The accident was a significant 
contributing factor to the need for the procedure. Corbett has met his burden of proof on 
the question of whether there is a causal connection between the stipulated work injury 
to his right knee and total right knee replacement surgery. 
2 .  
N o .  2 1 7 0 0 5 3 5. 0 1 :   L e f t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  S e p t e m b e r  
2 8 ,  2 0 2 0 .   
As found above, Dr. Noiseux’s opinion on the causal connection between the 
stipulated work injury to Corbett’s left knee and the total left knee replacement he 
underwent is most persuasive. The evidence is insufficient from which to conclude the 
other doctors who addressed the question had a complete understanding of Corbett’s 
symptoms and level of function before and after the stipulated work injury. The totality of 
the evidence establishes it is more likely than not Dr. Noiseux had the most complete 
and accurate understanding of Corbett’s symptoms and level of function before and 
after the stipulated work injury. 
It is more likely than not that Corbett had osteoarthritis in his left knee, which was 
dormant, before the stipulated work injury. The evidence establishes the total left knee 
replacement he underwent naturally and proximately flowed from the incident on 
September 28, 2020, which was a significant factor in causing the need for the surgery 
because it aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or lighted up the osteoarthritis in his left 
knee, ultimately necessitating the left knee arthroplasty. Corbett has met his burden of 
proof on the question of whether there exists a causal link between the stipulated work 
injury to his left knee and the total left knee arthroplasty he underwent. 
B . 
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y .  
This case stems from two separate injuries: One to the right knee and another to 
the left knee. Each stipulated work injury is to a distinct scheduled member and 
therefore subject to compensation for functional disability out of 220 weeks under the 
statutory schedule. See Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(p); see also Chavez v. MS Technology 
LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 666–67 (Iowa 2022) (discussing compensation for permanent 
partial disability to scheduled members and unscheduled body parts). 
In 2017, the legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.34(2) so that it 
incorporates the Guides by reference. Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2), the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits occurs when both: 
1) The claimant has reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) from the 
work injury; and  
 
2) The extent of any permanent impairment caused by the work injury can be 
determined using the Guides.  
The Guides use the term “maximal medical improvement.” See id., p. 19. The 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act uses “maximum medical improvement.” See Iowa 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 23 
 
Code § 85.34(2). The substantive meaning of the two terms, as contained in the Guides 
and fleshed out via Iowa Supreme Court precedent pre-dating the 2017 amendments, is 
largely similar.  
The Guides provide, “An impairment should not be considered permanent until 
the clinical findings indicate that the medical condition is static and well stabilized.” 
Guides, p. 19. “Maximal medical improvement refers to the date from which further 
recovery or deterioration is not anticipated, although over time there may be some 
expected changes. Once an impairment has reached [maximal medical improvement], a 
permanent impairment rating may be performed.” Id.  
The Iowa Supreme Court has held “a claim for permanent disability benefits is 
not ripe until maximum medical improvement has been achieved.” Bell Bros. Heating 
and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & 
Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 80.03D[3] n. 10, at D80–43 to 
D80–48.2 (2009)). “[A] claimant is entitled to PPD benefits upon proof that ‘it is 
medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated.’” 
Broadlawns Med. Ctr. v. Sanders, 792 N.W.2d 302, 307 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Iowa 
Code § 85.34(1)) (emphasis in opinion). “Any disability that remains after stabilization of 
the condition will support an award of [PPD] benefits to the extent the residual 
impairment decreases the claimant's earning capacity.” Id.  
Corbett seeks PPD benefits for both stipulated work injuries. MidAmerican 
argues that there is an insufficient basis from which to conclude either knee had 
reached MMI at the time of hearing. For Corbett to establish that the question of his 
entitlement to PPD benefits is ripe for determination, he must show by a preponderance 
of the evidence that the clinical findings indicate that the medical condition is static and 
well stabilized—put otherwise, that significant improvement from the injury is not 
anticipated.  
1 .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 0 4 5 8. 0 1 :   R i g h t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  J u l y  1 0 ,  
2 0 1 9 .  
As found in Section IV, the weight of the evidence establishes a causal 
connection between the stipulated work injury of July 10, 2019, and the right total knee 
replacement surgery Corbett will undergo at UIHC. Consequently, Corbett has not yet 
reached MMI under section 85.34 with respect to his right knee injury and the care for it. 
The question of what, if any, permanent partial disability Corbett sustained from the 
stipulated work injury to his right knee is not ripe for adjudication.  
2 .  
N o .  2 1 7 0 0 5 3 5. 0 1 :   L e f t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  S e p t e m b e r  
2 8 ,  2 0 2 0 .   
The weight of the evidence in this case does not establish that Corbett had 
reached MMI at the time of hearing from the total left knee arthroplasty. More time is 
needed for Corbett to reach the point where he is unlikely to have a significant 
improvement in his condition. Therefore, the question of what, if any, permanent 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 24 
 
disability the stipulated work injury to his left knee caused is not ripe for determination 
under Iowa Code section 85.34. 
C . 
M e d i c a l  B e n e f i t s .  
The parties identified reimbursement for the medical expenses in Exhibit 4 as a 
disputed issue and entered into a series of stipulations and identified additional disputed 
issues related to the larger issue in the hearing reports. Corbett did not address the 
issue in his post-hearing brief and neither did MidAmerican. Consequently, the contours 
of the parties’ positions are not clear. 
For all injuries compensable under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employee 
must “furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code Ann. § 85.27(1). The undersigned found a causal connection 
between the stipulated work injuries to Corbett’s knees and the need to undergo a total 
knee arthroplasty for each. This makes the disability stemming from the injuries 
compensable under chapter 85. 
Corbett underwent care for both injuries that did not resolve his symptoms, so he 
sought additional care at UIHC, where Dr. Noiseux recommended the total knee 
replacement surgeries. This establishes the care, both past and future, relating to the 
surgeries and recovery from them is reasonably necessary. MidAmerican is responsible 
for the medical expenses listed in Exhibit 4 and those after the date of hearing relating 
to the total knee arthroplasties and the care following them as recommended by Dr. 
Noiseux. 
D . 
I M E  R e i m b u r s em e nt .  
The parties did not identify IME reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39 
as a disputed issue on the hearing report. Corbett did not discuss IME reimbursement in 
his post-hearing brief. But MidAmerican identified the issue in its post-hearing brief as in 
dispute. (Def. Brief, p. 1) MidAmerican states the following in Footnote 7 on Page 31 of 
its post-hearing brief: 
Defendant agrees that Iowa Code [section] 85.39 allows for the 
reimbursement of Claimant’s IME given the timing of Dr. Hoffman’s 
impairment ratings in relation to Dr. Stoken’s examination. Defendant 
requests that Claimant’s IME be reimbursed for a reasonable fee given 
that Claimant’s total knee replacements are not work related. 
The issue was not identified as in dispute in the hearing reports. MidAmerican 
therefore waived it as a disputed issue because Corbett did not know it was in dispute 
at the time of hearing or at the time of briefing the case. However, even if the issue were 
identified as in dispute in the hearing reports, MidAmerican’s articulated basis for 
limiting the amount it must pay for Dr. Stoken’s examination is that the two total knee 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 25 
 
replacements are not work related and this decision finds that they are work related, as 
detailed above. Consequently, MidAmerican must pay for the entirety of Dr. Stoken’s 
IME. 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
A .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 0 4 5 8. 0 1 :  R i g h t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  J u l y  1 0 ,  
2 0 1 9 .  
1) MidAmerican shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
2) MidAmerican shall pay to Corbett one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) 
for the cost of the filing fee. 
3) MidAmerican shall pay Corbett for the medical expenses listed in Exhibit 4. 
4) MidAmerican shall pay for care after the date of hearing relating to the right 
total knee arthroplasty and recovery from the procedure. 
5) MidAmerican shall reimburse Corbett for Dr. Stoken’s IME. 
B . 
N o .  2 1 7 0 0 5 3 5. 0 1 :   L e f t  K n e e  I n j u r y  o f  S e p t e m b e r  
2 8 ,  2 0 2 0 .  
1) MidAmerican shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2).  
2) MidAmerican shall pay to Corbett one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) 
for the cost of the filing fee. 
3) MidAmerican shall pay Corbett for the medical expenses listed in Exhibit 4. 
4) MidAmerican shall pay for care after the date of hearing relating to the left 
total knee arthroplasty and recovery from the procedure. 
Signed and filed this 27th day of July, 2023. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 

CORBETT V. MIDAMERICAN ENERGY COMPANY 
Page 26 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
John P. Dougherty (via WCES) 
Lori N. Scardina Utsinger (via WCES) 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
