Case Number: 24002862.01
Case Title:  WHITE, NANCY V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      White Nancy-24002862.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NANCY WHITE,   
  : 
 
 
  : 
            File No. 24002862.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA,   
  : 
       
 
 
  :  
  HEAD NOTES:  1804, 3201, 3202,                           
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
       3203, 4100 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Nancy White filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (hereinafter “the Fund”). 
Claimant has alleged a first qualifying loss on July 12, 2016, and a second qualifying 
loss on November 7, 2022.1 The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration 
hearing on May 7, 2025. The case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all 
participants appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 7, and the Fund’s Exhibits AA through FF. The undersigned also takes 
administrative notice of the full commutation of benefits entered into between claimant 
and the employer, Jeld-Wen, Inc., which was filed on June 4, 2025. 
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on May 7, 2025. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on July 11, 2025, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa; 
                                                                 
1 The petition, when filed, also included a claim against Jeld-Wen, Inc., the employer, but the claimant 
and Jeld-Wen reached a settlement agreement prior to hearing. As such, Jeld-Wen did not participate in 
the hearing. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Oct-30  09:41:39     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
2. 
If so, the extent of Fund benefits, including permanent total disability/odd lot; 
and, 
3. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 58-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
9) She resides in Kellogg, Iowa, which is a small town of about 600 people. (Tr., p. 10) 
Claimant testified that the closest grocery store is in Newton, which is about a 20-minute 
drive. Kellogg is about a 45-minute drive from Des Moines.  
 
Claimant is a high school graduate. She testified that her grades were mainly Cs 
and Ds. (Tr., p. 11) While in high school, she worked at fast-food restaurants. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 5, p. 33) After high school, she obtained a Certified Nurses’ Aide 
(CNA) license. (Tr., p. 11) That license is no longer active. However, between 1988 and 
1998, claimant worked as a CNA for a few different nursing homes. (Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 33-
34) She did briefly leave the workforce between 1990 and 1993 to stay home with her 
children. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 34) 
 
In 1998, claimant began working at Jeld-Wen. (Tr., p. 12) Claimant’s job there 
was as an expediter, which she described as taking a piece of glass, and placing it in 
the proper slot in a cart, then taking the glass around the factory to other lines. (Tr., p. 
22) She testified that she had to lift over 50-pounds, and she had to push and pull the 
carts of glass. The formal job description indicates that a glass department expeditor 
delivers remake glass to the lines, slots rework glass on the IG carts, creates rework 
batches, fills in on the line as needed, and performs other tasks as needed. (Cl. Ex. 6, 
p. 37) Workers are required to keep up with the pace of the line, lift 50 pounds, and be 
able to read a tape measure and other internal documents. They must also be able to 
identify different types of windows and doors, and continuously inspect product for 
defects. Claimant’s last day working at Jeld-Wen was January 23, 2025, because the 
company closed the plant. (Tr., pp. 12-13) 
 
Claimant had a left knee injury on July 12, 2016. (Tr., p. 17) She testified that her 
knee had popped at work, and was causing pain. She did not report it as work injury, 
however. (Tr., p. 35) She had an MRI of the left knee on June 27, 2016, which showed 
a tear involving the posterior horn and body of the medial meniscus, trace joint effusion, 
and chondromalacia changes involving the medial patellar facet. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) 
She had left knee surgery on July 12, 2016, performed by Christopher Vincent, M.D. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 5) He performed a left knee arthroscopy with partial medial meniscectomy. 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
Claimant testified that the surgery provided a little bit of relief, but her left knee has 
gotten worse since that time. (Tr., p. 17) She was able to return to her same job after 
she recovered from the left knee surgery, and continued working with no restrictions 
related to the left knee. (Tr., p. 36) 
 
Claimant injured her right knee while working at Jeld-Wen on November 7, 2022. 
(Tr., p. 13) She testified that she was going to the back warehouse to go outside for her 
break, and she tripped over a hole in the floor and landed on her right knee. Her injury 
was accepted as compensable, and her medical treatment was covered by workers’ 
compensation. (Tr., pp. 13-14)  
 
Claimant was not seen for her right knee until April 28, 2023, when she saw 
Carlos Moe, D.O., at Concentra. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 57) It is unclear why she was not seen 
until then, but at the time of her appointment she reported continued right knee pain, 
tenderness, and decreased range of motion. An MRI was ordered. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58) She 
returned to Dr. Moe on May 1, 2023, with no change in her condition. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 60) 
At her next visit on May 8, 2023, she was still waiting for approval of the MRI. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 63) Dr. Moe noted that she continued to have significant swelling of the right knee, 
and that the MRI was extremely important as he could not make a definitive diagnosis 
without it. Dr. Moe referred claimant to orthopedics, as the injury was 7 months old at 
that point, and there was a risk of permanent impairment if the injury was not taken care 
of in a timely fashion.  
 
Claimant saw Christopher Vincent, M.D., at Iowa Ortho on May 16, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 7) Dr. Vincent also recommended an MRI, as well as a knee brace and 
prescription medication. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 9) Claimant returned to Dr. Vincent on May 30, 
2023, who reviewed the MRI results from May 24, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 12-13) The MRI 
showed abnormal signal in the medial meniscus consistent with a complex tear, as well 
as medial compartment and patellofemoral chondromalacia. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 13) Surgery 
was recommended. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) 
 
Claimant had right knee arthroscopic surgery on July 7, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 15) 
Dr. Vincent performed a partial medial meniscectomy, removal of chondral loose bodies 
greater than one centimeter, and chondroplasty of the patellofemoral joint. His 
postoperative diagnosis was medial meniscus tear of the right knee, multiple chondral 
loose bodies, and unstable cartilage flap with delamination of the patellofemoral joint. 
Claimant saw Dr. Vincent on July 18, 2023, for a post-operative visit, at which time she 
complained of continued knee pain and popping with ambulation. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 17) She 
had started physical therapy, and was beginning to improve, but still had pain and 
difficulties. 
 
Claimant next saw Dr. Vincent on August 15, 2023, and reported her symptoms 
had improved. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) She reported minimal pain, and Dr. Vincent wanted her 
to gradually return to work, spending a few hours on her feet each day without 
restrictions, and up to six hours of sit-down options per day. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 22) He then 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
planned to decrease the amount of sit-down time by two hours per week until she would 
be able to return with no restrictions.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Vincent’s office on September 26, 2023, and saw 
Miranda Ayers-Burkgren, PA-C. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 33-35) She reported doing well, with full 
range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 34) She continued to have some pain with stairs, and 
attributed that to weakness. She had returned to work with no restrictions, which she 
said was going well. She was told to continue with physical therapy and follow up with 
Dr. Vincent in four weeks.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Vincent on October 24, 2023, at which time she reported 
symptoms at a level 1 or 2 out of 10. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 37) She said the symptoms occurred 
randomly and were aggravated by not moving the knee. Dr. Vincent recommended a 
cortisone injection to decrease pain and inflammation, which was provided that day, and 
to work with physical therapy on a home exercise program. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 39) 
 
Claimant returned to PA-C Ayers-Burkgren on November 21, 2023, and reported 
minimal improvement in her knee pain and function recently. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 40) Her knee 
pain was worsened by standing for long periods of time. She reported the injection 
provided relief, but it was short-lived. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 42) PA-C Ayers-Burkgren 
recommended a series of three platelet rich plasma (PRP) injections to help with the 
ongoing pain and stiffness.  
 
The last physical therapy record in evidence is dated December 20, 2023. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 100) At that time, claimant was still having pain, but it was not as bad as the 
week prior. She said she was able to work a little longer at that point before having pain. 
It was noted that while her strength continued to improve, she still had deficits, and 
needed continued skilled therapy to address deficits of strength, mobility, pain, and 
neuromotor control. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 102) 
 
Claimant had the first PRP injection on January 2, 2024, followed by two more 
each week after. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 43-51) She returned to PA-C Ayers-Burkgren on March 
5, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 52) She reported doing well, and was placed at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI). (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 53) She was told to continue with home exercises, 
and that no additional follow-up was needed. Claimant testified that she did not report 
zero pain at this last visit, however. (Tr., p. 34) She said that she is infrequently without 
pain in her right knee, depending on how much she does. ( Tr., pp. 34-35) 
 
On March 11, 2024, Dr. Vincent authored a letter to the workers’ compensation 
claims administrator, confirming that claimant reached MMI on March 5, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 55) He stated the PRP injections restored claimant’s knee pain to baseline, and 
resolved the effusions and pain she was experiencing postoperatively. Dr. Vincent 
stated that claimant had no permanent restrictions, and noted that while she may need 
some future treatment for her underlying arthritis, it would not be related to the work 
injury. Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Disability, Fifth Edition, he 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
provided a 2 percent lower extremity impairment rating due to the partial medial 
meniscectomy. 
  
Claimant had a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) at WorkWell on March 18, 
2025, with Daryl Short, DPT. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) The report states that claimant gave a 
consistent effort and demonstrated consistent performance throughout the testing, 
making the results a valid representation of her abilities. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-2) At the 
beginning of the FCE, claimant rated her pain at a level 2 of 10 in her right leg. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 2) As she went through the testing, her pain increased to a level 7 of 10 in her right 
knee and level 3 of 10 in her left knee. Test results showed claimant had significant 
limitations related to stairs; crawling; lifting up to 20 pounds waist to/from floor; lifting up 
to 15 pounds waist to/from crown; and front carry 20 pounds up to 50-feet. She was 
unable to perform crouching and kneeling/half-kneeling. She also had some limitations 
with additional tasks, including standing and walking.  
 
Based on the FCE results, DPT Short opined that claimant did not meet the full 
sedentary category of physical demand level. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) This was based on 
decreased functional strength and endurance of her bilateral knees, right greater than 
left. He also found that she ambulated with an altered gait pattern with an antalgic limp, 
right more than left the longer she is standing or walking. He recommended that she 
limit her standing and walking combined to up to 30 percent of the day, and that she be 
able to change positions between sitting, standing, and walking as needed. This was all 
due to the decreased functional strength and endurance of her bilateral knees, right 
greater than left. 
 
Claimant attended an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., on March 27, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 9) Dr. Bansal’s report is dated April 1, 2025. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 22) Dr. Bansal provided a detailed summary of claimant’s medical history, and 
interviewed claimant regarding her injuries and current symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 9-15) 
He reported that after the November 7, 2022 incident, claimant reported the injury to her 
supervisor, but continued working despite the pain. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 14-15) She was 
instructed by the safety officer to use ice packs on her knee, and monitor the injury for 
one to two weeks. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15) Claimant told Dr. Bansal that her symptoms 
persisted and worsened, and she spoke with the safety officer once per week, if not 
daily, about her worsening knee pain, but was told the injury was improving. Her pain 
continued to increase to the point she was having trouble with weightbearing on her 
right leg, and she told her supervisor she could not continue working without medical 
treatment. At that point, the insurance carrier was contacted, but claimant said it was 
another two months before she had a medical evaluation.  
 
With respect to the left knee, claimant indicated she had surgery in 2016 after an 
injury years prior that occurred while skating. In 2016, while working, her knee popped, 
leading to surgery. 
 
Claimant also discussed her job duties with Dr. Bansal, noting that her job 
involved significant standing, walking, and manipulating materials and equipment. (Cl. 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
Ex. 2, pp. 15-16) She noted that she was unemployed at the time of the IME, as the 
plant had closed, and she had not been able to find another job. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 16) 
 
Dr. Bansal performed a physical examination of both lower extremities. (Cl. Ex. 2, 
pp. 16-17) He provided answers to questions posed by claimant’s attorney, including his 
diagnosis for each knee. With respect to the right knee, Dr. Bansal’s diagnosis was 
medial meniscus tear, multiple chondral loose bodies, unstable cartilage flap with 
delamination of the patellofemoral joint. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 17) He also noted she was status 
post right knee arthroscopy and described the surgery Dr. Vincent performed. With 
respect to the left knee, Dr. Bansal’s diagnosis was left knee symptomatic medial 
meniscus tear, status post arthroscopy with partial medial meniscectomy. 
 
With respect to her current symptoms, Dr. Bansal noted that claimant continued 
to have right knee pain, and reported minimal improvement with surgery. She reported 
needing to be careful with turning and pivoting, as rapid turns caused pain and 
instability in her knee. She reported intermittent swelling, and the inability to kneel or 
squat. She reported difficulty descending stairs, but doing okay with ascending. She 
said she could walk about one to two blocks, or about 15 minutes, without stopping to 
rest, and reported she could kneel on her left knee but could not bend her right knee. 
She reported having better function with her left knee, but still had some limitations. 
 
Dr. Bansal opined that the right knee injury was related to her work injury at Jeld-
Wen. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 18-20) Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, fifth edition, he provided an impairment rating for both knees. (Cl. Ex. 2, p.  
20) For the right knee, Dr. Bansal assigned a combined 7 percent lower extremity 
impairment, due to the surgery and history of direct impact to the knee, patellofemoral 
pain, and crepitus on examination. For the left knee, Dr. Bansal assigned a 2 percent 
lower extremity impairment, due to the partial medial meniscectomy. 
 
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Bansal agreed with the permanent work 
restrictions recommended in the valid FCE on March 18, 2025, which stated she did not 
meet the full sedentary category of physical demand level. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 21) He also 
agreed with Dr. Vincent’s PA-C, Miranda Ayers-Burkgren, that claimant reached MMI on 
March 5, 2024. Regarding future medical treatment, Dr. Bansal recommended periodic 
corticosteroid injections or additional PRP injection if claimant’s pain worsened. He also 
noted viscosupplementation injections may be beneficial for managing osteoarthritis 
symptoms if they progress. Finally, he noted that claimant may eventually require more 
extensive surgical intervention, including partial or total knee replacement, if her 
osteoarthritis becomes significantly disabling. 
 
Claimant participated in a vocational telephone interview with vocational 
specialist Phil Davis, M.S., on April 2, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 24) Mr. Davis’s report is dated 
April 3, 2025. He reviewed medical records, including the Short FCE and Dr. Bansal’s 
IME report, as well as claimant’s answers to interrogatories, the job description, and a 
social security statement. He reviewed claimant’s educational history, noting that she 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
had average to below average grades. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 25) She also reported little to no 
skill with computers, and that she does not have a computer at home.  
 
Mr. Davis reviewed claimant’s vocational history, which includes working at fast-
food establishments during high school, after which she obtained her CNA certificate 
and worked at nursing homes. She then began working at Jeld-Wen in 1998, until the 
plant closed in January of 2025.  
 
Mr. Davis reviewed claimant’s medical records, and provided a brief overview of 
the right and left knee injuries and treatment. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) He reviewed the Short 
FCE, and noted claimant’s restrictions, as well as Dr. Bansal’s IME report. (Cl. Ex. 3, 
pp. 26-27) He noted that claimant had not applied for Social Security Disability benefits. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 27) 
 
Mr. Davis performed a vocational analysis, and responded to specific questions 
from claimant’s attorney. Regarding restrictions, Mr. Davis opined that the restrictions 
recommended in the FCE, with which Dr. Bansal agreed, have an impact on claimant’s 
ability to work. Based on those restrictions, he opined that claimant was not capable of 
returning to any of her past employment activities. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) He stated that 
claimant’s past employment as a CNA and at Jeld-Wen required the ability to physically 
perform work falling into the medium physical demand category. As such, she would not 
be able to perform all of the essential functions of any of her past employment activities.  
 
Mr. Davis further opined that based on the restrictions provided by the valid FCE 
and Dr. Bansal’s IME report, claimant was currently incapable of performing all of the 
essential functions of any of her past employment activities. Taking into consideration 
her permanent restrictions, age, educational background, and work history, he opined 
that she had lost access to 100 percent of her past occupations. Looking at her past 
employment, he noted that the majority would require physical abilities beyond what she 
is able to perform. As such, he also opined that she had lost access to greater than 90 
percent of her pre-injury labor market. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 28-29) 
 
With respect to retraining, Mr. Davis noted that no academic testing was 
performed, but claimant reported limited computer skills. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 29) He opined 
that her ability to retrain was questionable, due to her need to change positions as 
needed, and the extended period of time sitting in an academic setting.  
 
Claimant underwent a second FCE on April 3, 2025, at Athletico with John 
Kruzich, OTR/L. (Second Injury Fund’s Exhibit CC, p. 20) Similar to the first FCE, 
claimant reported a pain level at level 3 out of 10 prior to testing, and 8 out of 10 at the 
conclusion. (Fund Ex. CC, p. 22) The results of the second FCE were also found to be 
valid, based on claimant’s consistent effort and other factors. Based on the results, it 
was recommended that claimant avoid floor to waist lifting, squatting, and kneeling, and 
limit most lifting between 15 and 20 pounds to an occasional basis. It was also 
recommended she climb stairs only occasionally, with use of handrails as required. She 
demonstrated the ability for frequent standing work, with positional changes as required. 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
This placed claimant in the light physical demand level according to Mr. Kruzich. (Fund 
Ex. CC, p. 21) 
 
While she did not have any permanent restrictions from Dr. Vincent, claimant 
testified that Jeld-Wen had allowed her to have a coworker help with lifting, pushing, 
and pulling. (Tr., p. 31) She also had asked permission to get a chair whenever she 
needed it, and was able to sit down as needed. Claimant testified that she believes if 
the plant had not closed, Jeld-Wen would have eventually fired her because of this and 
because she was slow at her job after the injury. (Tr., pp. 22-23) She said she thought 
her supervisors were getting frustrated that they had to have coworkers help her, and 
they would have found someone able to do the job on their own. She also testified that 
her final performance review was a lower score than she had ever received before over 
her years of employment with Jeld-Wen. (Tr., p. 44) 
 
Claimant testified that since the plant closure and loss of her job, she has been 
looking for work, but has not had any calls or interviews. (Tr., p. 23) She has not applied 
for Social Security disability benefits, because she wants to work. She testified that she 
wants to find a job and make money. Claimant testified that she has only applied for two 
jobs since losing her job at Jeld-Wen, but that she has looked at “over hundreds of jobs” 
on her phone. (Tr., p. 42) She has not applied for any factory jobs, because with her 
restrictions, she does not believe she will be hired, and she does not want to waste her 
time or theirs. The jobs she applied for were housekeeping and laundry. She testified 
that she intends to continue looking for jobs, because she wants to go back to work. 
(Tr., p. 43) 
 
Claimant testified that the jobs she has looked at are not all located in Kellogg, 
Iowa, but are usually within a 20 to 25-minute drive. (Tr., p. 45) Other than Mr. Davis, 
claimant has not seen any other vocational professionals or sought any assistance 
through the State for help with her job search. (Tr., p. 48) 
 
Claimant testified that she does not believe she would have been able to 
continue working at Jeld-Wen after the right knee surgery had it not been for the 
accommodations she was provided. (Tr., pp. 27-28) She would not have been able to lift 
50 pounds on her own, nor work at the pace required without help from coworkers and 
the ability to sit as needed. (Tr., p. 28) She testified that she does not think she will be 
able to find a new job, as the employer would have to give her a chance and work with 
her current restrictions. She did receive a severance package from Jeld-Wen, and had 
not applied for unemployment at the time of hearing, although she had plans to do so. 
(Tr., pp. 38-39)  
 
Claimant testified that she continues to have problems with both knees. (Tr., p. 
24) She said that they throb and get stiff, and at times there is some numbness. When 
they get stiff, she has to stand up and walk around, but if she stands for too long, they 
start to throb more, so she has to sit down. She no longer does yard work or shovels 
snow at her home due to her knees. She has also installed handle grips on her 
bathroom wall in order to help her get out of the bathtub. (Tr., p. 25) Her knees have 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
impacted the way she does other activities, such as getting dressed and performing 
household chores. She testified that she has to sit down every 10 to 15 minutes, 
depending on how much walking and moving around she has done that day. She also 
has difficulty driving for more than about 30 minutes, as her knees start to hurt. (Tr., p. 
26) She has to pull over and walk around for a few minutes after driving for 30 minutes. 
She continues to take over-the-counter medication for her knee pain, usually twice a 
day.  
 
Claimant testified that she does not believe she could go back to school, as it has 
been 40 years since she graduated from high school, and she does not know enough 
about computers or type well. (Tr., pp. 26-27) She does not believe she would be able 
to perform any of the previous fast-food jobs she has had, due to the fast pace, 
standing, walking, and lifting. (Tr., p. 27) She does not believe she would be able to 
return to work as a CNA, due to the lifting, standing, walking, and pushing wheelchairs.  
 
Despite her ongoing problems, claimant has not returned for any additional 
medical treatment with Dr. Vincent or otherwise since 2024. (Tr., p. 45) She testified 
that she does not trust Dr. Vincent anymore, because she felt like he wanted to “push 
me out of the way” so the workers’ compensation case would be closed. (Tr., pp. 45-46) 
She also testified that she does not like to go to the doctor that often, and tries to get 
her pain to get better on her own before going to a doctor for it. (Tr., p. 46) She testified 
that both Dr. Bansal and Dr. Vincent told her she would likely eventually need knee 
replacement surgery. (Tr., p. 21) 
  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first issue to determine in this case is whether claimant is entitled to benefits 
from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage 
the hiring of handicapped persons by making a current employer responsible only for 
the amount of disability related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the 
handicapped individual as if the individual had had no preexisting disability. See 
Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789, 792 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, 
Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 471 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355, 358 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300, 304 (Iowa 1979). The question is whether the cumulative effect of 
the two scheduled member injuries resulted in industrial disability in excess of the 
Fund’s credits. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d at 357-58. 
Iowa Code section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability. Before liability of 
the Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met. First, the employee must have 
lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye. Second, the employee must sustain 
a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable 
injury. Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
injury. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 8012 (Iowa 1994). It is 
the claimant’s burden to prove some permanent disability resulting from both the initial 
scheduled member injury and the second alleged scheduled member injury by the 
preponderance of the evidence. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 
543, 547-48 (Iowa 1995); Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6). 
In this case, claimant has alleged she is entitled to permanent total disability 
benefits, under either the traditional, statutory approach, or under the odd-lot doctrine. 
The Fund disagrees, and argues that claimant has not shown industrial disability in 
excess of the Fund’s credits.  
The parties stipulated that claimant sustained a first qualifying loss to her left leg 
on July 12, 2016, which resulted in 2 percent functional loss to the left lower extremity. 
(See Hearing Report, p. 3) The parties further stipulated that claimant sustained a 
compensable loss to the right leg on November 7, 2022, resulting in 7 percent functional 
loss to the right lower extremity. The parties also agree that if Fund benefits are 
awarded, the commencement date is June 20, 2024, and the Fund is entitled to a credit 
under Iowa Code section 85.64 for 19.8 weeks. (Tr., pp. 5-7) Due to the parties’ 
stipulations, the remaining issue to decide is whether the cumulative effect of claimant’s 
right and left lower extremity injuries resulted in industrial disability in excess of the 
Fund’s 19.8 weeks of credit.  
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee’s age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer’s offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). The commissioner 
may also consider claimant’s medical condition prior to the injury, immediately after the 
injury, and presently in rendering an evaluation of industrial disability. IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632-633 (Iowa 2000) (citing McSpadden, 288 N.W.2d at 192). 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness. Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee’s experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 
258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
The focus for evaluating total disability is on the person’s ability to earn a living.  
Diederich, 258 N.W. at 902. The question is whether the person is capable of 
performing a sufficient quantity and quality of work that an employer in a well-
established branch of the labor market would employ the person on a continuing basis 
and pay the person sufficient wages to permit the person to be self-supporting.  Tobin-
Nichols v. Stacyville Community Nursing Home, File No. 1222209 (App. December 
2003). A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however. See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). Industrial disability is determined by the effect the injury has on the 
employee’s earning capacity. Bearce v. FMC Corp., 465 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1991); 
Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 123 (Iowa Ct. App. 2003). 
Another important factor in the consideration of permanent and total disability 
cases is the employer’s ability to retain the injured worker with an offer of suitable work.  
The refusal or inability of the employer to return a claimant to work in any capacity is, by 
itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability. Clinton v. All-American Homes, File 
No. 5032603 (App. April 17, 2013); Western v. Putco, Inc., File Nos. 5005190, 5005191 
(App. July 29, 2005); Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, File No. 951206 (App. January 20, 
1995); Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 876894 (App. January 22, 1993); 
see also Larson, Workers’ Compensation Law, Section 57.61, pp. 10-164.90-95; 
Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark 385, 609 S.W.2d 102 (1980); Army & Air Force 
Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F.Supp. 865 (W.D. La 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas 
Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950). An employer knows the demands 
that are placed on its workforce. Its determination that the worker is too disabled for it to 
employ is entitled to considerable weight. If the employer in whose employ the disability 
occurred is unwilling or unable to accommodate the disability, there is no reason to 
expect some other employer to have more incentive to do so. 
In this case, the Fund argues that claimant has not proven she is permanently 
and totally disabled, noting that claimant continued to work for Jeld-Wen after the right 
knee injury for approximately 16 months following her full-duty release to return to work 
by Dr. Vincent in September of 2023. The only reason she stopped working in January 
of 2025 was due to the plant closure. The Fund points to claimant’s deposition 
testimony, in which she stated if she had not been laid off, she would continue to work 
at Jeld-Wen. (Fund Ex. DD, p. 35; Deposition Transcript p. 28) However, claimant 
stated she would have continued to work because she wants to work, as she stated in 
her testimony at hearing. She also testified in her deposition, like her testimony at 
hearing, that she was able to sit down and take breaks as needed at Jeld-Wen after the 
right knee surgery. (Fund Ex. DD, p. 36; Depo. Tr., p. 32) She went into greater detail at 
hearing regarding the extent of accommodations that Jeld-Wen was providing, including 
assistance from coworkers and a chair so she could sit as needed. (Tr., pp. 27-28; 31) 
She further explained at hearing that she does not believe she would have been able to 
continue working at Jeld-Wen after the right knee surgery had it not been for the 
accommodations she was provided. (Tr., pp. 27-28) The fact that claimant did not have 
formal restrictions from Dr. Vincent is not determinative in light of the employer’s 
informal accommodations for claimant upon her return to work. Additionally, Dr. Vincent 
did not send claimant for an FCE or provide any opinion regarding restrictions after 
either of the two FCEs were completed. Both FCEs were determined to be valid, and 
under the restrictions of either, claimant would be disqualified from performing the 
expediter position at Jeld-Wen. Considering all of the information as a whole, claimant’s 
return to work at Jeld-Wen following surgery does not preclude a finding that she is 
permanently and totally disabled. 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
The Fund also argues that claimant has not shown significant motivation to find 
employment. Claimant testified that while she has reviewed hundreds of jobs on her 
phone, she had only submitted applications for two at the time of hearing. (Tr., p. 42) 
She had not applied for other positions, including factory positions, because she did not 
want to waste anyone’s time, as she did not believe she would be able to perform the 
job duties with her restrictions. A claimant need not make efforts to work if those efforts 
would be futile. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 267 (Iowa 
1995). Any other rule would require clearly unemployable claimants to go through the 
futile exercise of searching for nonexistent employment. Id. 
I find that claimant has demonstrated motivation to continue working, both 
through her ongoing job hunt and her continued work at Jeld-Wen after surgery despite 
her pain and limitations. She has consistently testified that she wants to work, and has 
not applied for Social Security disability benefits because she still hopes to find a job 
she can physically perform.  
The Fund also argues that the vocational analysis provided by Mr. Davis is not 
accurate, because he did not review the FCE from Athletico that was performed after 
his analysis was completed. While the Athletico FCE placed claimant in the light 
physical demand category rather than the less-than sedentary category of the Short 
FCE, Mr. Davis noted that all of claimant’s past employment required work in the 
medium physical demand category. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) As such, there is no reason to 
believe that reviewing the Athletico FCE would have changed Mr. Davis’s opinion. 
Additionally, his opinion is unrebutted, and claimant agrees with his analysis.  
Finally, the Fund argues that the industrial disability for which the fund is liable is 
limited to that which exists as a result of the combination of the scheduled member 
injuries. If there are other factors, including other physical conditions, that contribute to 
industrial disability, the Fund argues it should not be held liable. The Fund notes that 
claimant’s FCE report indicates she had low back pain with several range of motion 
measurements, and it is unclear whether that contributed to the overall findings of the 
FCE. To the contrary, the Short FCE specifically states that the findings are based on 
“her decreased functional strength and endurance of her knees bilaterally, right greater 
than left.” (CL. Ex. 1, pp. 2-3) There is no evidence in the record to indicate that 
claimant has significantly disabling back pain, or needs any job accommodations or 
restrictions due to any issues with her back. 
The Fund also argues that claimant’s left knee condition has not significantly 
contributed to industrial disability, as she was able to work full-duty following that injury 
and has not required any additional treatment since that time. However, claimant 
credibly testified that her left knee has gotten worse since her right knee injury, and that 
she used a brace on occasion for both knees, when the pain got bad. (Tr., pp. 17, 37) 
Additionally, Dr. Bansal’s objective physical examination and the results of his IME 
provide unrebutted evidence that claimant has sustained permanent functional disability 
in both her right and left knee. Both FCE reports indicate bilateral knee pain, right 
greater than left. As such, the objective evidence supports claimant’s subjective 
complaints with respect to her bilateral knees. 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
Claimant was 58-years-old at the time of hearing. She has a high school 
education with average to below-average grades. She does not own a personal 
computer, and has limited computer skills. Her prior jobs have all involved work in the 
medium physical demand category, at minimum. Two valid FCEs have recommended 
permanent work restrictions in the sedentary to light physical demand category. A 
vocational analysis determined claimant’s ability to retrain is questionable, and that she 
has lost access to 100 percent of her past occupations, and more than 90 percent of her 
pre-injury labor market. She has looked at hundreds of job postings, but has only found 
two she felt physically capable enough to apply for.  
I have considered claimant’s age, education, employment history, inability to 
return to her prior jobs, her ability to retrain, her motivation, the situs and severity of her 
injuries, her impairment and restrictions, and all other industrial disability factors 
identified by the Iowa Supreme Court. I find claimant’s restrictions, combined with her 
prior work experience and education, preclude her from performing her past jobs.  
Having considered all of the evidence in the record, the greater weight of 
evidence supports the finding that claimant is permanently and totally disabled as a 
result of her bilateral knees. Realistically, there are no jobs within the community that 
claimant can perform and for which she can realistically compete in her current 
condition. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 815 (Iowa 1994). 
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant proved she is permanently and totally disabled. 
Because I find claimant permanently and totally disabled under the traditional 
standard, it is not necessary to address the argument that she is an odd lot employee. 
However, I find that she would also qualify for permanent total disability under the odd- 
lot doctrine. In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa 
Supreme Court formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.” Under that doctrine, a worker 
becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining 
employment in any well-known branch of the labor market. An odd-lot worker is thus 
totally disabled if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, 
dependability, or quantity that a reasonable stable market for them does not exist.” Id. at 
105.       
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker. When the worker makes a prima facie case of 
total disability by producing substantial evidence the worker is non-employable in the 
competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing availability of 
suitable employment shifts to the defendant. If the defendant fails to produce such 
evidence, and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot category, the 
worker is entitled to a finding of total disability. Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. Factors to 
be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee include the 
worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful efforts to find steady employment, vocational or 
other expert evidence demonstrating that suitable work is not available for the worker, 
the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, training, 
and the potential for retraining. No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue. Nelson, 
544 N.W.2d at 258. Even under the odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
the weight and credibility of evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of 
persuasion has been carried. Only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently 
strong as to compel a finding of total disability as a matter of law. Guyton, 373 N.W.2d 
at 106.  
In this case, claimant has made a prima facie case of total disability, as explained 
above. The burden to produce evidence showing some availability of suitable 
employment thus shifts to the Fund. Essentially, the only evidence offered by the Fund 
was the fact that claimant continued to work at Jeld-Wen for 16 months after Dr. Vincent 
released her. As noted above, that work was accommodated by the employer. That 
being said, that work is no longer available, as the Jeld-Wen plant has closed. The Fund 
has not offered any other evidence that suitable employment is available to claimant, 
and offered no rebuttal to the vocational analysis provided by Mr. Davis. As such, I find 
that claimant would still be found permanently and totally disabled under the odd-lot 
doctrine even if the traditional standards did not apply.  
Because claimant has proven she is permanently and totally disabled due to the 
cumulative effects of both scheduled member injuries, she is entitled to benefits from 
the Second Injury Fund in excess of the Fund’s credit. The parties stipulated that the 
Fund is entitled to 19.8 weeks of credit. The parties further stipulated that the 
commencement date for Fund benefits is June 20, 2024. As such, the Fund shall pay 
claimant permanent total disability benefits commencing June 20, 2024. 
The final issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to costs. The Second 
Injury Fund Act does not provide for costs to be paid by the Fund. Iowa Code section 
85.64. Additionally, subsection 2 of Iowa Code section 85.66, which codifies the 
creation of the Fund, specifically states, in pertinent part “... Moneys collected in the 
second injury fund shall be disbursed only for the purposes stated in this subchapter, 
and shall not at any time be appropriated or diverted to any other use or purpose.” The 
plain language of Iowa Code section 85.66 does not allow for the assessment of costs 
against the Fund. Houseman v. Second Injury Fund, File No. 5052139 (Arb. Dec. Aug. 
8, 2016): see DART v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, at 845 (Iowa 2015) (declaring an 
agency's authority to tax costs cannot go beyond the scope of the powers delegated in 
the governing statute). As such, no costs are awarded to claimant. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
The Second Injury Fund shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits at 
the stipulated rate of six hundred twenty-eight and 14/100 dollars ($628.14), 
commencing June 20, 2024 and continuing during the period of permanent total 
disability. 
 
 
The Second Injury Fund is entitled to 19.8 weeks of credit, as stipulated by the 
parties. 
 

WHITE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
The Second Injury Fund shall pay interest on all accrued weekly benefits 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30. Interest accrues on unpaid Second Injury Fund 
benefits from the date of this decision. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 
N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990).  
 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
Signed and filed this __30th __ day of October, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Randall Schueller  (via WCES) 
Sejla Numic   
(via WCES) 
Meredith Cooney  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must b e received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
