Case Number: 5062478
Case Title:  CARROW, PAMELA M V. HY-VEE INC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Carrow, Pamela-5062478.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT IN AND FOR POLK COUNTY 
PAMELA CARROW, 
        Petitioner,     
                 
 
vs. 
HY-VEE., EMC PROPERTY AND CASUALTY 
COMPANY, (EMC RISK SERVICES, LLC - TPA), 
         Respondents. 
  
  
    
Case No. CVCV058140 
  
  
RULING ON PETITIONER’S 
PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
This matter came before the court on November 22, 2019 for a hearing before the District Court 
on Petitioner’s Petition for Judicial Review. Having entertained the arguments of counsel, having 
reviewed the court file and the applicable law, being otherwise fully advised in the premises, the court 
enters the following order.  
 
I. 
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
 
Plaintiff, Pamela Carrow, filed two petitions in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from both her employer, Hy-Vee, and its insurer, EMC Property and Casualty Company. Her 
claim arises as a result of two injuries she allegedly suffered on August 18, 2015 and on October 9, 2015, 
both allegedly arising out of and in the course of her employment.  
Petitioner, who at the time of hearing was 65 years of age and has her GED, suffers from a long 
and complicated injury history. Prior to the injury allegedly arising out of and in the course of her 
employment with Hy-Vee, Petitioner had previously suffered injuries to her feet (including plantar 
fasciitis and tendonitis in both feet), back, and neck. Petitioner previously cut her left foot with an X-
ACTO knife at the end of December, 2014. She was treated at an emergency room and, in either March of 
2015 or June of 2015 (the record is unclear), reported this injury to her podiatrist. Petitioner underwent a 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

surgical procedure to correct her hammertoes in June of 2015. She was released to return to work on July 
30, 2015, with the use of a protective boot and restrictions to her walking and standing.  
On August 18, 2015, Petitioner injured her left foot while at Hy-Vee. The record concerning this 
injury is unclear. It appears that Petitioner was resting her foot on a ledge when she was approached by a 
customer. At this point, her foot slid off of the ledge and her toes bent backward. She heard a crack. It is 
unclear whether or not Petitioner was wearing her CAM boot at this time. Petitioner claimed in her 
testimony that she was wearing the boot, but that it left her toes exposed and was flexible. This account is 
different from her previous descriptions of the same injury. In her account of the injury to Dr. Modlin, her 
podiatrist, Petitioner indicated that she was not wearing her CAM boot as she was on her left foot and left 
knee and, when rising, caught her left second and third toes on the surface of the floor. It is further 
unclear when Petitioner reported her injury to human resources at work, and it does not appear she 
completed any paperwork with the employer on the day of the injury.  
On August 19, 2015, Petitioner went to see her podiatrist, Dr. Modlin. Dr. Modlin informed 
Petitioner that she had fractured two toes he had previously performed surgery on. Petitioner continued to 
work at Hy-Vee until October 8, 2015. On October 9, 2015, Petitioner underwent surgery, resulting in the 
two injured toes being amputated.  
December 8, 2015, Petitioner visited Dr. Glenn Hockett for chronic neuropathic pain in her left 
foot. Dr. Hockett opined that Petitioner was unable to work due to her foot pain. Petitioner visited Dr. 
Hockett once more on January 25, 2016, again for left foot pain and for acute cervical radicular pain, 
again opining that Petitioner should be excused from work.  
On July 18, 2016, Petitioner saw Dr. Chandan Reddy. Dr. Reddy opined that Petitioner suffered 
from cervical spondylosis with radiculopathy. He further opined that Petitioner should consider 
undergoing an anterior cervical discectomy and fusion, but Petitioner chose not to.  
 
On September 23, 2016, Plaintiff filed two arbitration petitions resulting from injuries suffered on 
August 18, 2015 and October 9, 2015.  
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

On August 24, 2017, Petitioner underwent her first independent medical examination (“IME”) 
with podiatrist Dr. Lee. Dr. Lee opined that Petitioner’s account of her work injury, either traumatic or 
cumulative, was not supported by the circumstances. Dr. Lee specifically noted that, after Petitioner’s 
initial surgery by Dr. Modlin to correct Petitioner’s hammertoe, Modlin’s efforts to correct Petitioner’s 
toes were already failing. Dr. Lee diagnosed Petitioner with amputation of the second and third toes 
following the failed hammertoe correction surgery, but did not link the diagnosis back to the alleged work 
injury in any way. Dr. Lee also diagnosed Petitioner with chronic pain but only minimally attributed it to 
Petitioner’s foot pain.  
 
Petitioner underwent a second IME by Dr. Stoken on September 11, 2017. Dr. Stoken causally 
related Petitioner’s toe amputations, chronic foot pain, and aggravated back pain to “the work incident 
referenced in the workers’ compensation Petition.” Dr. Stoken’s report did not go on to explore the cause 
of Petitioner’s foot injury.  
 
The Deputy Commissioner’s Arbitration Decision, filed August 15, 2018, awarded Petitioner 
nothing. In his decision, Deputy Commissioner James F. Elliott specifically noted the unclear record 
regarding the origin of Petitioner’s foot injury. Deputy Commissioner Elliott found Dr. Modlin’s report 
particularly convincing, noting that Modlin’s analysis was the most contemporaneous report and therefore 
likely the most accurate. Dr. Modlin’s notes indicated that Petitioner was not wearing her CAM boot and 
that she injured her left second and third toes when she was on her left foot and left knee and attempted to 
rise from that position. He concluded that, in light of the credibility of  Dr. Modlin’s report, Petitioner had 
failed to carry her burden of proof that her injury arose out of and in the course of her work, there was no 
convincing evidence that Petitioner had sustained a qualifying work injury and, as such, denied her 
request for workers’ compensation benefits.   
Petitioner filed her Motion for Rehearing on September 4, 2018. That motion was denied on 
September 11, 2018. On September 24, 2018, Petitioner filed her Notice of Appeal to the Commissioner. 
In his decision dated April 17, 2019, The Commissioner entered his decision, ordering that the arbitration 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

decision filed August 15, 2018 and the ruling on Motion for Rehearing filed on September 11, 2018, were 
affirmed in their entirety. Petitioner timely filed her Petition for Judicial Review.  
 
II. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Iowa Code Chapter 17A governs judicial review of final agency action. “Under the Act, [the 
court] may only interfere with the commissioner’s decision if it is erroneous on one of the grounds 
enumerated in the statute, and a party’s substantial rights have been prejudiced.” Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006). A party challenging agency action bears the burden of demonstrating the 
action’s invalidity and resulting prejudice. Iowa Code § 17A.19(8)(a). In exercising the power of judicial 
review, the district court acts in an appellate capacity. Nance v. Iowa Dept. of Revenue, 908 N.W.2d 261 
(Iowa 2018) (quoting Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 457, 463 (Iowa 2004)). 
Where the reviewing court is asked to review an agency’s interpretation of law, the court affords 
the agency a level of deference dependent on whether the authority to interpret that law has “clearly been 
vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency.” Burton v. Hilltop Care Center, 813 N.W.2d 
250, 256 (Iowa 2012). Where the legislature has clearly vested the agency with such authority, the court 
“will only reverse a decision of statutory construction which is irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable.” Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 252, 252 (Iowa 2010). If the agency has 
not been clearly vested with the authority to interpret the law, the court reviews questions of statutory 
interpretation for correction of errors at law. Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1, 7 (Iowa 2012). If 
the alleged error lies in the commissioner’s application of the law to the facts, the court will determine 
whether the commissioner’s application of the law to the facts is irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable. Larson Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 856-57 (Iowa 2009). 
On the contrary, factual determinations made by the Commissioner are vested by a provision of 
law in the discretion of the agency.’” Larson, 763 N.W.2d at 850 (quoting Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 
N.W.2d 457, 465 [Iowa 2004]). This Court defers to the Commissioner’s determinations of fact where 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

they arise from “substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is viewed as a 
whole.” Iowa Code 17A.19 § (10)(f). Substantial evidence is  
the quantity and quality of evidence that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, 
and reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the consequences resulting from 
the establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of great importance. 
Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f )(1); see also Larson at 850.  
The court should engage in a “fairly intensive review of the record”, rather than “simply rubber stamp the 
agency fact finding.” Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 499 (Iowa 2003). However, 
this does not require the parties to present a higher threshold of proof to support the agency’s decisions 
nor does it increase the court’s obligation to review the case; this is merely a more detailed statement of 
the law intended not to “...increase the intensity of judicial review...but to ensure that courts actually 
follow the level of review consistent with the act.” Id.  
In ascertaining the grounds underlying Petitioner’s claim, be it on the basis of fact or on issues of 
law, Petitioner fails to clearly identify which of the subsections of Iowa Code § 17A.19(10) she relies on 
in appealing to this Court for judicial review. It does appear the gist of her claim is that the Deputy 
Commissioner erred in failing to find substantial evidence supported Petitioner’s claimed injury arising 
out of and in the course of her employment with Hy-Vee. Given Petitioner seems to take issue with the 
Commissioner’s determinations of fact, it appears Petitioner disputes the factual basis and findings 
underlying her claim and the Commissioner’s ruling. As such, this court will only disturb the 
Commissioner’s factual findings if there is not substantial evidence in the record, when viewed as a 
whole, to support them.  
III. 
MERITS 
 
Petitioner bears the burden of proving a compensable injury qualifying for benefits, and that said 
injury arose out of and in the course of employment by a preponderance of the evidence. Quaker Oats Co. 
v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996). “An injury arises out of the course of employment when there 
is a causal relationship between the employment and the injury.” Id. Petitioner must also prove, by a 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

preponderance of the evidence, the date on which she, as a reasonable person, would be plainly aware of 
(1) the injury and (2) the causal relationship between the injury and her employment. George A. Hormel 
& Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 152 (Iowa 1997).  
Petitioner in large part relies on the language of Iowa Code 17A.16(1), stating that the “[a]gency 
decision shall include an explanation of why the relevant evidence in the records supports each material 
finding of fact...Each conclusion of law shall be supported by cited authority or by a reasoned opinion.” 
Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 561-62 (Iowa 2010). On its face, this seems to 
impose an onerous requirement that the Commissioner make note of every material fact relied on in his 
decision as well as the relevant evidence underlying that fact. In reality, the requirement is less than that - 
as interpreted by Iowa courts, the Commissioner’s duty requires the commissioner’s decision to 
...be “sufficiently detailed to show the path he has taken through conflicting evidence,” 
[but] the law does not require the commissioner to discuss each and every fact in the record 
and explain why or why not he has rejected it. Such a requirement would be unnecessary 
and burdensome.  
Id. 
 
Here, there is ample indication from both the arbitration decision and the Commissioner’s review 
that the evidence in the record was considered. The arbitration decision in particular states the 
material facts relied on by the deputy commissioner, including his consideration of Petitioner’s 
past injuries, the credibility determination made regarding the multiple conflicting reports 
concerning causation of Petitioner’s injury, his reliance on reports most contemporaneous with 
Petitioner’s reported injuries, and how convincing he found the evidence presented to him.  
 
Petitioner takes issue with the deputy commissioner and commissioner finding Drs. 
Modlin and Nelson credible on the issues of causation and the cumulative nature of Petitioner’s 
injury. It is the function of the finder of fact to determine witness credibility. See, e.g., State v. 
Dudley, 856 N.W.2d 668, 677-78 (Iowa 2014). Here, the deputy commissioner, having examined 
the record, made the following findings regarding the Petitioner’s issues. First, Petitioner found 
that Petitioner was not credible on the issue of causation of the traumatic injury. Second, he found 
Dr. Modlin’s report, being the most contemporaneous with the issue, to be the most credible 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

report concerning causation of the traumatic injury. Third, the deputy commissioner rejected Dr. 
Stoken’s reported causation of Petitioner’s traumatic injury based on Stoken’s assumption that the 
injury occurred at work, a fact in dispute between the parties. Based on the evidence, the deputy 
commissioner was entitled to find that, contrary to the evidence presented by Petitioner, the facts 
concerning the nature and cause of the injury were different from those assumed to be true by Dr. 
Stoken, thereby undermining the credibility of Dr. Stoken’s testimony. Fourth, the deputy 
commissioner found that Petitioner’s evidence of cumulative injury unconvincing. Fifth, the 
deputy commissioner specifically noted that he found Dr. Nelson’s report most persuasive 
concerning the possible cumulative nature of Petitioner’s injury. Nelson’s report indicated his 
inability to state within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Petitioner’s CAM boot 
exacerbated her lower back pain. He further opined that there were no cumulative injuries 
through October 9, 2015. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the deputy found that the 
evidence submitted by the Petitioner did not amount to a preponderance of same. The 
Commissioner echoed the deputy commissioner’s sentiments in his appellate ruling. In this 
instance, the material facts upon which both the deputy commissioner and Commissioner based 
their rulings constitute, in this court’s view, substantial evidence supporting their findings of fact. 
This Court will not disturb those factual findings.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The Commissioner’s ruling is AFFIRMED. The Commissioner’s statement and division of costs 
is likewise AFFIRMED.  
 
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV058140
PAMELA CARROW VS HYVEE INC ET AL
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-02-03 14:26:39     page 8 of 8
E-FILED  2020 FEB 03 2:26 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
