Case Number: 5063845
Case Title:  LAWSON, MARK V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lawson Mark-5063845d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERSŌĆÖ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARK LAWSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5063845 
LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                      Head Note No.:  1103 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Mark Lawson filed a petition in arbitration seeking workersŌĆÖ compensation 
benefits from Lehigh Northwest Cement and Liberty Mutual Insurance. The case came 
for hearing in Des Moines, Iowa, on May 28, 2019. Lawson participated personally and 
through his attorney, Sarah Baumgartner. The defendants participated through attorney 
Jeffrey Lanz. The case was fully submitted on June 25, 2019. 
The record consists of: 
’é¦ Hearing testimony by Lawson; 
’é¦ Hearing testimony by John Ward, a supervisor on the day shift at Lehigh; 
’é¦ Joint Exhibits 1 through 7; 
’é¦ ClaimantŌĆÖs Exhibits 1 through 2; and 
’é¦ DefendantsŌĆÖ Exhibits A through I. 
Under Rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
which defined the claims, defense, and issues submitted to the undersigned. The 
parties entered into various stipulations in the hearing report. All of the partiesŌĆÖ 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision. No 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Mar-02  14:56:05     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 2 
 
 
factual or legal issues relative to the partiesŌĆÖ stipulations will be raised or discussed in 
this decision except to help clarify the analysis of a disputed issue. The parties are now 
bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for determination: 
1) Whether Lawson sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Lehigh on December 22, 2016; 
2) Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery; 
3) Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and if so, the 
nature and extent of any permanent disability; 
4) Whether Lawson gave timely notice of his alleged work injury under Iowa 
Code section 85.23; 
5) Whether Iowa Code section 85.34(7) on successive disabilities applies to 
LawsonŌĆÖs alleged work injury; 
6) Whether Lawson is entitled to payment for an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39; and 
7) Whether Lawson is entitled to payment of medical expenses. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Lawson was 60 years old at the time of hearing. (Hearing Transcript, page 11) 
He was married at all times material hereto. (Tr. p. 11) Lawson completed high school 
through the 11th grade and ultimately received his GED. (Tr. p. 12) 
Lehigh hired Lawson in approximately 1997. (Tr. p. 13) During LawsonŌĆÖs career 
with Lehigh, he has held the following positions: 
’é¦ Worked in the yard; 
’é¦ Mill laborer; 
’é¦ Miller; 
’é¦ Extra man;  
’é¦ Burner helper; and 
’é¦ Burner. (Tr. p. 13) 
Lawson is an active individual. In addition to working for Lehigh, he has a side 
construction business. (DefendantsŌĆÖ Exhibit B, pp. 4ŌĆō5, 8ŌĆō9) He owns an acreage in the 
country. On the property, he has horses. Lawson owns a skid loader, trailer, enclosed 
trailer, and dump trailer. (Def. Ex. B, Deposition pp. 6ŌĆō8) In addition to his home, 
Lawson also has multiple sheds on his property and keeps horses. (Tr. pp. 41ŌĆō43) 
Lawson has a history of back problems going back to at least 1999. (Joint Exhibit 
1, p. 1) A radiographic report from North Iowa Mercy Health Center (North Iowa Mercy) 
details magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of LawsonŌĆÖs back found: 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 3 
 
 
’é¦ Right L4-5 foraminal broad based disc bulge or protrusion; 
’é¦ Mild broad based disc bulge L2-3; 
’é¦ Small central disc protrusion L5-S1; and 
’é¦ D11-12, L2-3, and L4-5 levels of degenerative disc disease primarily 
evidenced by disc desiccation with narrowing additionally seen at L2-3.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1, 2)  
Lawson sought treatment for his back problems again in 2001. (See Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 
2ŌĆō8) Lawson was experiencing right-sided low back and buttock pain, beginning at the 
lateral hip and radiating to his medial knee and down to his medial ankle. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) 
North Iowa Mercy performed another MRI, which showed: 
’é¦ A small midline herniation of the L5-S1 disc which is unchanged compared to 
1999; 
’é¦ A pronounced focal bulge versus far right posterolateral herniation of the L4-5 
disc which appears slightly more prominent than on the previous study; and 
’é¦ Mild broad-based midline bulging of the L2-3 disc which is unchanged.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 5ŌĆō6) 
Lawson sustained a back injury in 2007. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) His job was primarily to 
run computers, but Lehigh required him to perform heavier labor while the plant was 
shut down. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) Lawson was changing a return roller on a belt when he 
twisted the roll away and felt a pop in his lower back that caused non-radiating pain. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 9)  
On January 6, 2008, Lawson sustained another back injury. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) He 
was moving materials with a wheelbarrow when the handle broke. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
Lawson strained his back and felt a pop in the low back area. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) After the 
pop, Lawson experienced pain down his right leg and some tingling. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
Jay Mixdorf, M.D., diagnosed Lawson with myofascial low back pain secondary to strain 
with right sciatica and pre-existing degenerative disk disease. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11)  
X-rays and an MRI showed: 
’é¦ Multifocal lumbar spine degenerative disk disease and/or degenerative 
spondylosis; 
’é¦ L4-5 symmetrical broad based disc bulge with an asymmetrical disc 
protrusion within and lateral to the right L4-5 neural foramen contacting the 
nerve roots; 
’é¦ Mild symmetrical broad based disc bulges L2-3, L3-4, and L5-SI; and 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 4 
 
 
’é¦ L2-3 through L5-S1 degenerative disc disease evidenced by disc height loss 
and/or disc desiccation with L2-3 degenerative spondylosis seen to a degree 
as well.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 13, 17)  
Based on the radiographs, Dr. MixdorfŌĆÖs assessment was right radiculopathy with 
degenerative changes in the lumbar spine. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13) David Beck, M.D., first saw 
Lawson on March 10, 2008. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) Lawson wished to avoid surgery, so they 
opted to try an injection. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) After injections failed to remedy LawsonŌĆÖs 
symptoms, he underwent surgery. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 18; Jt. Ex. 2, p 31)  
Because of the surgery, Lawson missed work for a period of time. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
32ŌĆō43) Lawson was ultimately able to return to full-duty work with Lehigh. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
43) Dr. Beck found Lawson to have reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) 
effective March 1, 2009, and assigned him an impairment rating of 10 percent of the 
body as a whole. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 43) Dr. Beck also recommended a lifting restriction of 50 
pounds. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 44) 
On October 29, 2010, Robert Jones, M.D., performed an independent medical 
examination (IME) of Lawson. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 61) Dr. Jones assigned Lawson an 
impairment rating of 12 percent to the whole person. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 62) Dr. Jones 
prescribed the following work restrictions: 
’é¦ Limit lifting from floor to waist to 45 pounds occasionally; 
’é¦ May lift up to 20 pounds frequently; 
’é¦ Avoid lifting far out from the body and preferably lift close to the body; 
’é¦ Avoid excessive bending, lifting, twisting, stooping, and crawling. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
62) 
The parties entered into an agreement for settlement under Iowa Code section 
85.35(2) on January 5, 2012. (Def. Ex. D, p. 7) In the agreement for settlement, the 
parties agreed that Lawson sustained a 19 percent permanent partial disability of 19 
percent for loss of earning capacity. (Def Ex. D, p. 7) 
Between the 2008 surgery and 2016 injury, Lawson experienced pain he 
describes as constant. (Tr. pp. 16ŌĆō17) He takes hydrocodone daily just to moderate the 
pain so he can make it through the day. (Tr. p. 17) 
Lawson continued to work for Lehigh, where he ultimately reached the position of 
burner ŌĆö kiln operator. (Tr. p. 13) An ordinary day in the position consists of sitting at a 
desk and running a computer all day. (Tr. p. 13) When the plant goes on shutdown, 
Lawson must perform manual labor such as jackhammering and shoveling. (Tr. p. 14; 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 5 
 
 
Cl. Ex. 2 (video of Lawson and a coworker jackhammering during a plant shutdown in 
April 2019))  
Lawson could not recall if there was a plant shutdown that necessitated him 
performing manual labor in December of 2016, but he testified it was possible. (Tr. p. 
18) Lehigh used to have a shutdown in December and April each year. (Tr. p. 18)  
In December of 2016, Lawson was walking across the floor in his shop on his 
personal property when he felt a sharp pain that radiated down his buttocks and leg. (Tr. 
pp. 15ŌĆō16; Jt. Ex. 2, p. 47) The pain was such that it took Lawson to the floor. (Tr. p. 16) 
He was physically unable to get up for approximately 10 minutes. (Tr. pp. 16, 18) 
Lawson was unable to stand up straight once he got to his feet. (Tr. p. 18) Once he got 
into his home, he telephoned Dr. Boedeker, his personal physician. (Tr. p. 18) 
Lawson saw Dr. Boedeker, who referred him to Dr. Beck, the surgeon who 
treated his 2008 back injury. (Tr. pp. 18ŌĆō19) Dr. Beck saw Lawson on December 19, 
2016. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 48) He described Lawson as miserable. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 48) An MRI 
showed:  
’é¦ Left first central disc extrusion located at and below the level of the L4-5 disc 
space, narrowing the left lateral recess and potentially impinging upon the 
traversing left L5 nerve root; 
’é¦ Operative changes right hemilaminotomy noted; and 
’é¦ The aneurysm multilevel degenerative spondylotic disc space changes and 
facet arthropathy in the lumbar spine as detailed above, progressed since 
2008. Moderate spinal canal narrowing is noted at L4-5 related to the disc 
extrusion, broad-based disc bulge and facet arthropathy. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 24ŌĆō25) 
Dr. Beck performed an L5-S1 laminotomy and discectomy on December 22, 
2016. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 48ŌĆō49, 53; Tr. p. 19) LawsonŌĆÖs group health plan, provided by 
Lehigh, paid the medical relating to the care for this latest back injury. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 
21ŌĆō25)  
Lawson was off work from December 3, 2016, through February 20, 2017, 
because of his back. (Def. Ex. C; Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 51ŌĆō52) He took vacation from December 
3 through December 11, 2016. (Def. Ex. E, p. 28) Then Lawson received short-term 
disability (STD) benefits from December 12, 2016, through February 19, 2017, under a 
plan paid for by Lehigh. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 26, 31ŌĆō32) STD benefits are not available 
under the plan for work injuries. (Ex. E, pp. 31ŌĆō32) 
On February 20, 2017, Lawson resumed working for Lehigh in the job of kiln ŌĆö 
burner. Lawson was working the same job for Lehigh on the date of hearing. However, 
he had switched shifts to the night shift, which paid more and was less busy.  

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 6 
 
 
On December 27, 2017, LawsonŌĆÖs attorney sent Lehigh a letter dated, December 
27, 2017, stating that she represented Lawson for a workersŌĆÖ compensation claim 
relating to an injury he sustained while employed with the company. (Def. Ex. G) The 
notice of injury is dated 370 days after December 22, 2016, the alleged date of injury in 
this case. Lawson was unable to recall whether he informed Lehigh before the letter that 
he believed his December 2016 back injury was work related. (Def. Ex. B, Depo. p. 11)  
In 2018, LawsonŌĆÖs construction business continued its work. That year, its 
projects included building a deck as well as installing doors, windows, and a handrail. 
(Def. Ex. B, Depo. pp. 4ŌĆō5) LawsonŌĆÖs construction business had gross receipts in 2018 
of $9,002.00 with a net loss of $13,683.00. (Def. Ex. I, p. 58) 
Lawson saw Sunil Bansal, M.D., on February 22, 2019, for an IME. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 
68) Dr. Bansal is a board-certified occupational health physician. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 68) Dr. 
Bansal reviewed the following records as part of the IME: 
’é¦ Neurosurgery of North Iowa; 
’é¦ Healthworks Occupational Health; 
’é¦ Mercy North Iowa; 
’é¦ Mercy Rehabilitation Services; 
’é¦ Dr. Jones; 
’é¦ Forest Park Family Medicine Clinic; and 
’é¦ Mason City Physical Therapy. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 68ŌĆō76) 
Dr. Bansal also performed a physical examination of Lawson. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 78ŌĆō79)  
In a report dated March 13, 2019, Dr. Bansal found Lawson reached MMI on 
February 22, 2019, the time of his evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 79) On the question of 
causation, Dr. Bansal opined: 
In my medical opinion, Mr. Lawson incurred an L4-L5 disc herniation from 
the cumulative prolonged sitting he performed while working at Lehigh 
Portland Cement. Studies have shown that prolonged sitting will stress the 
lumbar spine, most notably at the L4-L5 level, consistent with Mr. 
LawsonŌĆÖs pathology. 
Analysis of the data shows the greatest change in disc height is at the L4-
5 level after prolonged sitting without intermittent breaks. 
Research has shown multiple reasons including biomechanical forces to 
account for the increased pressures at these discs. The results of this 
study support this clinical finding. The largest change in disc height with 
prolonged sitting was found at the L4-L5 level. Age and hours sitting were 
found to be significant risk factors for development of disc herniation at the 
L4-5 level. Our findings are in agreement with such a relationship. 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 7 
 
 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 79 (citing Billy, Gregory G et al. ŌĆ£Changes in lumbar disk morphology 
associated with prolonged sitting assessed by magnetic resonance imaging,ŌĆ£ PM & R: 
The Journal of Injury, Function, and Rehabilitation, vol. 6,9 (2014): 790-5) (italics in 
original)) This decision will refer to this article as Billy and Lemieux for ease of 
reference.  
Defense counsel wrote a letter to Dr. Beck regarding LawsonŌĆÖs injury. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
pp. 54ŌĆō55) The letter consisted of eight numbered paragraphs, each containing 
affirmative statements regarding LawsonŌĆÖs injury. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 54ŌĆō55) Dr. Beck 
confirmed these statements by signing and dating a letter on March 14, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 55) By doing so, Dr. Beck confirmed in pertinent part he believes the following: 
’é¦ Dr. Beck has no documentation in his file that LawsonŌĆÖs back condition at the 
time and the need for surgery was related to his work activities; 
’é¦ His office asks patients if their injury is work related, and he has no evidence 
in his notes that Lawson indicated his injury was such; 
’é¦ Dr. Beck cannot state with a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Mr. 
LawsonŌĆÖs back condition and need for the December 22, 2016, back surgery 
was caused by or substantially aggravated his work activities; 
’é¦ Lawson reached MMI on February 20, 2017; 
’é¦ Lawson would have an additional impairment rating of two percent to the 
body as a whole under the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides; 
’é¦ Dr. Beck does not recommend any permanent work restrictions for Lawson 
due to his 2016 back injury; and 
’é¦ He does not recommend further treatment for LawsonŌĆÖs 2016 back injury. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, pp. 54ŌĆō55) 
William Boulden, M.D., F.A.A.O.S., of Capital Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine 
performed a defense IME of Lawson on April 11, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 81) Dr. Boulden 
reviewed medical records and performed a physical examination of Lawson. (Jt. Ex. 7, 
pp. 81ŌĆō83) On the question of causation, Dr. Boulden disagreed with Dr. BansalŌĆÖs 
opinion: 
It is also noted that there is no history that he had a fall at work in the 
notes that I have seen. They are alleging that his occupation of sitting 
caused him to have a herniated disc. He has stated via some unknown 
article that I am not familiar with that sitting increases the stress across 
L4-5. I would disagree that that is the cause for his ŌĆ£herniated discŌĆØ at L4-
5. 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 8 
 
 
It is well known among spinal surgeons that women do have more 
problems at L4-5 than men because of their anatomy. That is why there is 
more degeneration, subsequent herniations, and spondylolisthesis 
problems in females at L4-5. It is stated that it is at least three times more 
prevalent at L4-5 in females than males. As stated earlier, the male 
anatomy is different, so L5-S1 has the most stress because of the most 
motion; at this level therefore, men have more herniated disease at L5-S1 
than at L4-5. Based on these facts, I would totally disagree with Dr. 
BansalŌĆÖs assessment and his conclusions.  
I would also like to point out that if Dr. BansalŌĆÖs assumptions are correct, 
we would have an epidemic of herniated discs at L4-5 because of the 
significant increase of sedentary type work that is being utilized throughout 
the world as compared to the past. This is not, in my opinion, a cause and 
effect and I do not believe that is the situation here, other than the fact that 
he had increasing progression of degenerative disc disease. 
Subsequently, when that is the case, a disc can spontaneously rupture 
without any type of physical activities, and I would definitely not relate a 
sitting activity as a stressful situation that would cause a herniated disc. 
This is based on 40-plus years of observation and taking care of low back 
problems. 
**** 
With reference to question number two, I would state that the patientŌĆÖs 
back condition and need for surgery on December 22, 2016, was not 
caused or even aggravated by his work activities of sitting. I have made a 
dissertation about stress across the discs in the lower back, stating that 
women have more common problems at L4-5 than men because of their 
anatomy differences. In males, however, L5-S1 is more stressed and 
degenerative changes occur at L5-S1 more commonly than at any other 
disc level; therefore, males have more herniations at L5-S1. I see nothing 
that would be a cause and effect relationship to his occupation causing the 
herniated disc at L4-5 other than pre-existing degenerative disc disease. 
Dr. Kirkaldy-Willis, over the years, has been the mentor of the cascading 
effects of degenerative disc disease. It is during the process of 
degeneration that discs can spontaneously herniate without any type of 
traumatic event. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 84) 
Dr. Boulden also disagreed with Dr. BansalŌĆÖs impairment rating: 
[Dr. Bansal] gave [Lawson] a rating of 11 percent using DRE 
Classification. It is inappropriate to use that classification, because it was 
a second operation on the same spinal level, L4-5. That is clearly 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 9 
 
 
described on Page 398 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, concerning range of motion and the utilization of 
it. Using The Guides, range of motion on Table 15-7 on Page 404, it would 
be two (2) percent of the lumbar spine. Dr. Beck had already 
recommended that rating of two (2) percent. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 83ŌĆō84)  
On April 25, 2019, Dr. Boulden signed a statement authored by defense counsel. 
By doing so, Dr. Boulden adopted multiple numbered opinions, including that his review 
of photographs of LawsonŌĆÖs work station did not change his opinion on causation; 
neither the design of the work station nor the particular chairs that Lawson used while 
working at Lehigh increased risk of injury, given his pre-existing back condition, or the 
herniated disc at L4-5. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 86ŌĆō87) 
On May 8, 2019, defense counsel wrote a letter to Dr. Beck that consisted of a 
series of affirmative statements. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 56ŌĆō57) Dr. Beck signed the letter and 
doing so, confirmed the statements. (Jt. Ex. p. 57) By doing so, Dr. Beck confirmed in 
pertinent part he believes the following: 
’é¦ Dr. Beck viewed photographs of LawsonŌĆÖs work station at Lehigh, provided by 
defense counsel; 
’é¦ Dr. Beck reviewed Dr. BansalŌĆÖs IME report on causation and Dr. BouldenŌĆÖs 
opinion disputing it, and he agrees with Dr. BouldenŌĆÖs opinions; 
’é¦ Nothing Dr. Beck observed in the photographs, Dr. BansalŌĆÖs opinions, or Dr. 
BouldenŌĆÖs opinions changes his opinions as expressed in the letter authored 
by defense and signed by Dr. Beck on March 14, 2019; 
’é¦ Based on LawsonŌĆÖs recount of the symptomsŌĆÖ sudden onset while he was 
walking at home, Dr. BeckŌĆÖs opinion is that the walking across the floor at 
home in his shop was most likely the event that caused the herniation and 
need for surgery; 
’é¦ Neither the design of LawsonŌĆÖs workspace or the chair he used while working 
contributed (caused or substantially aggravated) LawsonŌĆÖs herniated disc at 
L4-5 and subsequent need for surgery; 
’é¦ Neither the design of LawsonŌĆÖs workspace or the chair he used while working 
created a hazard or exposed him to a risk of injury that would not also be 
present elsewhere; and 
’é¦ The risk of back injury, given LawsonŌĆÖs preexisting condition, was in no way 
connected to or increased by the design of the work station or chairs he used 
while working, not to any other aspect of his regular job duties at Lehigh. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, pp. 56ŌĆō57) 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 10 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words ŌĆ£arising out ofŌĆØ referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words ŌĆ£in the course ofŌĆØ refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs ŌĆ£in the course ofŌĆØ employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. LukeŌĆÖs Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Dr. Bansal is the only medical expert to find a causal connection between 
LawsonŌĆÖs work at Lehigh and the injury of December 2016 to his back. Drs. Boulden 
and Beck, both surgeons with experience performing back surgeries, disagree with Dr. 
BansalŌĆÖs causation opinion. Dr. BeckŌĆÖs opinion exists as him signing off on statements 
authored by defense counsel and articulate disagreement with Dr. Bansal and 
agreement with Dr. Boulden. For the following reasons, the causation opinion of Drs. 
Boulden and Beck is more persuasive than that of Dr. Bansal.  

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 11 
 
 
Dr. BansalŌĆÖs opinion on causation is founded on the Billy and Lemieux study, 
which he cites as follows: 
In my medical opinion, Mr. Lawson incurred an L4-L5 disc herniation from 
the cumulative prolonged sitting he performed while working at Lehigh 
Portland Cement. Studies have shown that prolonged sitting will stress the 
lumbar spine, most notably at the L4-L5 level, consistent with Mr. 
LawsonŌĆÖs pathology. 
Analysis of the data shows the greatest change in disc height is at the L4-
5 level after prolonged sitting without intermittent breaks. 
Research has shown multiple reasons including biomechanical forces to 
account for the increased pressures at these discs. The results of this 
study support this clinical finding. The largest change in disc height with 
prolonged sitting was found at the L4-L5 level. Age and hours sitting were 
found to be significant risk factors for development of disc herniation at the 
L4-5 level. Our findings are in agreement with such a relationship. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 79)  
The Billy and Lemieux study found a change in disc height after prolonged sitting 
without intermittent breaks that was greater at the L4-5 levels. The study did not look at 
disc herniation. Thus, the statement that ŌĆ£[a]ge and hours sitting were found to be 
significant risk factors for development of disc herniation at L4-5 levelŌĆØ does not come 
from the study Dr. Bansal quotes. And Dr. BansalŌĆÖs report gives no indication from what 
study this conclusion comes. This assertion about disc herniation in an article about a 
study of disc height, standing alone without a citation or further explanation, undermines 
the persuasiveness of Dr. BansalŌĆÖs opinion. 
 
Dr. BansalŌĆÖs report also does not include information about the Billy and Lemieux 
report that is pertinent to considering how much weight to give it as the basis of his 
causation opinion. This means the citation of the report raises more questions than it 
answers. For example: 
’é¦ What is the sample size of the study? As a general rule, the bigger the 
sample size, the more reliable the study. If the Billy and Lemieux study used a 
small sample of people to study, its conclusions should be given less weight 
than if it studied a larger sample of people. 
’é¦ What is the demographic breakdown of the participants in the study? As Dr. 
Boulden observed in his report, men and women have physiological 
differences that make women more susceptible to disc issues at the L4-5 
level. If the Billy and Lemieux study used a disproportionate share of women 
in the sample of people it studied, this could skew the results to a degree. 
Likewise, the demographic information about the ages of participants might 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 12 
 
 
have a similar effect. It also might give more weight to the study if, for 
example, they are similar in age to Lawson. But we do not know because Dr. 
BansalŌĆÖs report provides no information on the demographics of the 
participants in the Billy and Lemieux study. 
’é¦ What constituted an ŌĆ£intermittent breakŌĆØ? The studyŌĆÖs finding includes the 
qualifier ŌĆ£after prolonged sitting without intermittent breaks.ŌĆØ (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 79 
(quoting Billy and Lemieux) (italics in the exhibit and bold-faced emphasis 
added)). Dr. BansalŌĆÖs report does not explain what constituted an intermittent 
break for purposes of the Billy and Lemieux study. Nor does it apply that 
standard to LawsonŌĆÖs sitting and breaks at work. This undermines the 
persuasiveness of Dr. BansalŌĆÖs report. 
Dr. Boulden zeroed in on the physiological differences between men and women 
when criticizing Dr. BansalŌĆÖs opinion, based on the Billy and Lemieux study, that 
LawsonŌĆÖs herniated disc at L4-5 was caused by prolonged sitting on the job at Lehigh. 
Dr. Boulden stated that these differences establish that men are more likely to suffer 
disc herniation of L5-S1 while women are more likely to do so at L4-5. The inference 
being that without knowing demographic information about the participants in the Billy 
and Lemieux study, it is difficult to determine how much weight to give its findings. Dr. 
BouldenŌĆÖs opinion is entitled to additional weight given his more than 40 years of 
experience treating back injuries. His firsthand observation that the increase in 
sedentary work has not caused a marked increase in L4-5 disc herniation cuts against 
Dr. BansalŌĆÖs opinion on causation.  
Lastly, Dr. Beck was LawsonŌĆÖs treating physician for his earlier work-related back 
injury and the injury that gave rise to this case. This means Dr. Beck has firsthand 
knowledge of both of LawsonŌĆÖs back injuries and the treatment for them. In this case, 
Dr. BeckŌĆÖs history with Lawson as the treating physician for his back injuries makes his 
opinion on causation more persuasive even if it comes by way of a check-box letter 
authored by defense counsel. 
For the reasons contained herein, the opinions on causation issued by Drs. 
Boulden and Beck are more credible than Dr. BansalŌĆÖs. Consequently, Lawson has 
failed to meet his burden of proof on the question of whether his work at Lehigh caused 
his back injury in December 2016. Because Lawson has not proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence that his back injury arose out of and in the course of his 
employment at Lehigh, the other issues in dispute between the parties are moot and the 
decision does not address them. 
CONCLUSION 
It is therefore ordered: 
1) Lawson shall take nothing in this case. 

LAWSON V. LEHIGH NORTHWEST CEMENT 
Page 13 
 
 
2) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this 2nd day of March, 2020. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     DEPUTY WORKERSŌĆÖ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jeffrey Lanz (via WCES) 
Sarah Baumgartner (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via WorkersŌĆÖ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of WorkersŌĆÖ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: WorkersŌĆÖ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of WorkersŌĆÖ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of WorkersŌĆÖ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
