Case Number: 23006637.01
Case Title:  KENYON, CODY V. CITY OF DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Kenyon Cody 23006637.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CODY KENYON, 
  : 
         FILE NO.  23006637.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
       
CITY OF DES MOINES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                               
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :  HEAD NOTES:  1402.40, 1803, 2206, 2907 
 
 
  :                                 
 
Defendant. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
Cody Kenyon, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against City of Des Moines. 
This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on July 18, 2024, via 
Zoom.  
  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
  
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant's Exhibits 1 
through 3, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through E. All exhibits were received without 
objection. 
  
Mr. Kenyon testified on his own behalf.  John Brauer, Dale Kenyon, and Douglas 
Triplett also testified on claimant’s behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing. All parties served their post-hearing briefs on 
August 23, 2024, at which time this case was deemed fully submitted to the 
undersigned. 
 
ISSUES 
  
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability; 
 
2. The extent of claimant's entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any; 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Feb-13  11:59:37     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 2 
3. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits; and  
 
4. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
The instant case stems from a stipulated work injury occurring on May 6, 2022.  
The claimant at the center of this case is Cody Kenyon, a 31-year-old individual who 
lives and works in Des Moines, Iowa.  Kenyon is a high school graduate.  After high 
school, Kenyon attended Des Moines Area Community College for approximately six 
months, but quit prior to finishing his first semester due to the birth of a child. (Exhibit E, 
Depo. pp. 4-5)  His employment history has involved roles requiring physical labor and 
technical skills across various fields, including street maintenance, truck driving, 
computer support, and equipment operation. (Ex. B, pp. 2-3) 
 
Kenyon began working in the Public Works’ streets department for the City of 
Des Moines in June of 2020. (Ex. B, p. 3)  Initially, Kenyon worked as a temporary or 
seasonal worker.  After his initial employment period, the City of Des Moines offered 
Kenyon a full-time position. (Hearing Transcript, pp. 9-10)  As a “street maintenance 
worker” Kenyon performed semi-skilled work in connection with the maintenance and 
construction of roads and other City facilities. (Ex. A, p. 1)  Kenyon mainly handled 
asphalt work for the streets department. 
 
On Friday, May 6, 2022, Kenyon’s crew was repairing patches of asphalt on 
Jefferson Avenue.  To patch the various areas of asphalt, Kenyon’s crew utilized an 
asphalt truck owned, operated, and maintained by the City of Des Moines.  The truck 
dispensed asphalt out of an auger and down a chute. (Hr. Tr., pp. 12-13)  Unfortunately, 
the chute on this specific truck was not functioning properly on the date of injury.  As a 
result, the crew members had to shovel the asphalt from the chute to the patch. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 11-12)  While shoveling the asphalt, Kenyon experienced an intense stabbing pain 
in his back and he fell to his knees. (Hr. Tr., pp. 12-13)  
Over the following weekend, Kenyon presented to Hayley Sharpe, ARNP, 
reporting a four-day history of low back pain that began after shoveling asphalt. (JE3, p. 
13)  His pain was located in the left hip, with radiating pain down both legs.  Ms. Sharpe 
diagnosed left sciatic nerve pain and prescribed a Medrol Dosepak. (JE3, p. 15) 
One day later, claimant presented to Marcus Rushing, M.D.  According to Dr. 
Rushing, claimant’s presentation was most consistent with a lumbar strain. (JE4, p. 16)  
Dr. Rushing recommended physical therapy and ordered an MRI. (JE4, pp. 16-17) 
The MRI, collected on May 10, 2022, revealed a small disc protrusion at L5-S1 
and no significant spinal canal or foraminal narrowing. (See JE4, p. 18) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Rushing on May 13, 2022, reporting that his pain had 
significantly improved since his last appointment. (JE4, p. 18)  That being said, he still 
reported a pain rating of 4 to 5 on a 10-point scale. (Id.)  He denied lower extremity 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 3 
weakness and numbness.  During the appointment, claimant requested the ability to 
return to full-duty work. (Id.)  Despite claimant’s request, Dr. Rushing elected to keep 
claimant on work restrictions. (JE4, p. 19)  Dr. Rushing also recommended physical 
therapy and an EMG to properly diagnose claimant’s leg symptoms. (JE4, p. 20) 
On May 26, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Rushing’s office reporting a significant 
improvement in his pain levels since his last appointment. (JE4, p. 21)  Claimant 
reported 4 out of 10 pain and described numbness in the back of both legs and tingling 
in his toes; however, he relayed that he was able to work through his symptoms. (JE4, 
p. 21)  Given claimant’s statements regarding his improvement, Dr. Rushing decided to 
hold off on ordering the previously recommended EMG. (Id.) 
Claimant presented to Judith Nayeri, D.O. on June 9, 2022.  During the 
examination, claimant reported that his legs occasionally felt like Jell-O while walking. 
(JE4, p. 22)  At claimant’s request, Dr. Nayeri returned claimant to work with a 50-pound 
lift, push, and pull restriction. (Id.)  The medical notes provide that Dr. Nayeri was 
initially against allowing claimant to lift as much as 50 pounds, but ultimately agreed 
because claimant reported he would back off if lifting up to 50 pounds bothered him. 
(Id.)   
Claimant suffered a flare-up in pain towards the end of June or beginning of July.  
He returned to Dr. Rushing on July 7, 2022, and reported right lower back pain that he 
described as stiff and sore. (JE4, p. 23)  At the time, claimant was working on a 
“recycler truck” at work, which allowed him to maneuver materials at waist level while in 
a standing position. (Id.)  Dr. Rushing attributed claimant’s symptoms to his then-current 
workload.  Nevertheless, Dr. Rushing approved a trial run of full-duty work. (Id.) 
One week later, claimant reported that his pain, while still present, was well-
controlled.  He further reported that he was able to perform his full-duty activities without 
difficulty during his trial of full-duty work. (JE4, p. 24)  As a result, Dr. Rushing placed 
claimant at maximum medical improvement and discharged him from care. (Id.) 
Kenyon did not present for any medical treatment related to his low back 
between August 2022, and April 2023.  During this time, Kenyon worked for the City of 
Des Moines on a full duty basis.   
Defendant concedes Kenyon suffered a work injury on May 6, 2022; however, it 
asserts he did not sustain any permanent impairment as a result.  In support of its 
argument, defendant stresses the possibility of an intervening event that occurred in 
early 2023. 
On April 17, 2023, approximately nine months after Dr. Rushing released him 
from care, Kenyon returned to Dr. Nayeri and reported an increase in his low back pain. 
(JE4, p. 26)  Claimant reported that he continued to experience low-grade pain following 
his release from care on July 14, 2022; however, his pain had recently increased.  
According to claimant, his low back pain increased two months prior while playing 
football with his kids.  At hearing, claimant testified that his kids were 7 and 9 years old 
at the time. (Ex. E, Depo. p. 34)  The report provides, “He states he was playing football 
with his kids and he went to catch the football, and he had a sharp pain on the right, and 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 4 
then the left leg locked up and he fell.” (JE4, p. 26)  Claimant reported that he had been 
experiencing numbness in his left leg and two of his toes for one and one-half months. 
(Id.)  He further reported that he had numbness in the posterior right leg and no strength 
in his left leg. (Id.)  Notably, claimant testified at hearing that he experienced similar 
flare-ups in low back pain between July 2022 and April 2023. (Hr. Tr., p. 19)  Dr. Nayeri 
assigned a 20-pound lift, push, and pull restriction and recommended a referral for an 
orthopedic evaluation. (JE4, p. 26)   
Defendant authorized an orthopedic evaluation with Trevor Schmitz, M.D. The 
evaluation occurred on May 3, 2023. (JE5, p. 28)  Following the examination, Dr. 
Schmitz ordered an updated MRI of the lumbar spine. (JE5, p. 30) 
On June 15, 2023, Dr. Schmitz produced a causation letter to defendant.  The 
report provides that claimant was doing well up until two weeks prior to the May 3, 2023, 
appointment, when he noted the acute onset of low back pain, along with bilateral leg 
symptoms, that occurred after playing football with his son.  It is likely Dr. Schmitz 
committed a “typo” when noting claimant’s symptoms increased two weeks prior to the 
appointment as opposed to two months as provided in Dr. Nayeri’s April 17, 2023, 
record.  In any event, Dr. Schmitz concluded that claimant’s then current presentation 
was not related to the May 6, 2022, work injury. (JE5, p. 32) 
On June 28, 2023, Kenyon presented to Julia Harvey, ARNP, reporting low back 
pain that was sharp, shooting, and stabbing. (JE1, p. 5)  He reported that his pain had 
been present for one year and worsened in April 2023. (Id.)  He further reported 
ongoing issues with his legs going numb, a Charlie horse in his feet, pain in his bilateral 
2nd toes, and balance issues. (JE1, p. 6)  During the evaluation, Kenyon requested a 
second opinion with a different orthopedic surgeon. (Id.) 
Kenyon returned to Dr. Nayeri for an appointment on July 14, 2023.  The record 
provides,  
He states he wants to go back to full duty.  He states he is feeling better.  
He states he went to ortho as recommended, but ortho put it in his note that 
he was injured playing with his kids in mid May, but when I had seen him, 
he had been complaining of ongoing problems since 05/09/2023.  He only 
told us about the incident the (sic) emphasize the kind of problems he was 
having from his back, but he was not allowed to have an MRI at that time, 
although I myself at this point, requested a followup (sic) MRI. 
(JE4, p. 27)   
During Dr. Nayeri’s physical examination, Kenyon demonstrated tenderness on 
the left back with left leg raises and when standing. (Id.)  Dr. Nayeri’s medical notes 
provide, “Initially when I saw him this visit was the right, but he says it varies, sometimes 
it is the right, sometimes it is the left.” (Id.)  In terms of his range of motion testing, 
Kenyon did not experience pain with flexion, extension, rotation, or side bending. (Id.)  
Dr. Nayeri assessed claimant with bilateral low back strain and discharged him from 
care. (Id.) 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 5 
An MRI of the lumbar spine collected on August 9, 2023, revealed mild 
spondylosis and a central disc protrusion at L5-S1.  The central disc protrusion was 
causing minimal effacement of the descending S1 nerve roots bilaterally. (JE6, p. 34)  
According to Dr. Schmitz, the MRI demonstrated “a slight worsening of the central disc 
protrusion.” (JE5, p. 33)  He opined the MRI results did not change his opinion and he 
believed Kenyon’s current back pain stemmed from “the intervening personal injury that 
occurred when he was playing football with his kids.” (Id.) 
Once additional treatment was denied by defendant, Kenyon sought to establish 
care with Zachary Ries, M.D., on December 12, 2023. (JE7, p. 36)  It is unknown what, 
if any, medical records Dr. Ries reviewed prior to examining Kenyon.  After examining 
Kenyon and analyzing his diagnostic imaging, Dr. Ries assessed Kenyon with low back 
pain and bilateral leg pain secondary to disc protrusion at L5-S1 and degenerative disc 
disease. (JE7, p. 37)  Dr. Ries advised that claimant’s condition should be treated 
conservatively and referred him to a pain specialist for a lumbar epidural steroid 
injection. (Id.) 
Pursuant to Dr. Ries’ recommendation, claimant presented to Robert Rossi, 
M.D., of Broadlawns Pain Management Center on February 1, 2024. (JE8, p. 39)  
During the initial evaluation, Dr. Rossi relayed that he was not able to determine any 
disability or causality given the “lengthy hiatus.” (JE8, p. 43)  Dr. Rossi administered an 
epidural steroid injection to claimant’s low back on March 8, 2024. (JE8, p. 54)  
Claimant received one week of symptomatic relief following the ESI. (JE8, p. 58)  A 
second ESI was administered on May 17, 2024. (See Ex. E, Depo. pp. 23-24)  At the 
time of hearing, Kenyon was treating with Megan Bradley, ARNP at the Broadlawns 
Pain Management Center. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24) 
On the issue of causation, Dr. Reis opined that the May 9, 2022, work injury 
represented a substantial causal, aggravating or accelerating factor in claimant’s current 
condition. (Exhibit 1, p. 1)  He also opined that Kenyon’s pain management treatment 
represented reasonable and necessary medical care for the work-related injury. (Id.)  
Notably, Dr. Ries only evaluated Kenyon once prior to providing his causation opinion.  
In addition, there is no evidence that Dr. Ries was aware Kenyon was placed at 
maximum medical improvement and did not present for additional medical treatment 
between July 2022 and April 2023.  There is also no evidence that Dr. Ries was aware 
of the alleged intervening incident that prompted Kenyon to seek additional treatment in 
April 2023.  
Defendant deposed Kenyon on May 9, 2024. (Exhibit E)  During the deposition, 
Kenyon initially denied having experienced any problems with his back prior to the May 
6, 2022, work injury.  However, he later acknowledged that he experienced low back 
pain prior to May 6, 2022, after being confronted with Facebook messages discussing 
the same. 
In an October 22, 2019, Facebook Messenger exchange between claimant and 
his wife, claimant reported that his back was “effing killing” him and that he had sought 
treatment for the same. (Exhibit C, pp. 4-5)  In relaying what his physician told him, 
claimant provided, “He said by the sounds of it I may end up having back problem in a 
few years if I dont (sic) already he said it sounds like something is pinching my cystic 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 6 
nerve.” (Ex. C, p. 4)  He further reported, “Yea that’s why I have been saying I have had 
that pain in my back and down my legs and he said that same nerve goes to the arch of 
my foot so that explains why I have been having those lock ups.” (Id.) 
The evidentiary record does not contain a corresponding medical record from 
October 22, 2019; however, at least one medical record suggests claimant presented to 
Mercy Urgent Care and received a steroid pack for his low back pain around this time. 
(See Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) 
On November 11, 2019, claimant presented to the UnityPoint Clinic and reported 
a one-year history of low back pain that he characterized as burning, stabbing, and 
throbbing. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1)  He further reported a stabbing pain down his legs when 
he stood on his tiptoes. (Id.)  Claimant was assessed with chronic bilateral low back 
pain without sciatica and referred to physical therapy. (JE1, p. 2)   
Claimant presented for his initial physical therapy visit on December 5, 2019. 
(JE2, p. 9)  During therapy, claimant reported that his pain began when he was lifting 
some items onto a storage shelf above his garage door. He reported pain in his back 
and into both legs. (Id.)  In terms of aggravating factors, claimant reported difficulties 
bending forward, lifting, sitting for longer than one hour, sleeping, standing, and walking. 
(Id.)  The physical therapist recommended claimant present to physical therapy two 
times each week for four weeks. (JE2, p. 12)  No other physical therapy records for this 
injury were submitted into evidence. 
Claimant was seen again on October 5, 2020, reporting a two-year history of 
intermittent left hip and low back pain. (JE1, p. 3)  He further reported that the pain ran 
down his left leg and into his foot. (Id.)  He had positive signs and symptoms of possible 
lumbar radiculopathy. He was treated with a Medrol Dosepak and referred for physical 
therapy. (JE1, p. 4)    
Kenyon asserts the symptoms he experienced following the May 6, 2022, work 
injury were different from the symptoms detailed in his pre-existing medical records. 
(See Hr. Tr., p. 38)  Kenyon’s testimony in this regard is not credible.  While it is 
possible the severity and frequency of the symptoms changed after the date of injury, 
the description of his symptoms throughout the medical records are substantially similar 
to the symptoms detailed in the pre-existing medical records.   
Defendant asserts Kenyon failed to disclose relevant medical information 
regarding his pre-existing low back condition to his treating physicians following his 
work injury.  Defendant further asserts this failure to disclose affects the credibility of the 
treating physician’s medical opinions.  I agree. 
Turning back to the May 6, 2022, injury, Kenyon sought an independent medical 
evaluation to be performed by Robert Rondinelli, M.D.  The examination occurred on 
May 29, 2024.  Defendant highlights that this is the first post-injury medical record to 
acknowledge the claimant’s pre-existing low back pain and summarize medical records 
that predate the May 6, 2022, work injury. 
Dr. Rondinelli opined that claimant had pre-existing and underlying mild lumbar 
spondylosis not proximately or directly causally associated with his incident of low back 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 7 
strain at work. (Ex. 2, p. 9)  He then opined claimant sustained a work-related lumbar 
strain with a corresponding small midline herniated nucleus pulposus at L5-S1 and 
probable right-sided L5-S1 radiculopathy on May 6, 2022.  Dr. Rondinelli also 
expressed his belief that claimant was prematurely and incompletely terminated from 
care by Dr. Rushing in July 2022.  He opined claimant likely sustained a recurrent flare-
up of his chronic lower back condition with minimal subsequent progression of his 
herniated disk at L5-S1 to some degree while playing catch with his two young children. 
(Ex. 2, p. 10)  Ultimately, Dr. Rondinelli opined that claimant most likely suffered a 
permanent material aggravation of his preexisting underlying lumbar spondylosis and 
degenerative disk disease as a result of the May 6, 2022, work injury. (Id.) 
Dr. Rondinelli recommended claimant obtain an EMG to evaluate the nature and 
extent of radiculopathy.  He further recommended claimant return to pain management 
to consider a possible spinal cord stimulator trial for added pain relief. (Ex. 2, p. 11)  Dr. 
Rondinelli deferred a determination of maximum medical improvement until claimant 
pursued interventional pain management and a formal psychological evaluation. (Id.) 
Despite finding claimant had not reached maximum medical improvement, Dr. 
Rondinelli provided a provisional estimate of claimant’s permanent impairment.  Dr. 
Rondinelli opined that at the time Dr. Rushing placed him at maximum medical 
improvement, claimant met the criteria for DRE Lumbar Category II impairment worth 
five to eight percent (5-8%) whole person impairment. (Ex. 2, pp. 11-12)  Alternatively, if 
an EMG verified the clinical radiculopathy suggested by Dr. Rondinelli’s physical 
examination, claimant could qualify for a DRE Category III rating up to ten to thirteen 
percent (10-13%) whole person impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 12) 
Based on a table that links occupationally-related spinal injury impairment to 
corresponding work restrictions, according to the US Department of Labor’s Dictionary 
of Occupational Titles, claimant’s work-related spinal condition “potentially qualifies” him 
for a “Light” work physical demand class. (Id.)  Ultimately, Dr. Rondinelli recommended 
claimant not exceed 20 pounds lifting on an occasional basis, and 10 pounds on a 
frequent basis. (Id.)  He further recommended claimant avoid forward bending, 
shoveling activity, and running, and limit his sustained walking or standing, not to 
exceed 30 minutes per shift with appropriate rest breaks following each standing 
episode. (Id.) 
 
With respect to his current work activities, Kenyon continues to work in the role of 
street maintenance worker for the City of Des Moines.  It appears that Kenyon can 
perform all of the job duties he performed prior to the date of injury. (Ex. E, Depo. pp. 5-
6)  For instance, Kenyon testified he can lift asphalt and utilize a tamping instrument. 
(Ex. E, Depo. pp. 6-7)  He further testified that his job duties have not changed in any 
way since his work injury. (Ex. E, Depo. p. 7)  Kenyon testified that he stays within his 
self-imposed limits when lifting; however, he struggled to provide examples of things he 
could no longer lift due to his work injury. (See Ex. E, Depo. pp. 5-7)  At hearing, 
Kenyon testified that he now performs less physically demanding assignments than he 
did prior to his work injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  He does not adhere to any work restrictions; 
however, Kenyon testified that he has to ask for help “quite a bit.” (Hr. Tr., pp. 26-28) 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 8 
Claimant called his co-worker, John Brauer, to testify at the evidentiary hearing. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 43)  Mr. Brauer has known Kenyon for approximately four years. (Id.)  He 
considers Kenyon to be a very good worker, honest, and trustworthy. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)  
When asked to describe Kenyon’s job, Mr. Brauer testified that all of the crew members 
“pretty much do the same thing,” including Kenyon. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)  For instance, Mr. 
Brauer testified, “I mean Cody will either like run the wand that dispenses the material 
into the crack or he’ll run the squeegee or, you know, we’ll load material into the 
machine.  Basically, he does whatever needs to be done at that particular time, I mean.  
We’re all pretty much, you know, the same.” (Id.)  He further testified that Kenyon “does 
exactly the same that everybody else does” when it comes to crack sealing. (Hr. Tr., p. 
45)  Mr. Brauer confirmed that crack sealing work is easier than handling asphalt. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 45-46) 
Mr. Brauer did not indicate that Kenyon was accommodated in his work.  From 
Mr. Brauer’s testimony, it appears Kenyon is regularly assigned to the crack sealing 
crew when such work is available.  While it appears that his condition could play a role 
in the assignments, the record also suggests that his experience and skill in the role, as 
well as his seniority, would likely result in his placement in the crack sealing crew 
regardless of his injury.  In other words, it is unclear from Mr. Brauer’s testimony 
whether Kenyon’s condition is the predominant factor or a substantial factor in his work 
assignments.  
Claimant also called Douglas Triplett, a former co-worker at the City of Des 
Moines who retired in December 2021. (Hr. Tr., p. 64)  Like Mr. Brauer, Mr. Triplett 
testified that Kenyon is a very good worker, honest, and trustworthy. (Hr. Tr., p. 66)  The 
rest of Mr. Triplett’s testimony concerns allegations that the City of Des Moines treats 
injured employees poorly. (Hr. Tr., pp. 67-70) 
Kenyon appears to adopt Mr. Triplett’s opinion regarding the City of Des Moines; 
however, the examples he provided did not justify such a stance.  For example, Kenyon 
asserted that the defendant employer has “messed” with him, harassed him, and 
stalked him since the date of injury. (Ex. E, Depo. p. 44)  When pressed for examples, 
Kenyon could only think of two examples.  First, he testified he once saw his supervisor 
“hiding in corners” and following him on his snowplow routes to see if he was “messing 
anything up.” (Ex. E, Depo. p. 45)  Kenyon testified that the City has individuals that 
check his snowplow routes; however, his supervisor is not one of the “checkers” so it 
was odd for him to be following him.  Kenyon testified he was never disciplined for work 
associated with his snowplow routes. (Ex. E, Depo. pp. 45-46)  He further testified that 
he has not been disciplined by the defendant since the date of injury. (Ex. E, Depo. p. 
48) 
Kenyon also testified that he has applied for different positions within the City of 
Des Moines Public Works Department and the City has rejected all of his applications.  
According to Kenyon, the City told him that he did not have the qualifications for the 
various positions. (Ex. E, Depo. p. 47)  It is reasonable for the City to reject an 
application if the applicant is not qualified for the position. 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 9 
Lastly, claimant called his father, Dale Kenyon. (Hr. Tr., p. 55)  Dale testified that 
his son no longer has the ability to do anything to maintain his home or any property.  
He further testified that his son experiences “pretty much constant pain.” (Hr. Tr., p. 60)   
The primary issue before the undersigned is whether the stipulated work injury 
was merely a temporary aggravation of a pre-existing condition or a permanent and 
material aggravation.  Kenyon contends the injury resulted in a permanent aggravation 
of a pre-existing condition, while the defendant asserts the injury was temporary and 
had resolved by the time Kenyon returned to full duty work in July 2022.  While there is 
some merit to defendant’s argument regarding Kenyon’s return to work and the nine-
month gap in treatment, a thorough review of the medical evidence and the claimant’s 
work history suggests the work injury caused a more lasting impact on his condition. 
Although Kenyon was returned to full-duty work in July 2022, evidence suggests 
that his duties, or at least his job assignments, were modified to include less physically 
demanding tasks.  This modification points to the possibility he was not fully recovered 
but rather managing his ongoing symptoms.  Furthermore, the May 10, 2022, MRI 
revealed a small disc protrusion at L5-S1, which worsened slightly on the August 9, 
2023, MRI.  The diagnostic imaging supports the idea that the injury did not fully 
resolve.  Lastly, it is clear from the medical records in evidence that Kenyon was 
pushing his treating physicians for a return to work, despite ongoing symptoms, in July 
2022. 
The undersigned is cognizant of Kenyon’s pain complaints in 2019 and 2020.  
Unfortunately, there is no pre-injury diagnostic imaging available.  Without pre-existing 
imaging, there is no objective evidence to show claimant’s lumbar condition had 
structurally progressed to a herniation before the May 6, 2022, work injury. 
After analyzing all of the evidence in the record, I find Dr. Rondinelli’s causation 
opinion to be the most convincing and credible in the evidentiary record. Dr. Rondinelli 
provided a detailed discussion of the medical records in evidence.  Indeed, Dr. 
Rondinelli is the only physician to review claimant’s pre-existing medical records from 
2019 and 2020.  He was in the best position to address causation.  As such, I accept 
the causation opinion of Dr. Rondinelli.   
The act of playing catch may have caused a temporary flare of his condition, but 
the act itself cannot be said to be a substantial factor in bringing about the claimant’s 
current condition.  As noted in the evidentiary record by claimant, Dr. Nayeri, and Dr. 
Rondinelli, Kenyon remained symptomatic with radicular complaints after his placement 
at maximum medical improvement by Dr. Rushing.  Dr. Rondinelli convincingly 
explained Kenyon more than likely sustained a recurrent flare up of his chronic lower 
back condition with minimal subsequent progression of his herniated disk at L5-S1.  In 
other words, the 2023 flare-up was an expected worsening of an ongoing condition, not 
an independent injury. 
Dr. Rondinelli does not believe that Kenyon has reached maximum medical 
improvement.  Like Dr. Rushing, Dr. Rondinelli opined an EMG could add valuable 
information as to the nature and extent of claimant’s radiculopathy.  He further opined 
Kenyon may be a candidate for an implantable spinal cord stimulator device.  As such, I 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 10 
find treatment recommendations exist and that such treatment should be undertaken 
before a determination of claimant’s permanent disability occurs.  Because Kenyon is 
not at MMI, the issue of permanency is not ripe for adjudication.   
For the sake of argument, even if I found claimant had reached maximum 
medical improvement, I would not be able to award permanent partial disability benefits 
as the evidentiary record does not contain a reliable impairment rating.  Through his 
brief, Kenyon requests an award of 8 percent functional impairment, “consistent with the 
functional impairment rating provided by Dr. Rondinelli on 5/9/2024.” (Claimant’s Post-
hearing Brief, p. 15)  However, Dr. Rondinelli did not assign 8 percent permanent 
impairment to Kenyon’s low back condition.  As mentioned, Dr. Rondinelli opined that 
claimant’s July 2022 condition met the criteria for DRE Lumbar Category II impairment 
worth five to eight percent (5-8%) whole person impairment.  The undersigned lacks the 
authority to select an impairment rating from the range provided by Dr. Rondinelli   
On the hearing report, the parties disputed whether the alleged injury is a cause 
of temporary disability during a period of recovery.  They also stipulated that entitlement 
to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits is no longer in dispute.  In any 
event, Kenyon’s full-time work status as of the date of the evidentiary hearing would not 
qualify for temporary total, temporary partial, or healing period benefits. 
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 11 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
 
Following review of the entirety of the evidentiary record, and after giving 
significant consideration to the medical opinions in evidence, I determined the claimant 
proved by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained a material aggravation of 
his pre-existing low back condition on May 6, 2022.   
 
The next issue in this case is whether the claimant has reached maximum 
medical improvement for his low back condition.  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
described MMI as “stabilization of the condition or at least a finding that the condition is 
“not likely to remit in the future despite medical treatment.”' Bell Bros. Heating & Air 
Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (citation omitted). 
 
In the matter at hand, Dr. Rushing placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement and discharged him from care on July 14, 2022.  Although Kenyon 
returned to full-time work and did not request or seek additional medical treatment for 
nine months after his release, he testified that his pain never completely resolved.  
During these nine months, Kenyon experienced flare-ups in low back pain with work 
activities. (Hr. Tr., p. 19)  He eventually sought additional treatment in April 2023 
following such a flare-up while playing catch with his kids.  At the time of hearing, he 
continued to treat his low back pain through pain management.   
 
Dr. Rondinelli did not place claimant at maximum medical improvement.  Instead, 
he recommended additional diagnostic imaging and pain management treatment.  
These recommendations belie a finding of maximum medical improvement.  I found 
claimant has not reached maximum medical improvement for his low back condition.  I 
therefore conclude claimant's claim for permanent disability is not yet ripe for 
determination. I find that recommendations for treatment exist and that such treatment 
should be undertaken before a determination of claimant's permanent disability occurs. 
Claimant did not assert a claim for healing period benefits through the date of 
hearing. Rather, the hearing report provides that claimant's entitlement to temporary 
disability and/or healing period benefits is no longer in dispute. (Hearing Report, p. 1) 
The undersigned is cognizant of the similarities between this case and Sandhu v. 
Nordstrom, Inc., No. 5046628 (App. Jan. 24, 2019), and acknowledges that an 
argument exists for the undersigned to assess the extent of claimant's permanent 
impairment based on the intent of the parties. However, the instant case is 
distinguishable from Sandhu. 
In Sandhu, the deputy commissioner found claimant sustained a permanent 
work-related injury to her bilateral shoulders. The deputy commissioner also determined 
the medical treatment for claimant's shoulders, including surgery, was related to the 
work injury. However, the deputy commissioner concluded the extent of claimant's 
permanent disability was not ripe for determination because claimant had not yet 
reached maximum medical improvement for her work-related mental health condition. 
As a result, the deputy commissioner found the claimant had not reached MMI for all 
conditions and awarded claimant a running award of healing period benefits. 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 12 
On appeal, the defendant argued it was improper for the deputy commissioner to 
issue a running award of healing period benefits when claimant did not request a 
running award of healing period benefits and the parties stipulated claimant's healing 
period had ended. The claimant disputed defendant's position that the parties stipulated 
claimant's healing period had ended. However, on cross-appeal, claimant argued she 
was permanently and totally disabled and requested that the commissioner reverse the 
deputy commissioner's award of running healing period benefits and make findings and 
conclusions regarding the extent of her permanent disability. Both parties agreed that 
they wanted and expected the deputy commissioner to decide the extent of claimant's 
permanent disability. 
The commissioner reversed the deputy commissioner and concluded that 
permanent disability was ripe for adjudication. In reaching this conclusion, the 
commissioner largely relied on the intent of the parties. The decision provides, “On 
appeal, both parties continue to assert that the extent of claimant's permanent disability 
is ready to be decided. [...] Thus, I respectfully disagree with the deputy commissioner 
and I find the extent of claimant's permanent disability was and continues to be ripe for 
determination.” Sandhu, File No. 5046628, 2019 WL 366447 at 2 (App. Jan. 24, 2019) 
Notably, at least two physicians placed Sandhu at maximum medical 
improvement for her bilateral shoulder condition prior to the date of injury. Additionally, 
the parties stipulated on the hearing report that the work injury was a cause of 
permanent disability and asserted alternative commencement dates for permanency 
benefits.  
In the instant case, the parties dispute that the injury is a cause of permanent 
disability. In other words, the parties agree that there is an active disagreement 
regarding whether the injury is a cause of permanent disability. The parties further 
dispute claimant's entitlement to permanent disability benefits, and defendant 
acknowledged the possibility that claimant had not reached maximum medical 
improvement in its post-hearing brief. Given the disputed issues in this case, and the 
lack of a credible opinion finding Kenyon has reached maximum medical improvement, I 
find this case is distinguishable from Sandhu. 
 
Finally, the claimant seeks assessment of his costs associated with this 
contested case proceeding.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa 
Code section 10A.328. Considering that claimant prevailed in this case, I exercise the 
agency's discretion and conclude that it is reasonable to assess claimants' costs in 
some amount. 
Kenyon seeks the cost of his filing fee ($128.75).  The filing fee is a reasonable 
cost and granted pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Kenyon also seeks assessment of the 
cost of his deposition ($104.50).   The deposition transcript is a reasonable cost and 
granted pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
 
 
 

KENYON V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 13 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant shall provide claimant ongoing medical care for his low back 
condition. 
Defendant shall pay the future medical expenses of claimant necessitated by the 
work injury. 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant's costs in the amount of two hundred thirty-
three and 25/100 dollars ($233.25). 
Defendant shall timely file all reports as required by 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __13th __ day of February, 2025. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Christopher Spaulding  
(via WCES) 
Reagan Peterson   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
