Case Number: 21701135.03
Case Title:  FLEMING, TASHA V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Fleming Tasha-21701135.03d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TASHA FLEMING, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 21701135.03 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                     
 
Employer,  
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GUIDEONE INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
Head Note Nos.: 1108, 1801.1, 1802, 
 
 
  : 
 
 
       2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :            
_____________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Tasha Fleming, filed a petition for arbitration on April 4, 2022, and 
seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Opco Norwalk, IA, LLC, employer, and 
GuideOne Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by 
Robert Gainer.  The defendants were represented by M. Anne McAtee and Taelor 
Cooper. 
The matter came on for hearing on August 17, 2023, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The record in 
the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 10; and 
Defense Exhibits B through J.1  The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to her 
husband, Kevin Fleming, and defense vocational expert, Lana Sellner.  Lucinda 
Winslow-Haidsiak served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on 
October 2, 2023. 
Prior to hearing, defendants sought a continuance, arguing that Ms. Fleming was 
not at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and it would be a waste of administrative 
judicial resources to proceed to hearing.  Claimant adamantly resisted.  A prehearing 
                                                 
1 While Defense Exhibit A remains in the electronic record, it was withdrawn by defendants prior 
to hearing and was not reviewed or considered as part of this claim. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Mar-14  13:51:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
conference was held on August 10, 2023, and the motion was denied for the reasons 
stated therein. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Temporary disability benefits are in dispute.  Claimant is seeking temporary 
disability (HP, TTD, or TPD) from April 8, 2022, through June 15, 2023.  The 
defendants deny responsibility for any temporary disability benefits. 
Defendants have raised a defense under Section 85.33 for a refusal to accept 
suitable work during this period. 
2. Claimant is seeking permanent total disability benefits and has alleged the 
“odd-lot” burden shifting theory.  Defendants deny that permanency is ripe for 
adjudication as claimant is not at maximum medical improvement.  
Defendants alternatively argue that – even if claimant is at MMI – she is not 
totally disabled.  The commencement date for any permanency is disputed, 
however, the parties have stipulated that if permanency is ripe, the disability 
is industrial.  Claimant has asserted alternatively that if she is not at MMI, she 
is entitled to a running award of benefits. 
3. Claimant is seeking alternate medical care under Section 85.27; and this 
appears to be mainly an issue of causal connection. 
4. Claimant is seeking a penalty for late/unpaid benefits.  Defendants dispute 
this. 
5. Claimant has asked for a specific taxation of costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on September 14, 2021, which has caused temporary disability 
during a period of recovery. 
3. The appropriate weekly rate of compensation is $755.86 per week.  This is a 
slightly higher rate than claimant has been paid and the defendants agreed 
on the record to make up the difference with interest. 
4. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit of 39 weeks of 
compensation. 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
5. Other than the Section 85.33 defense, affirmative defenses have been waived 
by defendants. 
6. The Hearing Report was amended on the record to reflect that past Section 
85.27 expenses are not in dispute, nor is the IME under Section 85.39.  
Defendants agreed to pay the IME in the amount of $4,857.00. 
7. The defendants have paid 39 weeks of compensation at a slightly lower rate 
of compensation. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Tasha Fleming was 48 years old as of the date of hearing.  She resides 
in Des Moines, Iowa.  She testified live and under oath at the video hearing.  Her 
testimony is found to be credible. 
  Ms. Fleming graduated from Lincoln High School in Des Moines in 1993.  She 
attained some college credits at DMACC and William Penn, but never earned a degree.  
In 2012, Ms. Fleming obtained her license as a licensed practical nurse (LPN).  She 
took some courses to become a registered nurse (RN) but never completed the 
program.  Since 2012, Ms. Fleming has worked as an LPN for different employers.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 3, pages 34-36)  At hearing, she testified that this work was often 
physically demanding and always included “floor work” safely transferring, bathing and 
dressing patients or residents.  (Transcript, pages 18-19; 23-24) 
OPCO Norwalk hired Ms. Fleming as an LPN in a Minimum Data Set (MDS) 
coordinator position.  The job description is in the record.  (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 173-175)  As 
an MDS coordinator, she was responsible for doing assessment of residents and 
entering the results into the system.  She also performed all the regular duties of an 
LPN, including the physical work of transfers and other physical cares.  She began 
working for OPCO Norwalk on May 15, 2021. 
On June 21, 2021, Ms. Fleming testified she sustained an injury to her right 
shoulder away from work.  She slipped and fell in the shower.  (Tr., pp. 32-33)  She was 
treated by Jeffrey Davick, M.D., and surgery was performed on her right shoulder for 
tears of her supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons.  (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 5)  Dr. Davick 
performed arthroscopic surgery on July 27, 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 73)  On August 4, 2021, 
Dr. Davick documented that Ms. Fleming was recovering well.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6)  He 
placed temporary restrictions on her to not use her right arm.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8)  She 
followed up with Dr. Davick on September 8, 2021.  She was still doing “well” and he 
reduced some of her medical restrictions, however, still limiting the use of her right arm 
and shoulder to no more than 10 pounds.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) 
The parties have stipulated that on September 14, 2021, Ms. Fleming sustained 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of her employment to her right shoulder.  
Ms. Fleming testified in some detail about this injury.  Specifically, she testified that she 
had been asked to work outside of her restrictions.  (Tr., p. 35)  While working on the 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 4 
 
 
floor she lost control of a large heavy binder.  It started to fall, and she caught it with her 
right arm causing a jerking sensation that caused immediate and severe pain.  (Tr., pp. 
36-37)  She reported the injury immediately.  She testified that she had significant 
difficulty getting authorization for any medical treatment.  (Tr., p. 38)  Eventually she 
hired an attorney and filed for alternate medical care.  (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 165-166)  The 
defendants eventually accepted the claim and authorized treatment with Dr. Davick.  On 
November 3, 2001, Dr. Davick documented that Ms. Fleming had been doing quite well 
in her recovery until the work accident.  Dr. Davick documented the new symptoms and 
reinitiated physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
On December 15, 2021, Dr. Davick opined that Ms. Fleming was developing 
adhesive capsulitis in her right shoulder because of the work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 15)  
He ordered an MRI in March 2022, which showed recurrent full thickness tears of the 
supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 19)  He recommended surgery.  
Again, defendants refused to authorize the surgery and she filed a second application 
for alternate medical care in March 2022.  (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 170-171)  Eventually the 
surgery was authorized and performed on April 8, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 23-25)  By June 
2022, Ms. Fleming was complaining of left shoulder pain, which Dr. Davick opined was 
caused by overuse and stemmed from the work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26)  He ordered a 
left shoulder MRI in July 2022.  He diagnosed rotator cuff tears of the supraspinatus and 
infraspinatus tendons and recommended surgery.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 30, 33)  In July, Ms. 
Fleming also reported her shoulder pain was causing anxiety and depression.  (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 79)  She was diagnosed with a moderate episode of recurrent major depressive 
disorder and anxiety.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 81) 
On August 31, 2022, defendants delivered a written offer of light duty work.  
(Defendants’ Exhibit G, pp. 25-30)  Beginning on September 1, 2022, she was asked to 
work as a COVID screener.  She was to screen employees and visitors for COVID and 
sanitize high-touch areas using disinfectants.  Her restrictions at that time were no lifting 
greater than 5 pounds and no use of either arm above chest height.  Ms. Fleming 
refused to sign the job offer; however, she did work in the position.  She testified that 
she told her employer that the work included activities outside of her restrictions.  (Tr., p. 
80)  Ms. Fleming worked just under 20 hours the first week.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 163(1))  Ms. 
Fleming complained of pain in her back and neck and testified that sitting on a chair with 
no back was exacerbating these symptoms during this timeframe.  In fact, she was 
evaluated at DMOS for low back pain on September 2, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 37)  She was 
evaluated on September 6, 2022, for her low back, thoracic and neck pain.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
39)  On September 9, 2022, she requested a leave of absence.  Her employer 
responded that while she was not eligible for FMLA, it would allow her to take unpaid 
leave from September 9, 2022, through October 20, 2022. 
Ms. Fleming underwent an MRI of the thoracic and cervical spine on September 
21, 2022.  The MRI showed cervical spondylosis and a degenerative disc bulge at C5-6 
with mild left neural foraminal narrowing.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 44)  Other medical notes during 
this timeframe documented symptoms in her neck, upper and mid back.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
92)  None of the medical providers would provide restrictions specific to these 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 5 
 
 
conditions.  The employer offered Ms. Fleming a new job on October 17, 2022.  This 
position was supposed to be just sitting with residents.  (Def. Ex. G, pp. 31-32)  Ms. 
Fleming accepted this position and worked light-duty in October, November, and part of 
December.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 163(1); Tr., pp. 50-51) 
She returned to Dr. Davick on November 16, 2022.  He opined she was still 
having pain in her shoulders and ribs which he felt was secondary to her work injury.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 50)  He recommended she proceed with left shoulder surgery.  After 
another application for alternate medical care, the defendants authorized surgery on 
December 16, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 77) 
Ms. Fleming was also receiving treatment from Anthony Kopp, D.O., at Mercy 
Physical Medicine for her rib pain.  He performed some osteopathic manipulation 
treatment in December 2022 and January 2023, documenting the chronic pain in 
various areas of her body.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 96-104)  He opined she was deconditioned 
and that her limited activity was contributing to her back pain.  Like other physicians 
involved, however, Dr. Kopp did not want to opine on medical restrictions, preferring to 
leave this to Dr. Davick.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 104)  Eventually, Dr. Kopp performed some 
trigger point injections to her bilateral upper trapezius, scapula, right thoracic 
paraspinals, and rhomboids.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 105-106)   
Ms. Fleming returned to work as a resident supervisor/sitter on January 19, 2023.  
(Def. Ex. G, pp. 34-36)  Her position was switched to greeter in March 2023.  (Def. Ex. 
G, pp. 37-38) 
On April 12, 2023, Ms. Fleming followed up with Dr. Davick.  The record 
documents she was still having significant pain in her right shoulder.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 59)  
Dr. Davick ordered another MRI to rule out a re-tear of her rotator cuff.  The right 
shoulder MRI did show some tearing in her rotator cuff.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 62)  Dr. Davick, 
however, opined that a third surgery on the right would not be beneficial.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
65)  Dr. Davick placed her at maximum medical improvement for her bilateral shoulders 
stating she “is not looking for more surgery at this point.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 65)  Dr. Davick 
recommended permanent restrictions for the right shoulder including no lifting more 
than 5 pounds and no work above chest height.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 65)  He assigned 
impairment ratings in June 2023 of 13 percent on the right and 6 percent on the left 
based upon decreased range of motion.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 67)  These ratings were faxed to 
the insurance carrier on June 28, 2023, and payments were issued on July 24, 2023. 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., evaluated Ms. Fleming on June 15, 2023, for purposes of an 
independent medical examination under section 85.39.  Dr. Bansal reviewed numerous 
appropriate records, took history from Ms. Fleming, and performed a thorough 
examination.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-17)  He prepared a report dated July 6, 2023.  He agreed 
with the diagnoses by Dr. Davick in her bilateral shoulders and opined these conditions 
are related to her September 14, 2021, work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 18-19)  He also 
opined that Ms. Fleming has a C4-C5 disc protrusion, as well as thoracic myofascial 
pain syndrome.  These conditions, he opined, are also causally connected to the work 
injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 19-20)  Dr. Bansal did not offer any opinion as to whether Ms. 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 6 
 
 
Fleming is at MMI for her cervical or thoracic conditions.  He opined she is not at MMI 
for her bilateral shoulders.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 20)  He did provide permanent impairment 
ratings in “the absence of further treatment.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 20) 
Right Shoulder 
 
 
13 percent RUE 
Left Shoulder  
 
 
8 percent LUE 
Cervical Disc Protrusion 
 
15 percent BAW 
Thoracic Condition  
 
5 percent BAW 
(Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 21-22)  For all her conditions, he recommended permanent restrictions of 
no lifting more than 10 pounds with the right arm or greater than 15 pounds with the left, 
no overhead lifting, no frequent bending or twisting, avoid work activities that require 
repeated neck motion or place neck in a posturally flexed position greater than 15 
minutes.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 22) 
In addition, the parties both secured expert vocational opinions.  The claimant 
secured opinions from Phil Davis, M.S., while defendants secured opinions, including 
live testimony, from Lana Sellner, M.S.  These dueling opinions predictably debate the 
extent of Ms. Fleming’s loss of earning capacity.  (Compare Cl. Ex. 2; with Def. Ex. J, 
and Tr., pp. 113-130) 
Having reviewed all of the evidence, I find that Ms. Fleming sustained an injury to 
her right shoulder on September 14, 2021.  This injury has resulted in conditions in her 
bilateral shoulders, her neck, and her mid back, as well as symptoms in her ribs.  No 
physician has placed Ms. Fleming at maximum medical improvement for all of her 
conditions at this point in time.  While she was placed at maximum medical 
improvement for her bilateral shoulders by Dr. Davick in May 2023, just prior to hearing, 
it appears that this was based upon his understanding that she did not wish to have any 
further surgery. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties have stipulated that Ms. Fleming sustained an injury which arose out 
of and in the course of her employment on September 14, 2021.  The parties have also 
stipulated that this injury is a cause of some temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.  The precise conditions, however, which the injury caused, appear to be 
disputed to some degree. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 7 
 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1961). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
By a preponderance of evidence, I adopt the opinions of Dr. Bansal regarding the 
conditions which are causally related to her work injury.  Specifically, Dr. Bansal opined 
her bilateral shoulders, cervical spine and thoracic spine conditions are all connected to 
her stipulated work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 18-20)  These opinions are supported by the 
contemporaneous medical notes, the opinions of Dr. Davick, as well as the credible 
testimony of Ms. Fleming and her husband, Kevin Fleming. 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 8 
 
 
The next question is whether Ms. Fleming has reached maximum medical 
improvement at the time of hearing.  This issue is significant only from a procedural 
perspective.  The primary question is whether the period of recovery has ended, and if 
so, when.  The claimant, for her part, argues that she is at MMI, and she is totally 
disabled.  The defendants argue strenuously that she is not at MMI, and, in fact, sought 
a continuance to address this. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
The imposition of a rating of permanent impairment is equivalent to an opinion 
that further significant improvement from the injury is not expected. Absent a showing 
that further improvement was expected, healing period ends when a permanent rating is 
given. Brown v. Weitz Company, File No. 830840 (App. March 13, 1990); Miller v. 
Halletts Materials, File No. 861983 (App. November 23, 1992). The persistence of pain 
does not prevent a finding that the healing period is over, provided the underlying 
condition is stable. Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 1993). Medical 
stability is viewed in terms of industrial disability; if it is unlikely that further treatment of 
pain will decrease the extent of permanent industrial disability, continued pain 
management will not prolong the healing period. Id. at 392.  Specifically, when a 
condition is stable medically, further treatment “may extend the length of the healing 
period if a substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result.”  Id. at 
391.  On the other hand, if the continued treatment is merely expected to assist with the 
symptoms rather than “decrease the extent of permanent disability” then the healing 
period should end.  Id. 
I find that Ms. Fleming has failed to prove that she is at maximum medical 
improvement at the time of hearing.  While Dr. Davick did place her at maximum 
medical improvement for her bilateral shoulders, this was based upon his understanding 
that she did not want further invasive treatment.  In fact, Dr. Davick specifically 
discussed further treatment for the shoulders when he tentatively placed her at MMI.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 65)  Moreover, no physician has placed Ms. Fleming at MMI for her cervical 
condition, her thoracic condition, or her ribs.  While Dr. Bansal did rate these conditions, 
it appears in his report that he specifically avoided the issue of MMI regarding these 
conditions.  In regard to the bilateral shoulders, Dr. Bansal opined that she was at MMI 
“in the absence of further treatment.”  Just prior to hearing, defendants had authorized 
further treatment with either the Mayo Clinic or the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics.  While it is somewhat unclear at the time of hearing, what this precise treatment 
will be, I find by a greater weight of evidence that it is premature to assess permanency.  
I find that there will likely be a much clearer picture of Ms. Fleming’s actual disability 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 9 
 
 
once she has undergone full evaluation and treatment for all of her work-related 
conditions and it would most likely be speculative to assess her permanent disability 
without such further evaluation and treatment. 
The next question submitted is whether Ms. Fleming is entitled to any temporary 
disability benefits.  The parties have stipulated that Ms. Fleming sustained an injury 
which arose out of and in the course of her employment and that this injury is a cause of 
temporary disability during a period of recovery.  The defendants contend that they have 
paid all temporary disability owed and that Ms. Fleming has refused suitable work at 
various points in time. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Iowa Code Section 85.33(2) (2021). 
If an employee is entitled to temporary partial benefits under subsection 3 of this 
section, the employer for whom the employee was working at the time of injury shall pay 
to the employee weekly compensation benefits, as provided in section 85.32, for and 
during the period of temporary partial disability.  The temporary partial benefit shall be 
sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the difference between the employee's weekly 
earnings at the time of injury, computed in compliance with section 85.36, and the 
employee's actual gross weekly income from employment during the period of 
temporary partial disability.  If at the time of injury an employee is paid on the basis of 
the output of the employee, with a minimum guarantee pursuant to a written 
employment agreement, the minimum guarantee shall be used as the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of injury.  However, the weekly compensation benefits shall 
not exceed the payments to which the employee would be entitled under section 85.36 
or section 85.37, or under subsection 1 of this section.  Iowa Code Section 85.33(4) 
(2021). 
Having reviewed all of the evidence regarding Ms. Fleming’s recuperation and 
her efforts to return to work, I find that she is entitled to healing period benefits when 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 10 
 
 
she was on a leave of absence from September 9, 2022, through October 16, 2022.  
During this period, the defendants had offered claimant work in writing under Section 
85.33; however, the work was not suitable and exceeded her restrictions.  Specifically, 
the written job offer extended to Ms. Fleming would have required her to work beyond 
her restrictions.  (Def. Ex. G, p. 25-30)  The employer apparently told Ms. Fleming that 
she did not have to perform any duties outside her restrictions, however, she was 
granted a leave of absence.  Ms. Fleming refused such work and is entitled to benefits 
for this specific period of time.  This is the only period of time in the record where Ms. 
Fleming actually refused work. 
When she returned to work from October 17, 2022, through December 15, 2022, 
she was earning less money while working on light-duty, and she is therefore entitled to 
temporary partial disability benefits during this period of time.  I find she was off work 
from December 16, 2022, through January 18, 2023, and she was paid temporary 
benefits during this period of time.  On January 19, 2023, through the date of hearing 
and continuing, Ms. Fleming was still not at MMI.  She is in a period of recovery, but she 
has continued to work, earning less than her stipulated average weekly wage prior to 
her injury.  She is entitled to TPD benefits during this period until such time that she 
reaches MMI or is otherwise ineligible for temporary benefits. 
Having found that Ms. Fleming is not at MMI, I find that all issues related to 
permanency are not ripe and are bifurcated for later adjudication if necessary.  I further 
find that the penalty issue is moot as it was predicated upon a late payment of 
permanency benefits, which were not actually owed. 
The next issue is future medical expenses under Iowa Code section 85.27. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by section 17A.14.  The 
agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge may be utilized 
in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in the courts are not 
controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of evidence on which reasonably 
prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of serious affairs.  Health care is a 
serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 11 
 
 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 124 N.W.2d 548 
(1963).  
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually, providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
On the record, the defendants have agreed to authorize and pay for treatment for 
the claimant at the Mayo Clinic or University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  This care is 
reasonable.  Since the care has already been authorized, I find it is inappropriate to 
award it.  The agency, however, does expect defendants to carry through on the 
promise to authorize and pay for this treatment. 
Finally, the claimant seeks costs.  Using the discretion set forth in Iowa Code 
Section 10A.328, I award costs in the amount of $2,352.96. 
All of the other issues raised by the parties in the Hearing Report including 
penalty are moot at this time since claimant has not reached maximum medical 
improvement.  Defendants are entitled to a credit for the PPD benefits paid and 
documented in the hearing report (paragraph 9(a)).  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
This matter is bifurcated and only the issues addressed herein are final.  At such 
point in the future when either party contends that claimant has reached maximum 
medical improvement or other justiciable issues arise, said party may request a 
bifurcated hearing by motion on permanency, or any other disputed issue, without filing 
a new petition. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant healing period benefits from September 9, 
2022, through October 16, 2022, at the rate of seven hundred fifty-five and 86/100 

FLEMING V. OPCO NORWALK, IA, LLC 
Page 12 
 
 
dollars ($755.86) per week. 
Defendants shall pay TPD benefits from October 17, 2022, through December 
15, 2022, and January 19, 2023 through the date of hearing, and continuing until such 
time as TPD benefits are no longer owed. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of two thousand three hundred fifty-
two and 96/100 dollars ($2,352.96). 
Signed and filed this __14th _ day of March, 2024. 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
M. Anne McAtee (via WCES) 
Taelor Cooper (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
