Case Number: 20012048.01
Case Title:  ORTEGA, MICHAEL V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING COMPANY LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ortega Michael-20012048.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL ORTEGA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
         File No. 20012048.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC,   : 
     ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE CO.,   :          Headnotes: 1402.40, 1803, 2907 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Claimant filed a petition in arbitration on November 12, 2021, alleging he 
sustained an injury while working for Defendant National Beef Packing Company (“Iowa 
Premium Beef”) on February 1, 2020.  Iowa Premium Beef and its insurer, Defendant 
American Zurich Insurance Company (“American Zurich”), filed an answer on December 
1, 2021.   
An arbitration hearing was held via Zoom video conference on October 18, 2022.  
Attorney Joanie Grife represented Ortega.  Ortega appeared and testified.  Attorney 
Peter Thill represented Iowa Premium Beef and American Zurich.  Jenny Mora and 
Roger Verhoef appeared and testified on behalf of Iowa Premium Beef and American 
Zurich.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 1 through 8 and Exhibits 1 through 7 and A through G were 
admitted into the record.  The record was held open through November 28, 2022, for 
the receipt of post-hearing briefs.  The briefs were received, and the record was closed. 
Before the hearing the parties submitted a Hearing Report listing stipulations and 
issues to be decided.  Iowa Premium Beef and American Zurich waived all affirmative 
defenses.  The Hearing Report Order was entered at the conclusion of the hearing 
adopting the parties’ stipulations and issues to be decided. 
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Iowa Premium Beef 
and Ortega at the time of the alleged injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-12  15:37:58     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 2 
 
2. 
Ortega sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment on February 1, 2020.   
3. 
Entitlement to temporary disability benefits is no longer in dispute. 
4. 
If the injury is found to be the cause of permanent disability, the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are awarded, is 
December 15, 2020.   
5. 
At the time of the alleged injury Ortega’s gross earnings were $950.00 per 
week, he was single and entitled to two exemptions, and the parties believe the weekly 
rate is $605.05. 
6. 
Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
1. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
2. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of permanent disability? 
3. 
If the injury is found to be the cause of permanent disability what is the 
nature of the injury? 
4. 
If the injury is found to be the cause of permanent disability, what is the 
extent of disability? 
5. 
Is Ortega entitled to recover medical expenses set forth in Exhibit 3? 
6. 
Is Ortega entitled to recover the cost of the independent medical 
examination (“IME”) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
7. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Ortega is single and has one son. (Tr.:7)  At the time of the hearing Ortega was 
28. (Tr.:7)  Ortega completed the eleventh grade before dropping out of high school. 
(Ex. 4:20; Tr:8)  Ortega earned B and C grades in school. (Tr.:9, 43)  Ortega has not 
attended any additional schooling since he left high school and he has not received a 
GED. (Tr.:9, 43)  Ortega testified he has the ability to obtain a GED if he were to choose 
to do so. (Tr.:43)   
After leaving high school Ortega worked for McDonald’s full-time for four years as 
a crew member wrapping hamburgers on the line. (Tr.:9, 24)  Ortega left McDonald’s to 
work for Iowa Premium Beef in 2015. (Ex. E:12; Tr.:10)  Ortega worked full-time for 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 3 
 
Iowa Premium Beef from May 11, 2015 through 2018 until he was terminated. (Ex. 1:20; 
Tr.:10-11, 46)   
On May 30, 2019, Iowa Premium Beef rehired Ortega for a chuck trim position, 
earning $16.50 per hour. (Exs. 1:20, E:16-17; Tr.:10, 47-48)  Ortega moved to the chuck 
saw operator position on July 22, 2019, and Iowa Premium Beef increased his pay to 
$18.00 per hour.  (Ex:17-18, 48)  Ortega testified he moved to the saw operator position 
because the pay was better. (Tr.:28)  As a chuck saw operator Ortega pulled 100-pound 
pieces of meat from the chest high assembly line with a hook, put the pieces on a table, 
cut through the middle of the pieces, and put the pieces back on the assembly line. 
(Tr.:11-12, 48)  Each day Ortega pulled 700 pieces of meat, nine to 10 hours per day, 
six days per week. (Tr.:13)   
On February 1, 2020, three pieces of meat were stacked on top of the line. 
(Tr.:14)  Ortega stopped the line and pulled the first piece from the top and flipped it 
over with his hook. (Tr.:14)  As he flipped over the meat, he heard a pop and felt pain in 
his low back and down his left and right legs. (Tr.:14-15)  Ortega reported his work 
injury to his supervisor. (Tr.:15)  At the time of his work injury Ortega was earning 
$18.00 per hour. (Ex. F:39-43)  Ortega testified he had not received treatment for his 
back before the work injury. (Tr.:40)   
Ortega went to the emergency room the Sunday after his injury. (Tr.:15)  His 
employer sent him for medical treatment on February 5, 2020 with Sherri Vesely, DNP. 
(Tr.:15)  Ortega reported he felt a pop in his back with sharp pain after lifting meat at 
work and relayed he was experiencing pain in his lumbar spine radiating to his left knee 
with weakness. (JE 1:1)  Vesely documented Ortega exhibited decreased range of 
motion, tenderness, swelling, and pain on exam, including tenderness with palpation 
and swelling over the SI joint. (JE 1:2)  Vesely diagnosed Ortega with a low back strain, 
prescribed physical therapy, administered a Toradol injection, and prescribed diclofenac 
and tizanidine. (JE 1:3)  During his IME with John Kuhnlein, D.O., Ortega denied 
reporting he had symptoms in his left lower extremity, stating most of his low back pain 
has been on the right side. (Ex. 1:2)   
Ortega returned to Vesely on February 26, 2020, reporting he no longer had pain 
radiating down his left leg. (JE 1:4)  Vesely documented Ortega had a visible spasm 
from his lumbar spine up to his left scapula, which was tender to touch. (JE 1:4)  Vesely 
continued Ortega’s medication and physical therapy, prescribed lidocaine patches for 
pain, and imposed restrictions of no squatting, jumping or running, pushing or pulling, 
prolonged standing, repetitive movements, twisting/bending/pivoting, and no use of 
ladders or scaffolds. (JE 1:5-6)  Ortega again denied reporting he had left-sided 
symptoms during his IME with Dr. Kuhnlein, reporting his symptoms have been on the 
right side. (Ex. 1:2)   
On March 17, 2020, Ortega attended a follow up appointment with Vesely, 
complaining of lumbar and thoracic back pain on the left. (JE 1:7)  Vesely documented 
Ortega had decreased range of motion, pain and spasm in the thoracic spine, 
decreased range of motion, tenderness, pain in his lumbar spine, and limited range of 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 4 
 
motion with hip flexion on the left, but not on the right. (JE 1:8)  Vesely continued his 
physical therapy and medications, and released him to return to work with a 15-pound 
lifting restriction. (JE 1:9-10)  Ortega again denied reporting he had left-sided symptoms 
during his IME with Dr. Kuhnlein, relaying his symptoms have been in the right side. 
(Ex. 1:2-3)   
After Ortega was placed on light-duty, Iowa Premium Beef assigned him to a 
position where he picked bones coming down the line, which involved standing and 
twisting. (Tr.:28-29)  Ortega believes he could do that job if he were still employed by 
Iowa Premium Beef. (Tr.:29)   
Ortega returned to Veseley’s office on April 27, 2020 and he was examined by 
Christa Slagle, DNP. (JE 1:11)  Slagle documented Ortega had pain in his lumbar spine 
that was mild, but chronic, with no leg pain, numbness, or tingling. (JE 1:11)  On exam, 
Slagle found Ortega had tenderness and pain in his lumbar spine and normal range of 
motion. (JE 1:12)  Slagle documented Ortega had completed physical therapy and she 
increased his lifting restriction to 50 pounds. (JE 1:12) 
On May 11, 2020, Ortega attended an appointment with Slagle, reporting he was 
wearing a back brace and taking his medications as directed, but his back pain had 
increased after his lifting restriction was increased to 50 pounds. (JE 1:14)  Slagle 
decreased his lifting restriction to 15 pounds, continued his medication, and stated she 
believed he may need magnetic resonance imaging. (JE 1:14-15)   
Ortega underwent lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging on May 27, 2020. 
(JE 3:53)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of disc disease at L5-S1 with a 
posterior annular tear, no significant osseous central canal narrowing, and a contact 
point with the exiting left L5 nerve root in the intervertebral foramen. (JE 3:54)   
On June 2, 2020, Ortega attended an appointment with Trevor Schmitz, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon, complaining of stabbing low back pain exacerbated by lifting and 
twisting, and pain radiating down his right lower extremity with right posterior thigh 
numbness and tingling. (JE 4:55-56)  Dr. Schmitz documented Ortega ambulated with a 
nonantalgic, nonataxic gait, and observed he had diffuse tenderness throughout his mid 
and lower back, worse over the right SI joint, with no palpable spasm, pain with right hip 
range of motion, pain with simulated trunk rotation of his low back, and a positive 
Patrick’s test on the right. (JE 4:57)  Dr. Schmitz reviewed Ortega’s magnetic resonance 
imaging and a computerized tomography scan of his pelvis from July 2018, noting his 
imaging showed a small annular tear at L5-S1, retrolisthesis at L5-S1, with no obvious 
evidence of central or foraminal stenosis or neural impingement. (JE 4:57)  Dr. Schmitz 
documented Ortega had some findings on exam consistent with a nonanatomic source 
of his pain, continued his tizanidine and lidocaine patches, encouraged him to use over-
the-counter anti-inflammatories, ordered physical therapy, recommended a right 
sacroiliac injection, opined he did not recommend surgery, and imposed restrictions of 
no lifting over 15 pounds and to avoid repetitive bending, lifting, and twisting. (JE 4:57-
59) 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 5 
 
Ortega attended an appointment with Tork Harman, M.D., a pain management 
specialist, on June 18, 2020 on referral from Dr. Schmitz. (JE 5:67)  Dr. Harman listed 
diagnoses of chronic bilateral low back pain with right-sided sciatica and spinal 
enthesopathy of the lumbar region, administered lumbar epidural steroid and bilateral 
lumbar trigger point injections, and prescribed cyclobenzaprine to help with his sleep 
problems. (JE 5:67, 70)   
On August 10, 2020, Ortega returned to Dr. Harman reporting his pain improved 
40 percent following the injections, and noting he was attending physical therapy twice 
per week and remained on light duty at work. (JE 5:71)  Dr. Harman administered 
additional injections. (JE 5:74-75) 
During a follow-up appointment on October 6, 2020, Ortega relayed he was 
sleeping better, he continued to attend physical therapy, but he continued to have 
continuous pain in his low back with some slight radiation into the right buttock and 
occasional pain in the right posterior thigh. (JE 5:76)  Dr. Harman administered 
additional injections and found Ortega did not need to return to his clinic. (JE 5:79) 
Ortega attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Schmitz on December 15, 
2020. (JE 8)  Dr. Schmitz found Ortega had reached maximum medical improvement 
and he continued his 15-pound lifting restriction pending a functional capacity evaluation 
(“FCE”). (JE 8) 
On January 12, 2021, Ortega attended a FCE with E3. (JE 6; Tr.:20)  The 
physical therapist determined the test was invalid due to Ortega’s inconsistent 
performance and failure to give maximum effort, but opined Ortega met the material 
handling demands for a medium demand vocation. (JE 6, p. 81)   
Dr. Schmitz released Ortega to return to work without restrictions on January 29, 
2021. (JE 4:61)  At the time he was released to return to work without restrictions, 
Ortega was earning $20.00 per hour. (Ex. G:47-48)   
After Dr. Schmitz released Ortega without restrictions, Iowa Premium Beef had 
him return to his prior position as a saw operator. (Tr.:29)  Ortega testified he told the 
nurse he could not perform the position. (Tr.:30)  Iowa Premium Beef assigned Ortega 
to work on a small table saw where he cut smaller pieces coming down the line. (Tr.:30)  
Ortega picked up bones weighing five pounds and cut the sides off. (Tr.:30)  Ortega 
relayed he could perform that position with the restrictions imposed by Dr. Kuhnlein. 
(Tr.:30)   
On March 16, 2021, Ortega returned to Dr. Schmitz complaining of sharp low 
back pain. (JE 4:62)  Dr. Schmitz documented he had last seen Ortega in December 
2020, when he placed him at maximum medical improvement. (JE 4:62)  Ortega relayed 
after he was taken off light duty, he had been working with a saw and he was required 
to engage in frequent bending and twisting motions, and he was taking ibuprofen, but 
not experiencing much relief. (JE 4:62)  Ortega continued to complain of right-sided low 
back pain. (JE 4:62)  Dr. Schmitz documented he reviewed his magnetic resonance 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 6 
 
imaging, which showed some retrolisthesis at L5-S1 with a slight annular tear and 
stated he considered his imaging to show normal age-related changes. (JE 4:63)  Dr. 
Schmitz advised Ortega the best thing he could do for his pain was to stop smoking, he 
did not have a good explanation for current clinical examination and he believed his 
imaging and findings on exam were consistent with a non-anatomic source of his pain, 
documented he did not need restrictions. (JE 4:64-65)   
On March 18, 2021, Dr. Schmitz responded to a letter from Defendants’ 
representative, opining Ortega had sustained a zero percent permanent impairment of 
the whole person under Table 15-3 of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001) (“AMA Guides”). (JE 4:66)  Dr. Schmitz stated 
Ortega reached maximum medical improvement in December 2020, and he had been 
released to full duty. (JE 4:66) 
Ortega attended a second FCE with WorkWell on April 8, 2021. (JE 7)  The 
physical therapist found Ortega’s job description did not include specific physical 
demands and that she was unable to determine the physical demand level he is 
capable of working in. (JE 7:95)  The physical therapist noted his “[p]hysical problems 
other than referred diagnosis prevents a match between [his] physical abilities and job 
demands,” and that his physical limitations represent a barrier to return to work unless 
the work is modified. (JE 7:95)   
Iowa Premium Beef terminated Ortega’s employment on June 7, 2021, for having 
too many points. (Ex. 7:26; 1:1; Tr.:31)  At the time of his termination Ortega was 
working on the small saw and he earned $23.00 per hour. (Exs. 7:26, E:23, G:67; 
Tr.:30, 52)   
On June 9, 2021, John Kuhnlein, D.O., an occupational medicine physician, 
conducted an IME for Ortega. (Ex. 1)  Dr. Kuhnlein reviewed Ortega’s medical records 
and examined him. (Ex. 1)  Ortega told Dr. Kuhnlein he could not play with his son or 
perform chores around the house. (Ex. 1:6)   
Dr. Kuhnlein diagnosed Ortega with chronic low back pain caused by a lumbar 
strain on February 1, 2020 at work. (Ex. 1:7)  Dr. Kuhnlein found Ortega reached 
maximum medical improvement on or about December 3, 2020, and he recommended 
conservative future care with stretching and core strengthening exercises, Tylenol, and 
ice. (Ex. 1:7)  Using Table 15-3 of the AMA Guides, Dr. Kuhnlein found Ortega falls into 
DRE Lumbar Category II and he assigned him a five percent permanent impairment. 
(Ex. 1:7-8)  Dr. Kuhnlein recommended permanent restrictions of lifting 25 pounds 
occasionally from floor to waist, 30 pounds occasionally from waist to shoulder, and 25 
pounds occasionally over the shoulder, stooping, squatting, bending at the waist, 
crawling, and kneeling occasionally, and working at or above shoulder height 
occasionally. (Ex. 1:9)  Dr. Kuhnlein found Ortega could frequently climb stairs and work 
at ladders and height while maintaining a three-point safety stance. (Ex. 1:8)   
In August 2021, the attorney for Iowa Premium Beef and Zurich American sent 
Dr. Schmitz a copy of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME and asked him to respond to the IME. (Ex. A)   

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 7 
 
On September 10, 2021, Dr. Schmitz sent a response letter. (Ex. B)  Dr. Schmitz 
stated he disagreed with Dr. Kuhnlein’s finding Ortega falls into DRE Lumbar Category 
II, stating “I did not feel as though he had any significant clinical findings other than 
several findings consistent with a nonanatomic source for his pain.  He certainly had no 
alteration in the structural integrity of his spine,” based on “essentially negative imaging 
findings.” (Ex. B:3)  Dr. Schmitz opined he believed Ortega could be released to full duty 
because he had no findings on magnetic resonance imaging indicating he has any 
impairment related to an injury and he has a stable spine and can do anything he 
wishes to do in life. (Ex. B:3)   
Dr. Schmitz noted individuals who smoke have lower pain thresholds and likely 
experience increased pain and he believed Ortega could help himself from a pain and 
overall health perspective by stopping smoking, noting, “I certainly would recommend 
this prior to recommending any permanent restrictions or aggressive treatment, 
particularly given the fact that he is presenting with an examination that is wholly 
inconsistent with any known anatomic source for pain and given the fact that he has 
essentially negative imaging findings.” (Ex. B:3-4)   
The first time Ortega worked for Iowa Premium Beef he worked on trim and threw 
it in a hole. (Tr.:26)  Ortega reported he could perform the trim position within Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s restrictions. (Tr.:26)   
After his termination, Ortega received unemployment insurance benefits. (Tr.:34)  
Ortega testified he applied for employment in the fast food industry after his termination 
and he eventually decided to stay at home with his son who was not in school to save 
money while his girlfriend worked. (Tr.:34-35, 54)   
In October 2021, Ortega applied for work with Iowa Premium Beef. (Tr.:74, 75) 
Ortega testified Iowa Premium Beef never contacted him to offer him a position. (Tr.:88)  
Iowa Premium Beef did not present any evidence the company spoke with Ortega and 
offered him a position after he submitted his application in October 2021. (Tr.:74, 76)   
While he stayed at home with his son Ortega cleaned the residence, cooked, and 
cared for his son. (Tr.:35)  Ortega testified he had a difficult time with vacuuming, doing 
laundry and washing dishes because the activities involved bending and twisting. 
(Tr.:36)   
Ortega’s son started school in the fall of 2022. (Tr.:37, 58)  Ortega gets his son 
up, dresses him, and puts him on the bus every morning. (Tr.:37, 58)  Ortega relayed he 
was planning on finding employment in the fast food industry while his son is in school. 
(Tr.:37)   
Ortega testified he continues to have pain in his low back and sometimes a 
tingling pain in his left leg and right leg. (Tr.:38)  Ortega takes Tylenol for pain once a 
week. (Tr.:40)  Ortega relayed since his work injury he cannot go to the park with his 
son, do yardwork, or go on dates with his girlfriend. (Tr.:38)  Ortega reported he can 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 8 
 
stand for 30 minutes without needing to walk or sit. (Tr.:39)  He can walk approximately 
one block and sit for one hour before he has pain. (Tr.:39) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Nature and Extent of Disability 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, the employee’s injuries arose out of and in the course 
of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment, and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
[i]t is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act 
which he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer. 
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert opinion, the 
fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the claimant 
was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, 
the expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which 
bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 
366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 
Defendants accepted Ortega’s injury and provided treatment to him.  In their 
post-hearing brief, Defendants agreed, “if any permanent partial disability benefits are 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 9 
 
awarded, the mechanism is traditional industrial disability pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v),” which measures the employee’s loss of earning capacity. (Defendants’ 
Post-Hearing Brief:12)  The parties disagree on whether Ortega has sustained a 
permanent impairment as a result of the stipulated work injury.   
Two experts have provided opinions in this case, Dr. Schmitz, a treating 
orthopedic surgeon, and Dr. Kuhnlein, an occupational medicine physician who 
conducted an IME for Ortega.  Dr. Schmitz opined Ortega sustained a zero percent 
permanent impairment.  (JE 4:66)  Dr. Kuhnlein opined Ortega sustained a five percent 
permanent impairment. (Ex. 1:7-8)   
As an orthopedic surgeon, Dr. Schmitz has superior training to Dr. Kuhnlein.  He 
also provided treatment to Ortega.  I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion more persuasive than 
Dr. Schmitz’s opinion. 
Ortega is a relatively young man.  At the time of the hearing he was 28.  There 
was no evidence he complained of back pain or received treatment for back pain before 
the February 2020 work injury.  Dr. Schmitz opined he believed Ortega could be 
released to full duty because he had no findings on magnetic resonance imaging 
indicating he has any impairment related to an injury and he has a stable spine and can 
do anything he wishes to do in life. (Ex. B:3)   
Before the work injury Ortega was able to perform the saw operator position, 
which required him to lift 100 pounds with the assistance of a hook.  While the first FCE 
was invalid, the physical therapist who conducted the FCE, determined Ortega meets 
the material handling demands for a medium demand vocation. (JE 6, p. 81)  This 
finding is not consistent with the requirements of the saw operator position.  Ortega 
testified he had to lift 100 pounds with a hook while working as a saw operator.  After 
Dr. Schmitz released him to return to work without restrictions, Ortega could not perform 
the saw operator position and Iowa Premium Beef assigned him to a light small saw 
position.  He continued to work with the small saw until he was terminated.   
Dr. Schmitz focused on Ortega’s smoking as a reason for his pain.  In his rebuttal 
opinion, Dr. Schmitz opined,  
[i]n my mind, one of the easiest steps Mr. Ortega could do to help himself, 
both from a pain and overall health perspective, would be to stop smoking.  
I certainly would recommend this prior to recommending any permanent 
restrictions or aggressive treatment, particularly given the fact that he is 
presenting with an examination that is wholly inconsistent with any known 
anatomic source for pain and given the fact that he has essentially 
negative imaging findings.  
(Ex. B:3-4)  Many injured workers smoke cigarettes.  Dr. Schmitz implies he would not 
assign permanent restrictions unless Ortega stopped smoking.  He does not explain his 
reasoning.  I do not find his opinion persuasive.  

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 10 
 
Based on the record evidence I find Ortega has established he sustained 
permanent impairment as a result of the work injury.  I also adopt Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
restrictions as Ortega’s permanent restrictions.  Therefore, it is necessary to consider 
the extent of disability.   
“Industrial disability is determined by an evaluation of the employee’s earning 
capacity.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 852 (Iowa 2011).  
In considering the employee’s earning capacity, the deputy commissioner evaluates 
several factors, including “consideration of not only the claimant’s functional disability, 
but also [his] age, education, qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in similar 
employment.”  Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Deutmeyer, 789 N.W.2d 129, 137-38 (Iowa 2010).  
The inquiry focuses on the injured employee’s “ability to be gainfully employed.”  Id. at 
138.  The statute also requires the factfinder “to take into account . . . the number of 
years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the 
time of the injury.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
The determination of the extent of disability is a mixed issue of law and fact.  
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  Compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2).  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Id. § 85.34(2)(u).   
At the time of the hearing Ortega was 28.  Ortega has not graduated from high 
school, but agreed he is capable of completing a GED.  Ortega has experience working 
in fast food and in meat packing.  While he is not capable of returning to the saw 
operator position at Iowa Premium Beef, Ortega agreed he could perform the small saw 
operator and trim positions with Iowa Premium Beef.  Ortega conducted a brief work 
search while he was receiving unemployment insurance benefits in 2021, before he 
decided to stay at home with his son.  His son went to school in the fall of 2022.  At the 
time of the hearing on October 18, 2022, Ortega had not looked for work in 2022.  I do 
not find he is motivated to work.  Considering all of the factors of industrial disability, 
including his lack of motivation, I find Ortega has sustained a 10 percent industrial 
disability, entitling Ortega to 50 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, 
commencing on December 15, 2020, at the stipulated weekly rate of $605.05. 
II. 
IME 
Ortega seeks to recover the $2,752.50 cost of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME.  Iowa Code 
section 85.39(2) (2020), provides: 
[i]f an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 11 
 
examination. . . . An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for 
the cost of an examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the 
injury for which the employee is being examined is determined to be 
compensable under this chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is 
not liable for the cost of such an examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to be a compensable 
injury.  A determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination 
made pursuant to this subsection, shall be based on the typical fee 
charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the local 
area where the examination is conducted.   
Dr. Schmitz opined Ortega sustained a zero percent permanent impairment.  
Ortega disagreed with the opinion and retained Dr. Kuhnlein to conduct an IME. 
In Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa 
Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021), defendants’ expert found there was no causation.  Kern 
disagreed with the opinion and sought an IME at defendants’ expense.  The 
Commissioner found Kern was not entitled to recover the full cost of the IME.  The Iowa 
Court of Appeals reversed, finding the “opinion on lack of causation was tantamount to 
a zero percent impairment rating,” which is reimbursable under Iowa Code section 
85.39.  Under Kern, Ortega is entitled to recover the $2,752.50 cost of Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
IME. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Defendants shall pay claimant fifty (50) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits, at the stipulated weekly rate of six hundred five and 05/100 dollars ($605.05), 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of December 15, 2020. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant two thousand seven hundred fifty-two and 
50/100 dollars ($2,752.50) for the cost of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME under Iowa Code section 
85.39. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 

ORTEGA V. NATIONAL BEEF PACKING CO., LLC 
Page 12 
 
Signed and filed this _12th _ day of January, 2023. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Joanie Grife (via WCES) 
 
Peter J. Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
