Case Number: 5064784.02
Case Title:  HAYS, JOSH V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hays Josh-5064784.01R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOSH HAYS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File Nos. 5064784.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
    5064784.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD., 
  : 
 
 
  :              REVIEW-REOPENING & 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :         PENALTY BENEFITS DECISION         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GRINNELL SELECT INSURANCE CO.,   : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos: 1402.40, 1802, 1803, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
2905, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Josh Hays, filed a review-reopening petition and a petition seeking 
penalty benefits against employer Central Iowa Fencing, Ltd., and its insurer Grinnell 
Select Insurance Company.  The undersigned heard the initial case on September 11, 
2019, in Des Moines, Iowa.   
In the May 28, 2020, arbitration decision, the undersigned found claimant was 
entitled to healing period benefits and awarded a running healing period against 
defendants.  The arbitration decision was affirmed on intra-agency appeal and on 
judicial review. 
The review-reopening and penalty hearing was held on June 20, 2023.  The 
evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 
11, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through N.  Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No 
other witnesses provided testimony. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.   
All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on August 4, 2023, at which time the 
case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned.   
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Feb-23  11:42:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained a change in condition causally related to the 
original work injury; 
2. Whether the alleged injuries caused temporary disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability benefits, if any; 
3. Whether the alleged injuries caused permanent disability and, if so, the nature 
and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, if any; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of medical expenses; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement under Iowa Code section 
85.39; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care;  
7. Penalty benefits; and  
8. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the record, the 
undersigned finds:  
Josh Hays sustained a permanent aggravation of his pre-existing low back 
condition as a result of his work activities at Central Iowa Fencing in August 2018.  The 
undersigned issued an arbitration decision on May 28, 2020.  Hays was not at 
maximum medical improvement at the time of the arbitration hearing.  Since the 
arbitration hearing, Hays has undergone two surgical procedures and reached 
maximum medical improvement for his low back condition.  Defendants assert that 
claimant’s current condition and disability are not causally related to the initial injury.  
Defendants further assert the need for surgery was caused by intervening incidents that 
occurred in early 2020 and late 2021.   
As mentioned, Hays received additional treatment following the September 11, 
2019, hearing.  On the day after the initial arbitration hearing, Hays presented to 
Nicholas Nerem, D.C. reporting intermittent sharp, aching, burning, numbing, and 
throbbing discomfort in his left calf. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1)  He further reported 
continuous shooting and throbbing discomfort in the back of his left hip. (Id.)  It was 
recommended that claimant present for chiropractic manipulations twice a week for six 
weeks. (Id.) 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 3 
 
After six weeks of treatment, Hays was reporting only occasional burning 
discomfort in the back of his left knee.  He considered the intensity to be “2” on a ten-
point scale. (JE1, p. 38)  However, Hays was still reporting continuous shooting and 
throbbing discomfort in the back of his left hip.  He considered the intensity to be “8” on 
a ten-point scale. (Id.)  Dr. Nerem continued the existing treatment plan, but transitioned 
Hays to one chiropractic adjustment per month. (Id.) 
In January 2020, Hays was working on his car in anticipation of driving down to 
Florida with his family. (See JE1, p. 39; JE2, p. 101)  More specifically, Hays was 
attempting to separate a wheel from his vehicle.  In order to remove the wheel, Hays 
had to “beat on a hub bearing” for “quite a while.”  At least one medical record provides 
that Hays beat on the hub bearing for four hours.  The next day, Hays experienced 
increased low back pain, with radiating pain in the left lower extremity. 
Dr. Nerem examined claimant on January 16, 2020. (JE1, p. 39)  While the wheel 
incident is not specifically discussed, the chiropractic record notes that claimant suffered 
a setback in his care due to an exacerbation causing an increase in his 
symptomatology. (Id.)  Dr. Nerem recommended claimant present for additional 
treatment once he returned from Florida. (Id.) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Nerem on February 3, 2020. (JE1, p. 41)  He 
complained of frequent burning, shooting, and throbbing discomfort in his buttocks, 
continuous shooting and throbbing discomfort in the back of his left hip, and frequent 
burning discomfort in the left calf. (Id.)  Dr. Nerem recommended claimant receive 
chiropractic care three times per week for four weeks. (JE1, p. 42)  He also encouraged 
claimant to speak with his physician about obtaining an updated MRI of the lumbar 
spine. (JE1, p. 51) 
Two months later, Hays returned to authorized treating physician Seth Quam, 
D.O., reporting a "return of his back pain." (JE2, p. 101)  Dr. Quam documented that 
Hays seemed to have complete resolution of his previous back pain and he was able to 
return to construction work three days per week in January 2020.  According to Dr. 
Quam's notes, claimant's pain returned after he was doing some work on his car in 
January 2020. (Id.)  More specifically, claimant was attempting to separate a wheel for 
nearly four hours. (Id.)  Claimant told Dr. Quam that his low back pain started the next 
day, and he has tried to rest ever since. (JE2, p. 101)  Claimant relayed that he could 
only stand upright for two to three minutes before he needed to lean forward for comfort 
or stop walking/standing altogether. (JE2, p. 102)  Dr. Quam ordered an MRI to check 
for any worsening of claimant’s previous lumbar disc pathology. (JE2, p. 102)    
At hearing, Hays admitted to the events described in the April 2, 2020, medical 
record. (Hearing Transcript, pp. 40-41)  He stated, "Yeah, yeah.  I had to beat on a hub 
bearing, and yeah, I beat on it for quite a while." (Hr. Tr., p. 41)  He further admitted that 
he was sore after the fact but asserted that his pain eventually returned to normal after 
a couple of days. (Hr. Tr., pp. 40-41)  The medical records in evidence do not support 
claimant’s assertion.   
Approximately one month prior to working on his vehicle, Dr. Nerem had reduced 
claimant’s treatment plan from two visits per week to one visit per month.  Subjectively, 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 4 
 
claimant’s pain had decreased between September and December 2019.  However, 
after working on his vehicle, Hays’ pain complaints increased and Dr. Nerem 
recommended he present for three visits per week for four weeks.  This treatment 
schedule was continued through at least April 2020. (JE1, pp. 41-78)  According to the 
chiropractic records, claimant’s pain levels remained elevated between February and 
April 2020. (See id.)   
While it is true that claimant’s symptoms had not completely resolved prior to the 
wheel incident, it is also true that claimant’s symptoms were significantly aggravated by 
the wheel incident.  I do not accept claimant’s testimony that his symptoms subsided 
within a few hours/days.   
The updated MRI showed a small L5-S1 left central/left subarticular disc 
protrusion which contacted the left S1 nerve root and partially narrowed the left lateral 
recess. (JE3, p. 189)  The “MRI Screening and History Form” from Iowa Radiology 
notes that claimant’s symptoms started approximately 10 weeks prior after working on a 
car. (JE3, p. 188) 
Pain management specialist Christopher Stalvey, D.O. evaluated Hays on May 8, 
2020. (JE4, p. 190)  Dr. Stalvey believed Hays was a surgical candidate and wanted 
Zach Ries, M.D. to "weigh in with his thoughts." (JE4, p. 193)  Dr. Stalvey administered 
a left paramedian L5-S1 interlaminar epidural steroid injection on May 21, 2020. (JE4, p. 
196)  Hays reported two weeks of substantial improvements in pain. (JE4, p. 198) 
Hays presented for an orthopedic evaluation with Dr. Ries on June 10, 2020. 
(JE5, p. 200)  On the date of the examination, Hays was having trouble walking and had 
to sit with his left leg pulled up to his chest. (Id.)  Dr. Ries reviewed the MRI imaging and 
diagnosed Hays with severe left S1 radiculopathy secondary to a left L5-S1 disc 
herniation. (JE5, p. 201)  He recommended surgical intervention. 
Defendants assert the updated MRI “now showed a herniated disc” in the lumbar 
spine. (Defendants’ Brief, p. 5)  The implication being that there was a clear worsening 
of claimant’s lumbar spine condition after claimant worked on his car.  This assertion is 
not supported by the diagnostic imaging results, as interpreted by Iowa Radiology.  
Additionally, defendants’ own expert stated, “Basically, the [April 2, 2020] report stated 
no significant change from 2018.” (Defendants’ Exhibit B, p. 12) 
The interpretation of medical imaging can vary among physicians for a myriad of 
reasons, including differences in expertise and subjective judgment.  Again, while Dr. 
Ries ultimately assessed claimant with a disc herniation, the assertion that the MRIs 
were significantly different misconstrues the medical records in evidence. 
Similarly, the opinion of whether a patient is a surgical candidate can vary among 
physicians based on several factors, including their interpretation of diagnostic tests, the 
evolution of the patient’s condition, and their clinical judgment. 
Dr. Ries performed a left-sided L5-S1 partial discectomy and decompression on 
June 30, 2020. (JE2, pp. 123-124)  During surgery, Dr. Ries discovered a left-sided disc 
herniation compressing the left traversing S1 nerve root. (JE2, p. 124; Ex. C, p. 18) 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 5 
 
Hays described the surgery as a “life-changing event” for him. (JE5, p. 203)  The 
surgery helped considerably with his consistent low back and left leg pain. (Hr. Tr., p. 
42)  However, he testified the left leg pain never completely resolved. (Hr. Tr., p. 49)  
The medical records support claimant’s assertion.  After a period of recovery, Dr. Ries 
released Hays to return to work without restrictions on October 5, 2020. (JE5, p. 207)  
In response to a correspondence from defendants, Dr. Ries confirmed that he did 
not assign any permanent work restrictions or believe that permanent work restrictions 
were necessary. (Ex. C, p. 18)  Utilizing the AMA Guides, Dr. Ries placed claimant in 
DRE Category III and assigned 11 percent whole person impairment. (Id.) 
After reviewing claimant’s medical records and the prior arbitration decision, Dr. 
Ries opined claimant’s back injury and need for surgery were causally related to 
claimant’s work activities between April 26, 2018, and August 9, 2018. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3, p. 63)  He further opined that claimant might require additional treatment 
consisting of physical therapy, pain management, and possible surgery. (Ex. 3, p. 64) 
Following his first surgery, Hays worked for VRaptor, where he helped sand and 
build custom cars. (Hr. Tr., pp. 22-23)  Hays testified that he worked at VRaptor for 
approximately one year before the pain in his low back returned. (Hr. Tr., pp. 22-23)  
Hays asserts he quit working for VRaptor when he noticed his pain levels were not 
returning to baseline as quickly as usual. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 17) 
The evidentiary record only contains two medical records from 2021.  Hays 
presented to Dr. Nerem on January 20, 2021, and June 15, 2021. (JE1, pp. 85-86)  He 
complained of continuous sharp, dull, and tightness discomfort in the low back, as well 
as continuous aching, shooting, and tightness discomfort in the side of the left hip. (Id.) 
As documented in Dr. Nerem’s medical records, Hays suffered an exacerbation 
causing an increase in his symptoms in January 2022. (See JE1, pp. 91, 93)  Dr. Nerem 
recommended Hays consult his primary physician regarding his low back pain. (JE1, p. 
93) 
Hays subsequently reported a flare-up in pain to Kyle Kosman, ARNP, at Dr. 
Quam's office on January 14, 2022. (JE2, p. 159)  However, he denied any new injuries 
and was unsure as to the etiology of his flare-up. (See id.)  At one point in their 
discussion, Hays questioned whether his new boots could be increasing his pain. (Id.) 
An MRI of the lumbar spine, dated January 31, 2022, revealed a left subarticular 
disc protrusion at L5-S1 with mass effect on the left lateral recess and traversing left 
nerve roots. (JE7, p. 260)  
Despite reporting to Mr. Kosman that he was unsure as to the etiology of his 
recent flare-up, Hays described a specific event when he presented to Dr. Ries on 
February 17, 2022. (JE5, p. 208)  Dr. Ries’ medical record provides: 
     He was doing great until couple months ago when he sneezed and had 
severe recurrent left posterior leg pain similar to prior to surgery.  He has 
taken steroids which did not help.  Using a cane.  States that he is nearly 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 6 
 
bedridden.  Has trouble walking around.  Repeat MRI showed a large 
recurrent left L5-S1 disc herniation. 
(Id.)   
Hays disputes the accuracy of Dr. Ries’ February 17, 2022, medical record.  He 
acknowledged that he experienced an increase in pain following a sneeze; however, 
similar to his pain following the wheel incident, Hays asserts his pain subsided after a 
few hours. (Hr. Tr., pp. 46-47)  According to Hays, the sneeze occurred after he had 
already presented for medical treatment and obtained an updated MRI of the lumbar 
spine. (Id.)  Hays later testified the sneeze in question occurred the night after his MRI. 
(Id.)  I find it unlikely that Hays’ recollection is accurate.   
Dr. Ries performed a left-sided L5-S1 partial discectomy and decompression, as 
well as an L5-S1 revision laminectomy, on March 14, 2022. (JE2, pp. 178-180)  Two 
months later, Dr. Ries opined Hays’ exacerbation was causally related to the initial work 
injury, and was a natural and expected consequence of his back condition from his work 
injury. (Ex. 3, p. 65)   
Dr. Ries confirmed his causation opinions on January 12, 2023, and March 29, 
2023. (Ex. 3, pp. 67-69)  In the March 29, 2023, correspondence, Dr. Ries definitively 
agreed that despite the exacerbations caused by working on his car in 2020 and 
sneezing in 2022, the original work injury was still a substantial contributing factor to 
claimant’s need for both back surgeries and ongoing symptoms. (Ex. 3, p. 68)  He 
further agreed that once a disc area is compromised and injured as Hays’ was in 2018, 
it can be more susceptible to aggravation from everyday activities. (Id.)  In the same 
correspondence, Dr. Ries was alerted to the fact claimant’s counsel considered Hays 
“working on his car” a daily activity. (Id.) 
Once again, surgery resolved the burning in claimant's left leg. (JE5, p. 214)  He 
reported 90 percent improvement in his leg pain overall. (JE5, p. 216)  Hays testified 
that his condition after the second surgery was the same as it was after the first.  He 
had soreness when he moved, but not an intense amount of pain when he was on his 
feet. (Hr. Tr., p. 49) 
Six weeks out from surgery, Dr. Ries released Hays without restrictions but 
instructed him to let pain be his guide. (Id.)  According to Hays, Dr. Ries told him to 
restrict himself from lifting anything over 80 pounds following both surgeries. (Ex. N, 
Depo. pp. 12, 25) 
Following his release, Hays returned to work for Howell Construction. At Howell 
Construction, Hays installed case and base trim and assembled furniture. (Ex. N, Depo. 
pp. 26-28)  He used a chop saw, drills, and a nail gun. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 29)  
Unfortunately, Hays only worked for Howell Construction for two to three months. (Id.)  
Hays experienced soreness following his first 45-hour week and, “I just said no, no 
more.” (Ex. N, Depo. p. 27) 
Today, Hays continues to experience left leg pain. (Hr. Tr., p. 50)  However, he 
considers his pain relatively manageable if he does not do any activities to aggravate it. 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 7 
 
(Hr. Tr., p. 53)  He does not take any prescription or over-the-counter pain medications 
for his low back pain. (Hr. Tr., pp. 54-55)    
Dr. Ries altered his causation opinion after speaking with defense counsel and 
reviewing medical records from Dr. Hitchon and Dr. Quam.1  The May 8, 2023, report 
provides: 
     Based on this documentation it is hard for me to correlate his 2018 work 
injury with the need for further treatment after his April 2, 2020 [visit] with 
Dr. Quam.  Hitting a car wheel for 4 hours with a hammer in my opinion is 
the cause of the flareup in his symptoms from his pre-existing injury.  This 
then resulted in the need for his surgical intervention.   
(Ex. C, p. 41)  Dr. Ries also opined the wheel incident is the kind of activity that could 
cause a significant aggravation regardless of any pre-existing spinal condition. (Ex. C, 
p. 37) 
John Kuhnlein, M.D., claimant’s expert physician, addressed causation following 
his independent medical evaluation of claimant.  The examination occurred on April 6, 
2023. (Ex. 1)  As part of the evaluation, Dr. Kuhnlein reviewed claimant’s medical 
history with him.  According to the report, claimant vigorously disputed the accuracy of 
several medical records adverse to his position. (See Ex. 1, pp. 17-22)  Dr. Kuhnlein 
conditioned his causation opinions on the accuracy of claimant’s reported history.  As 
an example, Dr. Kuhnlein opined that if claimant could not tell whether his pain 
permanently changed following the wheel incident in January 2020, it is more likely than 
not that the incident represented only a temporary exacerbation of his pre-existing 
lumbar condition.  As a result, Dr. Kuhnlein opined it is more likely than not that the 
need for Dr. Ries’ June 30, 2020, surgery is causally related to the original work injury.  
Similarly, Dr. Kuhnlein opined that if claimant’s pain symptoms returned to baseline 
shortly after the sneezing incident, as asserted, then the sneezing incident would also 
represent a temporary exacerbation of his pre-existing condition. (Ex. 1, p. 25)   
Defendants retained William Boulden, M.D. to conduct an independent medical 
examination of Hays. (See Ex. B, p. 4)  Dr. Boulden’s initial causation opinion does not 
address the alleged intervening wheel incident.  Instead, Dr. Boulden opined the June 
2020 surgery was not causally related to the 2018 work injury, "since there is no 
correlation of any direct injury that caused the pathological changes that were operated 
on." (Ex. B, p. 14)  He provided, “In other words, I do not feel he has a herniated disc in 
his back, especially at L5-S1.” (Ex. B, pp. 14-15)  Instead, Dr. Boulden believed that 
claimant had a disc bulge with degenerative changes and lateral recess stenosis. (Ex. 
B, p. 15)  He opined, “the pathology that was found on the MRI was all pre-existing in 
my medical opinion.” (Id.) 
Dr. Boulden opined the March 14, 2022, surgery was similarly not causally 
related to the 2018 work injury.  He provided that the need for surgery was “more 
related to the pre-existing degenerative changes and subsequent fact that he had 
surgeries [sic] and that there is a 10 percent incidence of recurrent herniated disc 
                                                 
1 Dr. Ries provided several causation opinions in this case both in favor and against causation. 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 8 
 
without any type of trauma; therefore, I cannot relate the initial 2018 issues to the need 
for surgeries [sic] in 2022.” (Ex. B, p. 16) 
Apparently unsatisfied with his initial opinions, defendants produced a series of 
pre-written opinions to Dr. Boulden.  The correspondence notes that defendants 
recently received all of Dr. Quam’s medical records and they were producing the same 
to Dr. Boulden for his review, implying that such records may change Dr. Boulden’s 
opinions.  Importantly, the correspondence focuses on Dr. Quam’s April 2, 2020, 
medical record, which Dr. Boulden already reviewed and summarized in his initial 
report. (Ex. B, pp. 6, 12)  The correspondence also focuses on the sneeze referenced in 
Dr. Ries’ February 17, 2022, medical record, which Dr. Boulden also reviewed, 
summarized, and discussed in his initial report. (Ex. B, pp. 7-8, 12-13)  In other words, 
Dr. Boulden’s updated opinions were not based on updated or previously undisclosed 
medical records.   
Dr. Boulden agreed that the June 2020 surgery was directly necessitated by 
claimant pounding on a wheel for four hours with an eight-pound hammer. (Ex. B, p. 6)  
He further agreed that the wheel incident was a significant intervening injury or cause 
for the surgery in June 2020. (Ex. B, p. 7)  Dr. Boulden also agreed that the act of 
sneezing was the direct cause for the surgery performed by Dr. Ries in early 2022. (Ex. 
B, p. 8) 
I assign no weight to Dr. Boulden’s causation opinions as his updated opinions 
directly conflict with his initial causation opinions.  In his initial opinion, Dr. Boulden 
opined that the pathology found on claimant’s MRIs was all pre-existing and there was 
no correlation of any direct injury that caused the pathological changes that were 
operated on.  He provided this opinion despite having knowledge of the wheel incident.  
He also noted that there were no significant changes observed on the April 9, 2020, 
MRI, when compared to the MRI obtained in September 2018. (Ex. B, p. 12)  Again, 
despite having knowledge of the wheel incident, Dr. Boulden opined that the need for 
surgery was related to a degenerative condition. 
Without any new information, Dr. Boulden altered his causation opinions to 
support defendants’ argument that the surgeries performed by Dr. Ries were 
necessitated by, or causally related to, intervening events as opposed to the initial work 
injury.   
Defendants assert the wheel incident was an intervening incident that caused the 
need for the June 20, 2020, surgery. 
Defendants’ causation argument hinges, in part, on the accuracy of Dr. Quam’s 
April 2, 2020, medical report.  Again, Dr. Quam’s record provides that Hays seemed to 
have complete resolution of his previous back pain until he worked on his car in January 
2020. (JE2, p. 101)  However, this assertion is clearly not supported by the medical 
records in evidence.  On the day after the arbitration hearing, Hays presented to Dr. 
Nerem, reporting intermittent sharp, aching, burning, numbing, and throbbing discomfort 
in his left calf. (JE1, p. 1)  He further reported shooting and throbbing discomfort in back 
of his left hip. (Id.)  Hays subsequently presented to Dr. Nerem twice a week for six 
weeks. (Id.)  After six weeks of treatment, Hays reported occasional burning discomfort 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 9 
 
in the back of the left knee.  He considered the intensity to be “2” on a ten-point scale. 
(JE1, p. 38)  However, Hays was still reporting continuous shooting and throbbing 
discomfort in the back of his left hip.  He considered the intensity to be “8” on a ten-point 
scale. (Id.)  Dr. Nerem continued the existing treatment plan, but transitioned Hays to 
one chiropractic adjustment per month, starting in January 2020. (Id.) 
Moreover, Dr. Quam walked back his findings from the April 2, 2020, 
appointment in a November 18, 2022, correspondence.  According to Dr. Quam, he was 
aware that claimant had been receiving chiropractic adjustments between September 
2019 and April 2020, and that claimant’s symptoms attributable to the work injury had 
improved but had not completely resolved. (Ex. 5, p. 72)  Dr. Quam further opined that 
the activity-related increases in symptoms described in the April 2, 2020, medical record 
would not constitute a new injury. (Id.)   
Intervening events do not break the causal chain if the intervening event would 
not have happened but for the prior work injury or the effects of the intervening event 
were worsened by the prior work injury.  In the matter at hand, the causation issue does 
not turn on whether or not the subsequent surgeries and disability would not have 
occurred but for the intervening event. The issue is whether the prior injury proximately 
worsened the effects of the intervening event. 
There are four expert opinions in this case.  Unfortunately, all four opinions are 
flawed to some extent.   
Dr. Ries, the authorized treating surgeon, opined that hitting a car wheel for 4 
hours with a hammer was the cause of the flare-up in Hays’ symptoms from his pre-
existing injury, which ultimately resulted in the need for his surgical intervention.  
However, Dr. Ries’ opinions have changed several times throughout this case.  
Significantly, each change in opinion was preceded by a conference call involving the 
attorneys in this case.   
Additionally, Dr. Ries’ final opinion is largely based upon the accuracy of Dr. 
Quam’s April 2, 2020, medical record. (See Ex. C, p. 41)  Dr. Quam, the claimant’s 
authorized treating physician, has since clarified his opinions. (Ex. 5, p. 72)   
Dr. Boulden, the defendants’ chosen expert, initially opined that claimant’s 
condition and need for surgery was related to his pre-existing, degenerative condition.  
He later altered his causation opinions to support defendants’ argument that the 
surgeries performed by Dr. Ries were necessitated by, or causally related to, 
intervening events as opposed to the initial work injury.   
Dr. Kuhnlein, the claimant’s chosen expert, opined the intervening incidents in 
question were temporary exacerbations and surgical intervention was necessitated by 
the original work injury.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion is almost entirely dependent on the 
accuracy of claimant’s statements during the independent medical evaluation.   
For the following reasons, it is concluded that the initial opinions of Dr. Ries are 
most persuasive.  As mentioned, the updated, adverse opinions of Dr. Ries are based 
upon an inaccurate reading of the medical records in evidence.  The assertion that 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 10 
 
claimant’s symptoms resolved prior to the wheel incident is not supported by the 
evidentiary record.  The weight of the evidence demonstrates claimant was still suffering 
from low back pain with radicular symptoms between September 2019 and January 
2020.   While the symptoms were undoubtedly improving, they were not completely 
healed.  
Dr. Kuhnlein’s report supports the initial opinions of Dr. Ries to an extent; 
however, I do not afford significant weight to Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion as his opinion is 
predicated on the accuracy of claimant’s statements regarding the alleged intervening 
incidents.  I did not find Hays’ testimony that his pain levels returned to baseline shortly 
after the wheel incident to be credible.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s report also fails to address 
whether the wheel incident could cause a herniated disc regardless of claimant’s pre-
existing degenerative condition.   
Despite his limited role in claimant’s treatment this time around, I find the 
opinions of Dr. Quam persuasive as they relate to the low back injury and subsequent 
surgeries.  I accept Dr. Quam’s opinions to the extent that they support Dr. Ries’ initial 
opinions on causation. 
After reviewing all the evidence and listening to the testimony, I find that Hays 
has sustained a physical change of condition since the date of the initial arbitration 
hearing. Specifically, Hays has received extensive treatment, including two surgeries, 
for his low back.  Additionally, all physicians agree that claimant’s low back condition 
has reached maximum medical improvement and is now ripe for a determination of 
impairment.   
Hays also asserts that since the initial evidentiary hearing, he has sustained a 
mental health injury as a sequela to his physical injuries. (Hr. Tr., p. 59)  Notably, the 
claimant has previously struggled with mental health issues, but asserts he sustained a 
permanent and material aggravation of his mental health conditions, namely depression 
and anxiety, as a result of the physical injuries sustained in August 2018. 
In January 2018, Hays presented for a psychological evaluation at Compass 
Clinical Associates (Compass). (JE11, pp. 277-279)  Hays and his wife openly 
questioned whether he was schizophrenic. (JE11, p. 278)  During the evaluation, Hays 
indicated that he had not been happy for most of his life and he was not comfortable 
most of the time. (Id.)  He reported experiencing auditory hallucinations throughout his 
whole life. (Id.)  Eric Barlow, M.D. noted, “All of these symptoms are causing 
depression, as he is feeling tortured by these delusions and hallucinations.” (Id.)  Dr. 
Barlow diagnosed Hays with severe schizophrenia, paranoid type and prescribed 
medication. (JE11, p. 282) 
Hays continued to treat with Dr. Barlow through at least April 23, 2018. (See 
JE11, p. 291)  During these appointments, Hays had GAF scores of 60, 63, 68, and 62. 
(JE11, pp. 282, 285, 288, 291)  The medications helped claimant with his hallucinations 
and overall “rage” for a period of time; however, he still described increased rage with 
projects, such as working on his wife’s car. (JE11, p. 288)  In March of 2018, claimant 
reported that he had been “more depressed lately, over the last two weeks, and that he 
has had some fleeting suicidal thoughts but contracts for safety.” (Id.)  Claimant 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 11 
 
reportedly stopped taking his medications sometime between March 22, 2018, and April 
23, 2018. (See JE11, p. 291)  He reported the medications were making him very 
aggressive and irritable.  He further reported that his suicidal ideation became very bad 
when he stopped taking his medications. (JE11, p. 291) 
Hays returned to Compass in July of 2020 to inquire about psychological and/or 
personality testing to show that he was fit to parent his children. (JE11, p. 294)  The 
record provides, “Currently, he has very limited time with them because his ex-wife 
believes he is ‘unstable’ and possibly dangerous.” (Id.)  The record further provides, “He 
is not working at this time as he had surgery just about two weeks ago and he wants to 
focus on the custody of his children.” (Id.)  At the time, Hays reported feeling “great” and 
declined a need for therapy. (Id.) 
Following the work-related injury, Hays did not report psychological or mental 
health problems to any of his providers until June 20, 2022. (See JE8, p. 263)  The first 
post-injury medical record noting symptoms of depression coincides with the period in 
which Hays quit working for Howell Construction. (See Ex. I, pp. 98, 100) 
Laura Cunningham, PA-C of Focused Life Healthcare evaluated Hays' anger, 
irritability, and depression on June 20, 2022. (JE8, p. 263)  The medical record provides 
that claimant was referred to Ms. Cunningham by his attorney. (Id.)  Ms. Cunningham 
diagnosed Hays with irritability and anger, moderate recurrent major depression, and 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). (JE8, p. 264)  Ms. Cunningham opined that the 
PTSD was most likely related to his work injury. (Id.)  She believed Hays would benefit 
from cognitive behavioral therapy and provided him with a list of organizations that 
would likely accept his insurance. (Id.)  More specifically, she recommended he 
establish care with Ed Piasecki, ARNP, or find a psychiatric provider through 
Broadlawns. (Id.) 
Several months later, Hays presented virtually to Dr. Quam for an evaluation of 
depression on February 23, 2023. (JE2, p. 181)  Hays reported that he had struggled 
with depression and anxiety since his work injury. (Id.)  The medical records note that 
Hays endorsed several adverse experiences in his childhood and as a young adult. 
(See JE2, p. 185)  He also claimed to have some posttraumatic stress disorder. 
(See JE2, p. 185)  Following the examination, Dr. Quam diagnosed Hays with a severe 
episode of recurrent major depressive disorder and prescribed medication. (JE2, p. 182) 
Dr. Quam adjusted claimant’s anxiety and depression medications at his March 
31, 2023, follow-up appointment. (JE2, p. 185)  Dr. Quam opined that if the medication 
did not help, Hays might require a psychiatric referral. (Id.) 
In a pre-written letter from claimant’s counsel, Dr. Quam causally related 
claimant’s mental health issues to the August 2018 work injury and recommended a 
referral to Mr. Piasecki for further mental health treatment.  He also opined that claimant 
had not reached maximum medical improvement for his mental health conditions. (Ex. 
5, pp. 74-75) 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 12 
 
Mr. Piasecki conducted an initial evaluation of claimant on May 1, 2023. (JE9, p. 
265)  He diagnosed claimant with major depressive disorder and a mood disorder. (JE9, 
p. 271) 
Kunal Patra, M.D., a board-certified psychiatrist, evaluated Hays as part of an 
independent psychiatric evaluation on April 3, 2023. (Ex. 2, p. 32)  During the 
evaluation, Dr. Patra administered two validity tests. (Ex. 2, p. 42)  Dr. Patra 
acknowledged sections of claimant’s validity tests were problematic, but felt the results 
were a “cry for help” and/or an extreme or exaggerated negative evaluation of oneself 
and one’s life based on their perception of how much they are suffering. (Ex. 2, p. 44)   
Dr. Patra diagnosed claimant with major depressive disorder, recurrent episode, 
of moderate intensity with anxious distress. (Ex. 2, p. 46)  Based on his evaluation, the 
collateral information obtained from Hays’ girlfriend, and a review of the medical 
records, Dr. Patra opined that the 2018 work injury was a substantial causal, 
contributing, or aggravating factor in the development of Hays’ current major depressive 
episode with anxious distress. (Ex. 2, p. 50)   
As part of his causation analysis, Dr. Patra discussed the temporal relationship 
between claimant’s work injury and the onset of depression. (Ex. 2, pp. 50-51)  Dr. 
Patra noted that Hays was not seeing mental health professionals for anxiety and 
depression, or prescribed any psychiatric medications in the months or the year prior to 
the 2018 work injuries. (Ex. 2, p. 50)  This, of course, is inaccurate as claimant had 
presented to Compass and was prescribed antipsychotic medications at the beginning 
of 2018.   
In the months leading up to his work injuries, claimant presented for a 
psychological evaluation and relayed that he had not been happy for most of his life and 
he was not comfortable most of the time. (JE11, p. 278) He also reported experiencing 
auditory hallucinations throughout his whole life. (Id.)  The psychiatrist opined, “All of 
these symptoms are causing depression, as he is feeling tortured by these delusions 
and hallucinations.” (Id.)  Hays was diagnosed with severe schizophrenia, paranoid 
type, and prescribed medication. (JE11, p. 282)   
Hays acknowledged his past mental health struggles during his evaluation with 
Dr. Patra.  Dr. Patra’s report provides, 
When asked about his mood and anxiety prior to his 2018 injuries, Mr. Hays 
replied that, on average, they were around 4-6/10, with 10 being the worst.  
Mr. Hays clarified that some of his early life experiences, not having proper 
education, and starting “at the bottom of the pole” made him sad and down, 
adding, “But for all these issues, I could work, and that was my escape.  For 
me, it has always been about setting a goal for myself.  Now, I can’t do that, 
making me feel worthless and less than everybody.” 
(Ex. 2, pp. 38-39) 
Dr. Patra opined that claimant’s difficult childhood, prior episodes of depression 
and PTSD, and a family history of psychiatric illness increased claimant’s vulnerability to 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 13 
 
developing clinical depression and anxiety following a significant negative life event.  Dr. 
Patra further opined the work injury ignited the vulnerability and caused claimant to 
develop his current episode of major depressive disorder. (Ex. 2, p. 51)  Dr. Patra’s 
rationale does not address the Compass medical records or the existence of depression 
and severe paranoia in the months leading up to the work injury.   
Dr. Patra did not believe that claimant had reached maximum medical 
improvement for his mental health condition.  Nevertheless, he estimated claimant’s 
permanent impairment.  Utilizing the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. Patra opined that 
claimant’s impairment would be classified as a moderate level of impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 
53)  Dr. Patra noted that the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, does not provide numerical 
impairment for depressive disorders; however, under the AMA Guides, Fourth Edition, a 
moderate level of impairment translates to a permanent impairment rating between 25 
and 50 percent. (Id.)  In terms of restrictions, Dr. Patra recommended claimant avoid 
employment in environments where he would have to perform physically intensive work, 
including construction, driving forklifts, and over-the-road truck driving. (Ex. 2, p. 51) 
With the evidentiary hearing approaching, the defendants quickly sent Hays to 
Robert Arias, Ph.D. for an independent neuropsychological evaluation. (Ex. D, p. 43)  
The evaluation occurred on April 27, 2023. (Id.)  During the interview phase of the 
evaluation, the claimant stated that there was no family history of psychiatric issues or 
substance abuse. Additionally, he denied any past methamphetamine use or periods 
spent in out-of-home placements, such as foster care (Ex. D, p. 47). Dr. Arias observed 
inconsistencies between the claimant's statements during this evaluation and those 
made to Dr. Patra (Id.)  
While Dr. Arias’ report includes a medical records review, the vast majority of the 
report focuses on claimant’s performance on various validity tests.  According to Dr. 
Arias, Hays “severely failed” several performance validity tests. (Ex. D, p. 43)  Dr. Arias 
explained that empirical research has shown that failure on four independent 
performance validity tests equates to a 100 percent chance of suboptimal effort or an 
intent to perform poorly. (Id.)  With respect to claimant’s test results, Dr. Arias explained, 
“Individuals who perform in this fashion would be functioning at a level of an advanced 
Alzheimer’s patient requiring institutionalization with 24/7 supervision.” (Id.)  Dr. Arias 
noted that the results obtained by Dr. Patra also supported the presence of malingering.  
Dr. Arias believed Dr. Patra inappropriately disregarded findings from claimant’s validity 
tests as a “cry for help” when there is no empirical support for such an interpretation. 
(Id.)  Dr. Arias further opined Dr. Quam and Ms. Cunningham did not conduct symptom 
validity tests during their mental health evaluations.  As such, Dr. Arias opined the 
evaluations would not meet professional standard for a competent mental health 
evaluation. (Ex. D, p. 49) 
Dr. Arias concluded that claimant does not suffer from a diagnosable psychiatric 
condition causally related to his work injury. (Id.) 
Dr. Patra authored a supplemental report, commenting on several of Dr. Arias’ 
opinions, on May 31, 2023. (Ex. 2, pp. 56-60)  The report discusses claimant’s 
malingering as a cry for help, the validity of SIRS-2 in a forensic setting, and Dr. Patra’s 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 14 
 
experience with administering psychological tests. (Id.)  Ultimately, Dr. Patra stood by 
the opinions contained in his April 30, 2023, report. (Ex. 2, pp. 59-60)  The 
supplemental report is thorough and well explained.   
At hearing, claimant testified his issues with depression started after he ran out of 
the money he was initially awarded. (Hr. Tr., pp. 61-62)  He testified, “And when that 
money ran out, it kind of caused a lot of things, you know, depression to start because I 
don’t really have a way to go and make more of it.” (Hr. Tr., p. 62)  At his deposition, 
Hays testified to his issues with anger and noted that he had attempted to talk to 
someone about a “mental block” he has with working for someone (as opposed to 
working for himself). (Ex. N, Depo. pp. 37-38)  He testified, “I have a hard – I get very 
upset when I’m at work, or even the thought of working for somebody, because I feel 
that they’re all going to fail to do their end of the deal, I guess.” (Ex. N, Depo. p. 38)  He 
was also frustrated by the prospect of having to learn a new craft. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 39) 
 
When I compare the respective credentials of the competing experts, I note that 
both experts are highly trained professionals who can offer valuable insights into 
diagnosing mental health conditions and opining on causation.  Often times, accepting 
one expert’s opinion over the other depends on the specific nature of the case and the 
expertise required.  Neuropsychologists, such as Dr. Arias, are particularly skilled at 
diagnosing conditions that involve brain dysfunction or injury.  Psychiatrists, on the other 
hand, are medical doctors who specialize in mental health and psychiatric disorders.  In 
this case, I find Dr. Patra’s credentials and expertise as a psychiatrist to be more 
pertinent than Dr. Arias’ as a neuropsychologist.       
 
On one hand, Dr. Patra’s report is thorough, well-reasoned, and easy to follow.  
He convincingly responded to the critiques outlined in Dr. Arias’ report and he bolstered 
his explanations with relevant citations.  On the other hand, Dr. Patras’ report does not 
summarize or address the medical records from Compass Clinical Associates or note 
the existence of depression and severe paranoia in the months leading up to the work 
injury. 
 
Despite Dr. Patra’s comprehensive report and findings, it is important to 
recognize the broader context surrounding Hays’ mental health history.  In the weeks 
and months leading up to his work injury, Hays had been receiving mental health 
treatment, where concerns about rage, depression, and schizophrenia were raised.  
Certainly, the symptoms described to Dr. Barlow suggest a longstanding and pre-
existing mental health condition.  Furthermore, Hays’ delay in seeking mental health 
treatment related to his work injury until just prior to the evidentiary hearing raises 
questions about the legitimacy behind his sudden presentation.  Dr. Arias’ report, 
though brief, brings attention to the inconsistencies in Hays’ presentation, including 
failure on validity tests.   
 
While the undersigned can certainly understand Hays’ frustration with the 
workers’ compensation process, and recognizing that his work injury likely contributes to 
his ongoing mental health challenges to an extent, the available evidence falls short of 
meeting the burden of proof required to establish a permanent and material aggravation 
or worsening of his pre-existing mental health conditions as a result of the 2018 work 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 15 
 
injury.  The complexities of Hays’ pre-existing mental health history, the timing of his 
presentation for evaluation, and the discrepancies highlighted by Dr. Arias’ assessment 
all contribute to the uncertainty surrounding causation.  While Dr. Patra’s report 
provides valuable insights, the absence of access to Hays’ pre-existing medical records 
limits the depth of analysis and undermines the persuasiveness of his opinion regarding 
causation.  
Having found claimant failed to carry his burden of proving a permanent and 
material aggravation or worsening of his pre-existing mental health conditions as a 
result of the 2018 work injury, I similarly find claimant is not entitled to a running award 
of healing period benefits. 
Hays alternatively asserts entitlement to healing period benefits between the date 
of the initial arbitration hearing on September 11, 2019, to September 14, 2022.   
Claimant was working for Casey’s General Store between September 11, 2019, 
and November 25, 2019. (Ex. J, p. 103)  Claimant next worked for Howell Construction 
for a few weeks in January 2020. (JE2, p. 101)  There is no definitive evidence 
establishing the date claimant stopped working for Howell Construction.  Claimant 
underwent surgery with Dr. Ries on June 30, 2020.  Dr. Ries released claimant to full 
duty work without restrictions on October 5, 2020. (JE5, p. 207) 
According to claimant’s answers to interrogatories, he worked full time for 
VRaptor between October 2020 and February 2022. (Ex. I, p. 98)  Again, there is no 
definitive evidence establishing the date claimant stopped working for VRaptor.  Dr. 
Ries performed the second surgery on March 14, 2022. (JE2, pp. 178-180)  Dr. Ries 
released claimant without restrictions on April 29, 2022. (JE5, p. 216)  Shortly 
thereafter, claimant began working for Howell Construction. 
Given the lack of evidence relating to when claimant stopped working for 
Casey’s, Howell Construction, and VRaptor, and the absence of any medical records 
taking claimant off work following his aggravations, I will rely on the dates we know for 
certain claimant was off work and in a recovery period.  I find claimant is entitled to 
additional healing period benefits from June 30, 2020, to October 5, 2020, and from 
March 14, 2022, to April 29, 2022.  
Ultimately, I find claimant carried his burden of proof to show a change in 
condition occurred subsequent to the September 11, 2019, arbitration hearing. The 
evidence now shows claimant has reached maximum medical improvement, and the 
extent of his disability related to the work injury is now ripe for adjudication. 
At the time of the review-reopening hearing, Hays was forty-two years old. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 17)  Hays did not graduate from high school or complete General Educational 
Development (GED) tests. (Hr. Tr., pp. 32, 34)  He did, however, obtain a basic tool and 
die certification when he was a machinist and a lead abatement certification when he 
worked for Leaf Guard. (Hr. Tr., p. 34)  He has worked as a laborer his entire career. 
(See Hr. Tr., p. 35) 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 16 
 
All physicians agree that claimant sustained a 13 percent whole person 
impairment under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. (Ex. C, p. 22; Ex. B, p. 16; Ex. 1, p. 26)  
Following his second surgery, Dr. Ries released claimant without restrictions on April 
29, 2022. (JE5, p. 216)  Instead of assigning definitive restrictions, Dr. Ries instructed 
claimant to let pain be his guide. (Id.)  In a follow-up correspondence to claimant’s 
counsel, Dr. Ries agreed that claimant would likely have some limitation in his ability to 
lift, bend, and twist. (Ex. 3, p. 65)  According to Hays, Dr. Ries told him to restrict 
himself from lifting anything over 80 pounds following both surgeries. (Ex. N, Depo. pp. 
12, 25) 
Hays obtained a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) performed by Daryl Short, 
DPT on January 27, 2023. (Ex. 6) Mr. Short opined that claimant was cooperative and -
gave consistent effort.  He concluded the FCE was valid.  According to the FCE, 
claimant does not meet the capabilities of the sedentary category of physical demand. 
(Ex. 6, p. 87)  Mr. Short opined that claimant is “essentially in an unemployable 
condition.” (Id.) 
Dr. Kuhnlein disagreed with the findings of the January 27, 2023, FCE report. 
(Ex. 1, p. 26)  He suggested claimant’s material handling restrictions should include 
lifting 10 pounds occasionally from floor-to-waist, 15 pounds occasionally from waist-to-
shoulder, and no work over the shoulder. (Id.)  He suggested nonmaterial handling 
restrictions would include sitting, standing, or walking on an as tolerated basis with the 
ability to change positions for comfort, occasionally bend at the waist, and rarely crawl 
or kneel. (Id.)  Dr. Kuhnlein also provided claimant could use hand or power tools within 
the outlined material restrictions. (Id.) 
As mentioned, claimant worked for Howell Construction doing case and base trim 
work and assembling furniture for a couple of months following his second surgery. (Ex. 
N, Depo. pp. 26-28)  He used a chop saw, drills, and a nail gun. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 29)  
Claimant quit working for Howell Construction in large part because he feared that he 
would injure his back again. (See Ex. N, Depo. p. 27)  (Hr. Tr., p. 28)  At hearing, 
claimant testified that he quit working at Howell Construction because he didn’t want to 
wake up one day and “everything is just catastrophically gone[.]” (Hr. Tr., p. 28)  There 
is no evidence claimant was physically unable to perform his job at Howell Construction.  
He also wanted to move forward with pursuing his own venture with buying and flipping 
vehicles. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 31)  At the time of his October 2022 deposition, Hays had 
purchased and repaired one vehicle. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 33) 
I find the restrictions recommended by Mr. Short and Dr. Kuhnlein do not 
accurately reflect claimant’s capabilities.  As such, I decline to adopt any specific 
restrictions.  I do, however, find claimant’s ongoing symptoms limit his functional 
abilities and he likely requires some form of permanent restrictions. 
Defendants have presented evidence to call Hays’ motivation into question.   
Hays testified that the first surgery was a “huge” help for his low back and left leg 
pain. (Hr. Tr., pp. 42-43)  He was able to obtain employment with VRaptor, where he 
worked from October 2020 until February 2022, when it was determined that claimant 
had sustained a recurrent disc herniation. (Ex. I, p. 98)  Hays testified that he was able 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 17 
 
to work at VRaptor for approximately one year before the pain in his low back returned. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 22-23)  Hays asserts he quit working for VRaptor when he noticed his pain 
levels were not returning to baseline as quickly as usual. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 17)  Hays 
consistently testified that his pain levels were the same following his first and second 
surgeries. (Hr. Tr., pp. 49-50; Ex. N, Depo. pp. 23-24)  He was able to return to work for 
Howell Construction, but ultimately quit due to fear of reinjury.  There is no evidence 
that any physician recommended he quit working for Howell Construction.   
Despite feeling like he did following his first surgery, Hays testified to his belief 
that he could not return to work for a number of his past employers.  Interestingly, Hays 
did not necessarily testify that he could not perform the work required of him in the 
various positions.  Instead, Hays essentially testified that he does not want to return to 
his prior positions because he fears reinjury. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 55-56)  For example, 
Hays testified he could not return to work at Casey’s because he would have to unload 
product, which would require him to bend and twist.  Despite being able to bend and 
twist, Hays testified, “To me, it’s like you get X amount of bends, and then it’s all gone.” 
(Hr. Tr., p. 55)  When asked to elaborate, Hays expressed that even performing a 
simple task such as unloading product would eventually result in another injury to his 
back. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 55-56)  He testified,  
Well, I used, what, a 1, 2-pound sanding block, and I made it a year and two 
months.  So I don’t know what – when you come from as rough as what I 
did prior […] to something so light as sanding body work and your body just 
gives out again, I don’t think there’s much of a future left in it. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 55-56)  Again, despite this testimony, Hays pursued his own venture with 
buying and flipping vehicles. (Ex. N, Depo. p. 31)  He successfully purchased and 
repaired one vehicle.  Unfortunately, he was not able to sell it prior to the review-
reopening hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 30; Ex. N, Depo. p. 33)  It appears Hays has not been 
able to continue with this venture due to funding. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 61-62)   
 
Since his second surgery, Hays has demonstrated the ability to perform case and 
base trim work, the ability to assemble furniture, and the ability to perform body work on 
automobiles.  Nevertheless, Hays has not looked for or submitted any applications for 
employment since quitting Howell Construction in the summer of 2022. (Hr. Tr., pp. 29-
30)  He applied for Social Security Disability benefits in the first half of 2023, but he had 
not received a decision prior to hearing. (Hr. Tr., pp. 57, 69-70)  Neither party secured 
the opinions of a vocational expert. Having rejected the opinions of Mr. Short, there is 
limited information as to what positions within the labor market Hays could perform 
given his functional abilities.   
I find the claimant did not introduce substantial evidence to show that he has no 
reasonable prospect of steady employment.  The evidentiary record is not well 
developed as it pertains to the assertion that claimant is permanently and totally 
disabled. Claimant’s current unemployment appears to stem from fear of reinjury and a 
lack of motivation to return to the active workforce.  According to the greater weight of 
the medical evidence, I find claimant is not permanently and totally disabled. 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 18 
 
Considering Hays’ age, educational background, employment history, functional 
abilities and limitations, permanent impairment ratings, his lack of motivation to return to 
the work force, as well as all other industrial disability factors identified by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I find that Hays has proven he sustained a 50 percent loss of future 
earning capacity as a result of the work injury. 
The last issue to be addressed is whether defendants should be assessed with 
penalties.   
The initial arbitration decision was filed on May 28, 2020.  In that decision, the 
undersigned found for claimant and awarded a running award of healing period benefits.  
The arbitration decision was affirmed on appeal to the workers’ compensation 
commissioner on December 17, 2020. 
Defendants next sought judicial review in district court. On September 24, 2021, 
the district court issued its ruling on defendants' petition for judicial review and affirmed 
the commissioner's running award of healing period benefits. 
Defendants appealed the September 24, 2021, District Court decision.  The 
appeal was then heard by the Iowa Court of Appeals, which issued a decision on July 
20, 2022, affirming the judicial review decision and the commissioner’s running award of 
healing period benefits.  No further judicial review was sought. 
On or about July 27, 2022, defendants mailed payment of benefits in the amount 
of $84,207.17 to claimant’s counsel. (Ex. 7, pp. 98-99) 
Hays asserts post-hearing penalty benefits are appropriate due to defendants’ 
delay in the payment of healing period benefits between December 17, 2020, and July 
27, 2022.  Claimant further asserts the defendants failed to show that any investigation 
or reevaluation occurred after the commissioner’s December 17, 2020, decision, and 
even if an investigation occurred, the defendants did not contemporaneously 
communicate the basis of any such investigation or denial. 
Defendants appear to argue they had a reasonable basis to delay the payment of 
temporary benefits simply because the decision was on appeal.  Pursuing an appeal 
does not, by itself, create a safe harbor for defendants to avoid their ongoing obligation 
to reevaluate their decision to refuse payment.  The defendants have failed to show that 
any investigation or reevaluation occurred after the commissioner's appeal decision.  
Defendants' delay or denial of benefits is found to be unreasonable. 
Claimant requests alternate medical care.  Claimant’s request for authorization of 
care by Dr. Ries and Dr. Stalvey is reasonable.   
Claimant asserts a claim for reimbursement of medical expenses he paid out-of-
pocket, as well as a request for award of past outstanding medical expenses and an 
award that requires defendants to satisfy and hold claimant harmless from such past 
medical expenses.  With the exception of the medical bills related to claimant’s mental 
health, I find that the medical expenses contained in Exhibit 10 are causally related to 
claimant's work injury.  I specifically find that the medical treatment and charges 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 19 
 
contained in Exhibit 10 are reasonable, necessary, and causally related to claimant's 
cumulative work injury. 
Claimant seeks payment of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME report. Dr. Quam, claimant’s 
authorized treating physician, referred claimant to Dr. Stalvey, who in turn referred 
claimant to Dr. Ries.  I find Dr. Ries to be claimant’s authorized treating surgeon.  Dr. 
Ries issued an impairment rating at the request of defendants on February 23, 2021.  
Dr. Kuhnlein conducted his IME of claimant on April 6, 2023.    
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 10A.317, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon. Iowa Code section 10A.317(2). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that a claimant does not need to prove that 
the change in the condition was not contemplated at the time of the original decision(s). 
Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009). However, the party bringing 
the review-reopening proceeding has the burden of showing that the employee's 
condition has changed since the original award or settlement was made and that that 
change in condition relates back to the original injury. The change may be either 
economic or physical. Blacksmith v. All-American. Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); 
Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959). A mere difference of opinion of 
experts as to the percentage of disability is not sufficient to justify a different 
determination on a petition for review-reopening. 
To establish a compensable review-reopening claim, claimant must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the current condition is causally related to the 
original work injury. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 392 (Iowa 2009). The 
principles of res judicata apply, and the agency should not reevaluate facts and 
circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action. (Id.) 
Defendants challenge whether claimant's current condition is causally related to 
the work injury. 
It has long been the law in Iowa that employers are liable for all consequences 
that naturally and proximately flow from a work injury. If an employee suffers a 
compensable injury and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result 
of the original injury, such further disability is compensable. Oldham v. Scofield & 
Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767, 266 N.W. 480, 481, 269 N.W. 925 (1936). When a worker 
sustains an injury, later sustains another injury, and subsequently seeks to reopen an 
award predicated on the first injury, he or she must prove one of two things: (a) that the 
disability for which he or she seeks additional compensation was proximately caused by 
the first injury, or (b) that the second injury (and ensuing disability) was proximately 
caused by the first injury. DeShaw v. Energy Manufacturing Company, 192 N.W. 2d 
777, 780 (1971). 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 20 
 
It is also well established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate when it is a 
substantial factor” in bringing about that condition. It need not be the only causative 
factor, or even the primary or the most substantial cause to be compensable under the 
Iowa workers' compensation system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 
(Iowa 1994). Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
In applying these legal principals, intervening events do not break the causal 
chain, if the intervening event would not have happened but for the prior work injury or 
the effects of the intervening event were worsened by the prior work injury.  Turning to 
the facts of this case, the causation issue does not turn on whether or not the 
subsequent surgeries and disability would not have occurred but for the intervening 
event. The issue is whether the prior injury proximately worsened the effects of the 
intervening event. 
The weight of the evidence demonstrates claimant was still suffering from low 
back pain with radicular symptoms between September 2019 and January 2020.   While 
the symptoms were undoubtedly improving, they were not completely healed.  
Dr. Ries definitively agreed that despite the exacerbations caused by working on 
his car in 2020 and sneezing in 2022, the original work injury was still a substantial 
contributing factor to his need for both back surgeries and ongoing symptoms. (Ex. 3, p. 
68)  He further agreed that once a disc area is compromised and injured as Hays’ was 
in 2018, it can be more susceptible to aggravation from everyday activities. (Id.)  I 
accepted Dr. Ries’ opinions as persuasive. 
I find that the work injury was a substantial cause of the treatment claimant 
received from Dr. Ries following the January 2020 wheel incident, including his 
surgeries to the low back, any resulting disability caused by the surgeries, and the 
current condition of claimant’s low back.  Claimant carried his burden of proving a 
physical change in condition. 
Hays seeks additional healing period benefits. 
Iowa Code section 85.33 governs temporary disability benefits, and Iowa Code 
section 85.34 governs healing period and permanent disability benefits. 
An employee has a temporary partial disability when because of the employee's 
medical condition, “it is medically indicated that the employee is not capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.” Iowa Code § 85.33(2). Temporary partial disability benefits are 
payable, in lieu of temporary total disability and healing period benefits, due to the 
reduction in earning ability as a result of the employee's temporary partial disability, and 
“shall not be considered benefits payable to an employee, upon termination of 
temporary partial or temporary total disability, the healing period, or permanent partial 
disability, because the employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings 
equal to the employee's weekly earnings at the time of the injury.” (Id.) 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 21 
 
The purpose of temporary total disability benefits and healing period benefits is to 
“partially reimburse the employee for the loss of earnings” during a period of recovery 
from the condition. (Id.) The appropriate type of benefit depends on whether or not the 
employee has a permanent disability. Dunlap, 824 N.W.2d at 556. Temporary total, 
temporary partial, and healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent. Teel v. 
McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986); Stourac-Flovd v. MDF Endeavors, File No. 
5053328 (App. Sept. 11, 2018); Stevens v. Eastern Star Masonic Home, File No. 
5049776 (App. Mar. 14, 2018). If Hays is entitled to temporary benefits, he is entitled to 
healing period benefits because he has sustained a permanent impairment to his low 
back. 
I found claimant is entitled to additional healing period benefits from June 30, 
2020, to October 5, 2020, and from March 14, 2022, to April 29, 2022.  
As discussed above, I found Hays established he sustained a change of 
condition.  Therefore, it is necessary to consider the extent of his disability. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: “It is therefore plain that the 
legislature intended the term ‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere “functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man.” 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides that the undersigned shall take into 
account the number of years into the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. The section does not indicate how this 
Agency is supposed to consider this factor, and the parties did not present any evidence 
or argument regarding the same. That being said, I have considered the number of 
years into the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the 
time of the injury. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
Claimant asserts that he is permanently and totally disabled. Defendants dispute 
the extent of claimant's permanent disability. Total disability does not mean a state of 
absolute helplessness. Permanent total disability occurs where the injury wholly 
disables the employee from performing work that the employee's experience, training, 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 22 
 
education, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich 
v. Tri-City R. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however. See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
In this instance, I found that claimant did not produce sufficient evidence to 
establish a prima facie case of total disability. Claimant has made no effort to secure 
alternative employment since the summer of 2022. He did not produce any evidence to 
show he attempted to return to the active workforce. Claimant did not submit a 
vocational assessment, and no physician has provided he cannot return to work in any 
capacity from a physical standpoint. Nevertheless, claimant has sustained permanent 
disability and industrial disability must be determined. 
Having considered the relevant industrial disability factors outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I found that claimant proved he sustained a 50 percent loss of future 
earning capacity. Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), industrial disability is paid 
in relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to the body as a whole. A 50 percent loss 
of earning capacity entitles claimant to an award of 250 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Claimant also seeks an award of past medical expenses. The employer shall 
furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all 
conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The employer shall also 
allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services. 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer 
has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., 
Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening 
October 1975). 
Having found that claimant's medical expenses contained at Claimant's Exhibit 
10 are reasonable, necessary, and causally related to his low back injury, I find those 
medical expenses are causally related to claimant's work injury and conclude that an 
order should be entered compelling defendants to satisfy any outstanding medical 
expenses, reimburse claimant for any out-of-pocket expenses, and to otherwise hold 
claimant harmless for any of the expenses contained in Claimant's Exhibit 10 that relate 
to treatment provided for his low back injury. 
Claimant seeks an order for alternate medical care and specifically requests that 
Drs. Stalvey and Ries be assigned as claimant’s authorized treating physicians.   
In this case, defendants have not provided ongoing medical care for claimant’s 
low back condition.  Defendants’ lack of care is not reasonable nor compliant with Iowa 
Code section 85.27. Claimant's request for alternate medical care will be granted and 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 23 
 
defendants will be ordered to provide and pay for causally related future medical care 
as recommended by Drs. Ries and Stalvey.   
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to penalty 
benefits under Iowa Code section 10A.315 and, if so, how much. 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an 
employee is entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in 
payment unless the employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse. A 
reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary 
for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a 
reasonable basis to contest the employee's entitlement to benefits. A 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 24 
 
“reasonable basis” for denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly 
debatable.” Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in favor of each party. 
Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 (Iowa 1993). An issue of fact is fairly debatable if 
substantial evidence exists which would support a finding favorable to the employer. 
Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
An employer's bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty. The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.” Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996). 
The employer's failure to communicate the reason for the delay or denial to the 
employee contemporaneously with the delay or denial is not an independent ground for 
imposition of a penalty. Keystone Nursing Care Center v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 
(Iowa 2005). 
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied. Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996). The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer's past record of penalties. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
After the appeal decision was issued by the commissioner, following his de novo 
review, the defendants were obligated to reevaluate their denial. A denial of benefits 
may be reasonable when the initial decision is made, but lack a reasonable basis when 
subsequent information becomes available. Squealer Feeds v. Pickering, 530 N.W.2d 
678, 683 (Iowa 1995) A defendant has an ongoing obligation to reevaluate a claim when 
new information becomes available. “Further, each time period (prehearing and 
posthearing) requires scrutiny.” Weitz Co. v. Johnson, 779 N.W.2d 494, 6 (Table) 2010 
WL 200042 (Iowa Ct. App. Jan. 22,2010), citing Squealer Feeds v. Pickering, 530 
N.W.2d 678, 683 (Iowa 1995). Pursuing an appeal does not, by itself, create a safe 
harbor for defendants to avoid their obligation to re-evaluate their decision to refuse 
payment. Simonson v. Snap-on Tools Corp., No 00-1999, 2002 WL 31113546, 4 (Iowa 
Ct. App., Sep. 25, 2002). 
The undersigned determines that for the period from December 17, 2020, the 
date of the commissioner's appeal decision, through July 27, 2022, benefits were 
delayed, and defendants have failed to carry their burden of proving a reasonable basis 
for the delay. This is a period of eighty-four weeks.  Eighty-four (84) weeks multiplied by 
the stipulated rate of $525.54, produces a total of $44,145.36. 
Based upon the factors identified in Robbennolt for determining the amount of 
penalty, the undersigned concludes that penalty in the range of 30 percent is 
appropriate. This takes into consideration the significant length of the delay, defendants' 
failure to reevaluate, and defendants’ failure to convey the reason for the delay or denial 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 25 
 
to claimant.  The total amount of benefits unreasonably delayed is $44,145.36.  
Approximately 30 percent of the total amount is $13,200.00. 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
for an independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 
permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
Claimant seeks reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Kuhnlein.  The Iowa Supreme 
Court provided a literal interpretation of the plain language of Iowa Code section 85.39, 
stating that section 85.39 only allows the employee to obtain an independent medical 
evaluation at the employer's expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the 
employer.  Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015).  Under the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the 
employer's expense if an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an 
employer-retained physician. 
Dr. Ries, an authorized treating physician, conducted an impairment assessment 
at the request of defendants on February 23, 2021.  Dr. Kuhnlein conducted his IME of 
claimant on April 6, 2023.  I conclude that claimant qualifies for an independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Defendants are only responsible for 
reimbursement of reasonable fees associated with such an evaluation. In this case, I 
find that the fees charged by Dr. Kuhnlein for his evaluation were reasonable.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant has established entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. 
Kuhnlein's charges pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
The last issue to be addressed is costs.  Assessment of costs is a discretionary 
function of the agency.  Iowa Code § 10A.328.  Because claimant was successful in his 
claim, I conclude it is appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some amount. 
Claimant seeks an assessment of the costs for his filing fee ($206.00), Dr. 
Patra's report ($2,250.00), Mr. Short’s FCE report ($350.00), and conference calls with 
Dr. Ries and Dr. Quam ($1,162.00).  
Claimant seeks $206.00 for his filing fees, which I conclude is reasonable and 
taxable pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
Agency rule 4.33(6) permits the assessment of the reasonable costs of “obtaining 
no more than two doctors' or practitioners' reports.” The agency has previously 
determined this administrative rule permits assessment of the cost of FCE expenses 
and vocational expert reports. Caven v. John Deere Dubuque Works, File Nos. 
5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009); Pastor v. Farmland Foods, File No. 5050551 
(Arb. April 2016); Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. November 23, 
2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. December 8, 2010). 
However, the Iowa Supreme Court has held that only the cost of drafting the expert's 
report is permissible in lieu of testimony. Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 845-846 (Iowa 2015). 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 26 
 
Claimant submitted an itemized invoice with respect to the FCE. (Ex. 11, p. 162)  
Under DART, the only allowable taxable costs are the reports themselves, not the 
underlying examination. Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846-847 (Iowa 2015). The claimant has the burden to establish which 
portion of the charges associated with those reports are taxable as costs under rule 876 
IAC 4.33(6). As claimant has provided the necessary information to determine what 
portion of the FCE charge is taxable, he has met that burden.  I award $350.00 for the 
cost of the FCE report under 876 IAC 4.33(6).   
Claimant also submitted an itemized invoice for Dr. Patra’s report.  Dr. Patra 
charged $2,250.00 for the cost of his report. (Ex. 11, p. 161)  I find the cost of Dr. 
Patra’s report is appropriate and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
Claimant seeks the costs associated with four conference calls with Dr. Ries. 
(Ex. 11, pp. 163-166)  Dr. Ries charged $250.00 per conference call.  Agency rule 876 
IAC 4.33(6) permits the agency to assess the reasonable cost of obtaining up to two 
doctors' reports. However, this rule does not permit assessment of the cost of a 
conference between the attorney and the physician in advance of requesting such a 
report. The invoice from Dr. Ries’ office indicates the $250.00 charges were to obtain 
telephone conferences with the physician. I conclude this is not a taxable cost. 
Therefore, claimant's request to tax this cost is denied. 
I similarly deny claimant’s request for the cost of two conference calls with Dr. 
Quam. (Ex. 11, pp. 167-170)  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant two hundred fifty (250) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on September 15, 2022. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated weekly rate of five hundred 
twenty-five and 54/100 dollars ($525.54) per week. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall pay directly to the medical provider, reimburse claimant for any 
out-of-pocket expenses, and hold claimant harmless for all medical expenses contained 
in Claimant's Exhibit 10. 
Defendants shall provide claimant ongoing medical care of his low back 
condition. 
Defendants shall authorize Dr. Ries and Dr. Stalvey as authorized treating 
physicians for the low back condition. 

HAYS V. CENTRAL IOWA FENCING, LTD. 
Page 27 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for his independent medical evaluation in 
the amount of five thousand one hundred eighty-five and 00/100 dollars ($5,185.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant's costs in the amount of two thousand eight 
hundred six and 00/100 dollars ($2,806.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __23rd __ day of February, 2024. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer (via WCES)  
Christopher Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
