Case Number: 24700165.01
Case Title:  ELA, MICHAELINA V. OSCEOLA FOODS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ela Michaelina-24700165.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAELINA ELA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 File No. 24700165.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
OSCEOLA FOODS, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
  Head Note No.: 1108 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Michaelina Ela, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Osceola Foods, a self-insured employer.  The claimant was 
represented by Mark King.  The defendant was represented by Abigail Wenninghoff. 
The matter came on for hearing on January 21, 2025, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The record in 
the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 9; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5; and 
defense exhibits A through H.  The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to Mike Von 
Wald.  Chris Quinlan served as the court reporter.  Liza Philipo served as the Kunama 
language interpreter.  The matter was fully submitted on February 18, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of her employment. 
2. If the claimant has proven she sustained an injury which arose out of and in 
the course her employment, the date said injury manifested is disputed and 
important.  The defendant contends the alleged injury would have manifested 
prior to the two-year statute of limitations set forth in Iowa Code Section 
85.26, and has asserted this as an affirmative defense. 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to any temporary or permanent disability 
benefits. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to future medical treatment (alternate medical 
care). 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-18  13:43:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 2 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to an IME under Section 85.39. 
6. Costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
3. The elements comprising the rate of compensation are stipulated and the 
parties assert the appropriate legal rate is $521.72. 
4. Past medical expenses are not in dispute. 
5. The parties stipulate that no weekly benefits have been paid to claimant and 
credit is not in dispute. 
6. Affirmative defenses, other than statute of limitations, have been waived. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Michaelina Ela was 54 years old as of the date of hearing.  She is a 
refugee from Eritrea, a small country in East Africa.  Her native language is Kunama.  
She has virtually no English language skills.  She testified live and under oath through a 
Kunama language interpreter during the video hearing.  It was challenging to find a 
Kunama language interpreter for this hearing.  Ms. Philipo performed well as the 
interpreter, however, she did spend a significant amount of time providing explanations 
to Ms. Ela in a reasonable effort to secure clear answers.  Ms. Ela was also not a 
sophisticated witness at all.  She testified that her education ended around the second 
grade.  She testified she does not know simple math, including weights and standard 
measurements.  While I found Ms. Ela to be likable and sympathetic, she was not a 
good historian and her testimony was difficult to follow at times, at least in part due to 
the language barrier.  Various inconsistencies in her testimony make it difficult to rely on 
her testimony to meet her burden of proof.  While I am not suggesting Ms. Ela was 
dishonest in any of her testimony, there are a number of inconsistencies and gaps in 
her testimony which shall be discussed in greater detail below. 
Ms. Ela testified that she came to Iowa as a refugee in approximately 2018.  She 
worked a couple of different jobs prior to starting at Osceola Foods.  She worked for a 
different meat packer for a short time and then worked at the Hy-Vee in Ankeny making 
pizzas for approximately one year.  She also worked briefly for a company that 
packaged medical equipment.  She testified that none of these jobs ever caused any 
pain in her shoulder.  According to her personnel file, she started working for Osceola 
Foods in December 2021 after clearing a medical exam.  (Defendant’s Exhibit A, page 
1) 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 3 
 
Ms. Ela testified in some detail about the type of work she performed at Osceola 
Foods which caused her right shoulder to feel pain. 
Q. Can you tell me what kind of work you were doing for Osceola Foods? 
A. It’s a meat company, and I work with meat, and it’s very hard. 
Q. Is it also a repetitive-type job like the others? 
A.  Yes.  It’s the same with the others, but this one it’s - - the lines are 
very quick and it’s very hard. 
Q. What exactly were you doing?  What was your job? 
A. It’s an assembly line, and we push the meat.  And the line is very 
fast, so we have to push it quickly. 
Q. When you get the meat, what kind of meat is it? 
A. Pork. 
Q. Is it like a roast?  Is it bacon?  Is it ribs? What was it? 
The Interpreter. I’m trying to explain to her.  Those words is not  
very common in Kunama. 
A. Mainly ribs.  And they’re heavy.  Sometimes I get easy ones, but 
usually it’s ribs, and they’re huge. 
Q. When you say “huge,” can you demonstrate on the table in front of 
you? 
A. I can’t precisely measure how big it is, but she showed right now.  
That’s how big it is. 
Q. Do you have a basic understanding of weights?  Like do you know 
what 10 pounds is versus 20 pounds, that kind of thing? 
A. No, I do not.  I don’t know anything about the - - how many pound it 
is, but I do know that it’s heavy. 
Q. Was all of the work that you performed, that fast-paced work, was it 
all at waist level, or was it higher than waist level?  Where was the 
work? 
A. A little above the waist. 
Q.  Okay.  It was above the waist.  And then what would you do with it, 
the meat?  What was your job? 
A. The one I worked is there’s an assembly line where the meats 
come, and then there is a big bucket right in front of me, and I have 
to push it - - the meat into that bucket.  And it’s fast-paced and it’s 
heavy.  And sometimes I go - - there is one also behind it, and it’s 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 4 
 
the same thing.  Then I go there and I do it sometimes. 
Q. What job duties at Osceola Foods caused you pain in your right 
shoulder? 
The Interpreter. I’m just going to tell her to go slow by slow and 
precisely so I don’t miss anything. 
A. That day I was working behind that line, and the assembly line was 
pretty quickly, and they sent the meat.   And it used to be just one 
at a time, but that time it overlapped on the other meat that was in 
front of it, and that meat hit my shoulder. 
(Transcript, pages 19-22) 
It is notable the Ms. Ela testified she was working with large slabs of ribs, 
although she stated that she had no idea the actual weight of the meat she worked with.  
It is also notable that she testified the work was all at waist level or just above waist 
level.  Ms. Ela, however, did not testify regarding the name of her job.  While she did 
testify a number of times that the work was fast-paced and hard, she did not describe a 
classic cumulative injury trauma, at least in her initial sworn testimony.  In fact, when 
asked directly about what it was about her job duties that caused pain in her right 
shoulder, she testified to what sounded like an incident of injury.  “And it used to be just 
one at a time, but that time it overlapped on the other meat that was in front of it, and 
that meat hit my shoulder.”  (Tr., p. 22)  She described this incident again on cross-
examination and in her sworn deposition testimony.  (Tr., p. 55; Def. Ex. H, Ela Depo, 
pp. 25-26)  Unfortunately, it is entirely unclear when this incident occurred in this record.  
I ultimately interpret her statements regarding her injury to mean that while her pain 
initially came on gradually she also had an incident of injury where she was hit in the 
shoulder with meat. 
Over the course of the hearing, Ms. Ela attempted to further explain the injury, 
however, her testimony only became more confused and confusing, particularly on 
cross-examination.  (See Tr., pp. 51-55; 63-66)  She testified that the pain first began 
after she moved the “new line.”  The problem in this record is, there is no indication 
what the new line was; or the old line for that matter.  There is no indication when she 
moved to the new position.  There are no job descriptions in evidence, nor any work 
records showing which positions she held and when.  She did testify specifically that 
she was moved to Line 13, however, in reviewing this testimony I doubt that this was 
accurate.  (Tr., p. 52)  Ultimately, her testimony regarding her work activities was so 
confusing and convoluted that it cannot be relied upon to help meet her burden of proof.  
Rather, I must rely on other objective evidence in the record.   
The Safety Manager at Osceola Foods, Mike Von Wald, testified at hearing on 
behalf of defendant.  His testimony was live and under oath.  While I find his testimony 
generally credible, I do not find it very helpful.  In February 2022, he was a senior team 
leader.  He attempted to clarify Ms. Ela’s job duties.  He testified generally regarding the 
job duties of a production worker on Line 13 or HPP, although his testimony provided no 
context regarding when she changed positions or what the change entailed.  (Tr., pp. 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 5 
 
81-83)  He never actually testified what job she held.  In fact, he never testified that Ms. 
Ela worked on Line 13.  Instead, he testified generally about the job duties in HPP (Line 
13).  He testified that small pieces of meat – the size of a sandwich bag – comes down 
the line.  These were under a pound.  (Tr., p. 86)  The production worker would place 
the meat in boxes and push them down the line on rollers.  (Tr., pp. 82-83)  
Interestingly, when he was asked if he ever worked with Ms. Ela on Line 13, he 
responded “I do not recall working with her in HPP; however, she might have worked in 
a different department.”  (Tr., p. 81)  Thus, I am unclear whether Mr. Von Wald knew 
what job Ms. Ela was actually doing in February 2022.  After reviewing all of Mr. Von 
Wald’s testimony, I am not entirely certain Ms. Ela worked in HPP or on Line 13 at the 
time of her alleged injury.  The witnesses actually seemed to be describing two entirely 
different jobs.  While it is possible that Ms. Ela was dishonest about her job duties, I 
doubt this.  I find it more likely that she was confused or there were errors caused by the 
language barrier and her lack of sophistication in general. 
Someone from the employer filled out a WC Loss Notice form on February 9, 
2022.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 2)  While there is little useful information (such as when, where 
and how) in this document it does suggest that Ms. Ela approached the employer on 
that date and reported the occurrence of some type of an injury.  Having reviewed this 
document, I strongly suspect there were additional pages which are not included in the 
record.  At the very bottom of the page there is what appears to be a heading titled 
“Incident Details” but there is nothing below it on this page and no additional pages are 
attached.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
The following day, she went to the Mercy Hospital Emergency Department. 
53 year old female presents to the ED with c/o right shoulder pain that began 
2 days ago.  Pain is constant, moderate and exacerbated with ROM.  No 
direct injuries or falls are reported; however, pt does report repetitive lifting 
and pushing of boxes at work.  No associated sx… No prior episodes or 
prior shoulder surgeries. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 48)  Moderate swelling was noted.  X-rays were taken which showed a 
nondisplaced humeral head fracture.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 48-51)  The diagnosis was listed as 
“right shoulder pain, nondisplaced humeral head fracture.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 50)  She was 
directed to follow up with Iowa Orthopedic Center “within 1 week”, ice the right shoulder 
and use ibuprofen/tylenol for pain.  She was also provided a sling and some pain 
medication called Norco which I understand to be a combination of hydrocodone and 
ibuprofen.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 50) 
There is no indication she followed up with Iowa Orthopedic Center until much 
later.  The next documentation of any condition in her right shoulder or arm is from a 
nurse’s note at Medcor, which is apparently a medical service provided in the plant at 
Osceola Foods.  On February 21, 2022, a “Patient Care Report” was filled out 
referencing her medical provider as Liz Cain.  It lists an incident date of February 18, 
2022.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 3)  Under the patient description section, the following is written:  
“Was moved to a new line and now having pain in upper right arm.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 3)  
The location of injury is listed as “Ham Pack.”  Ms. Ela was treated for “Shoulder/Upper 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 6 
 
Arm Pain without injury”.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 4)  She was given naproxen and instructed to 
ice it.   
Ms. Ela apparently returned the following day and a nearly identical Patient Care 
Report was filled out.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 5)  On this form, however, there is a narrative 
report by Mackenzee Erlewine which documented the following: 
She has not been following up with me like I have been instructing her to 
do.  This is the first time I have seen her since her appointment with Liz 
Cain.  She reports today that she is wanting more medicine since she is out 
now.  I told her that Liz Cain prescribed her medicine for 5 days and that it 
should have decreased the inflammation by now.  I told her I could call Liz 
for advice and see if she would extend the prescription.  She got very upset 
when I told her this and through translator she stated, ‘What good are you 
if you can’t get me more medicine.’ I explained to her that I’m a Nurse and 
cannot give or write her prescriptions but I could give her IBU, which is an 
anti-inflammatory and will also help with pain.  She then said that she didn’t 
need anything from me and that she will have her son call back and talk to 
me.  I told her that I would be more than happy to explain it to her son but I 
will tell him the same thing.  She refused any treatment from me and walked 
out of the room. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 6)  This report leads me to believe there are other reports which are not 
in evidence based upon the way Ms. Erlewine documented the matter.  For example, 
the note states she “has not been following up with me like I have been instructing …”, 
however, this is the first record I can locate which mentions Ms. Erlewine’s involvement.  
It also mentions that Liz Cain prescribed the naproxen 5 days ago, but the first mention 
of Liz Cain’s involvement in the notes is from the previous day.  In any event, this is the 
evidence in the record. 
Ms. Ela next visited the Emergency Department at Clarke County Hospital on 
February 23, 2022.  The documentation from this visit provides very little information 
about the injury, simply stating that she has “Arm Pain (unable to lift arm due to 
weakness, started last Monday)”.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 57)  This report does document that she 
was on “line 913 when the pain started- hard, heavy work at fast pace.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
58)  At that time, pain along the bicep was documented and she was unable to lift her 
arm above chest level.  She was diagnosed with biceps tendinitis and referred to 
physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 59-60) 
Ms. Ela was terminated on March 15, 2022.  “Michaelina did not show up for 
work or call in to report her absences to her supervisor or anyone in HR.  More than 3 
days no call/no show.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 10)  The employer’s documentation stated her 
last day worked was March 9, 2022.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 10)  Ms. Ela testified that she quit 
her job on March 7, 2022.  (Tr., p. 22)  She further testified the following:  “Starting on 
February 10th to March 10th, it was unbearable, the pain.  It was getting worse and 
worse, and I couldn’t do it, so that’s why I quit the job.”  (Tr., pp. 24-25)  She clarified on 
cross examination that the reason she quit was because the employer kept putting her 
back on the same job that was hurting her.  (Tr., p. 66) 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 7 
 
Ms. Ela was evaluated at Iowa Orthopedic Center by Paige Goff, PA-C, on March 
28, 2022. 
Patient presents to clinic today as a new complaint for evaluation of right 
shoulder pain.  She states she was at work at Osceola Food and was lifting 
meat when she had immediate pain in that right shoulder.  She describes 
diffuse pain over her entire right shoulder and radiating to the back.  She 
describes the pain as sharp in character and radiating down to her arm.  
She denies numbness or tingling in the fingers.  She denies any history of 
prior injury to the shoulder before this time. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 65)  Ms. Goff diagnosed a “small greater tuberosity fracture of the right 
humerus, …” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 66)  She recommended exercise, physical therapy and 
medications, and told her to return in six weeks.  
She returned to Iowa Ortho nearly one year later, in February 2023, and was 
examined by Scott Meyer, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 68)  He noted she had been doing therapy 
exercises for the past year, but that her shoulder was symptomatic.  He diagnosed right 
shoulder adhesive capsulitis with weakness.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 68-69)   
Later in October 2023, Ms. Ela established medical care with Broadlawns 
Medical in Des Moines.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 76)  Following an MRI, the clinical notes 
documented the following: 
54-year-old female, chronic right shoulder pain, history of greater tuberosity 
undisplaced fracture treated nonoperatively in February 2022, x-rays done 
recently negative with evidence of old greater tuberosity healed fracture 
MRI of the right shoulder done recently showed evidence of supraspinatus 
tendinitis with degenerative superior labral tear.  AC arthritis seen 
She has positive impingement signs, AC joint tenderness and positive 
biceps tendinitis signs.  Her visit was facilitated through an online interpreter 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 86)  She got a cortisone injection and was instructed to follow up in 3 
months. 
After Ms. Ela stopped working for Osceola Foods, she sought out new 
employment.  She worked for periods of time at Midwest Healthcare Linen Service, Hy-
Vee and Katecho.  (Def. Exs. C, D and E)  She did not require or utilize medical 
restrictions for any of these positions although she testified that her right shoulder has 
continued to be symptomatic and painful.  She has had other health problems as 
documented in the medical file, including gallbladder surgery. 
Ms. Ela secured an IME from Sunil Bansal, M.D., in December 2024.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  
Dr. Bansal reviewed relevant medical records and thoroughly examined Ms. Ela.  He 
documented the following regarding her injury: 
INJURY 
At the time of her injury, Ms. Ela was employed by Osceola Foods.  As a 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 8 
 
result of her repetitive work activities, she sustained an injury to her right 
shoulder/upper extremity.  Over approximately six months, her job duties 
involved repeatedly lifting meat products, specifically sides of ribs weighing 
30 to 40 pounds, and packaging them in boxes.  She processed hundreds, 
if not thousands of pieces of meat per day.  She began experiencing pain 
in December 2021, and reported it to her employer. 
Ms. Ela was evaluated at the emergency room at Mercy on February 10, 
2022, and imaging was obtained which revealed an irregularity along her 
right humeral head and a possible nondisplaced fracture.  She was further 
evaluated at Clarke County Health on February 23, 2022, and was 
diagnosed with right biceps tendinitis.  By March 7, 2022, she had to resign 
from her job due to pain and an inability to perform her duties. 
She has received fragmented care through multiple providers.  She was 
seen at Iowa Ortho on March 28, 2022, and sent to physical therapy.  An 
MRI of her shoulder was obtained.  In November 2023 she was evaluated 
by Dr. Somisetty at the Broadlawns orthopedic clinic, and was given an 
injection into her shoulder.  However, there was no scheduled follow up after 
this appointment.  She did report temporary relief from the injection. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-6)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed right biceps tendinitis, rotator cuff tendinitis, 
SLAP tear and adhesive capsulitis.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9)  Using the AMA Guides, 5th edition, 
he assigned a 10 percent rating to her right upper extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9)  Regarding 
causation, Dr. Bansal opined the following: 
 
RIGHT SHOULDER/UPPER EXTREMITY: 
In my medical opinion, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, Ms. 
Ela’s repetitive work activities at Osceola Foods coming forward to March 
2022 were a substantial contributing factor to her right shoulder pathology. 
Her job duties required repetitive lifting and handling of meat products 
weighing 30 to 40 pounds, which she performed hundreds to thousands of 
times daily.  This created significant biomechanical stress on her right 
shoulder complex through multiple mechanisms.  During overhead lifting, 
the deltoid muscle creates an upward force vector on the humeral head that 
must be counterbalanced by the rotator cuff muscles, which compress the 
humeral head into the glenoid and prevent superior migration.  The 
repetitive nature of this work leads to cumulative microtrauma of the rotator 
cuff tendons, particularly at the critical zone of the supraspinatus where 
vascularity is naturally diminished.  This mechanism is confirmed by her 
MRI findings, showing supraspinatus tendinitis with a partial-thickness 
articular surface tear at the critical zone. 
Additionally, the repetitive heavy lifting creates significant shear and 
compressive forces on the glenohumeral joint affecting the labrum.  The 
combination of shoulder abduction, external rotation, and loading creates 
increased strain on the superior labrum where it interfaces with the biceps 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 9 
 
anchor.  When lifting heavy weights in varying positions the humeral head 
can translate in multiple directions, creating shear forces that stress the 
entire circumference of the labrum.  This is evidenced by her MRI findings 
showing anterior, inferior, posterior, and superior labral tears, a pattern 
consistent with repetitive multi-directional stress rather than an acute 
traumatic event. 
The temporal relationship strongly supports causation.  Ms. Ela began 
experiencing symptoms in December 2021 after approximately six months 
of intensive work activity, progressing to the point of requiring an emergency 
room evaluation.  Her persistent symptoms including limited overhead 
reaching, an inability to sleep on her right side, and having difficulty with 
activities of daily living are consistent with her diagnosed pathology complex 
of partial-thickness rotator cuff tear, subacromial impingement, biceps 
tendinitis, and circumferential labral tears.  The subsequent development of 
adhesive capsulitis, or a frozen shoulder, is a known complication of this 
type of shoulder pathology, further supporting the work-related nature of her 
condition. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p.8)  Dr. Bansal recommended significant medical restrictions and further 
medical treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) 
Having reviewed the entire record in this case, I am unable to find that the 
claimant has met her burden of proof either that she sustained a cumulative injury which 
arose out of and in the course of her employment or that any of the conditions in her 
right shoulder and upper arm are causally connected to any work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is whether Ms. Ela sustained a cumulative work 
injury for Osceola Foods and whether this injury is a substantial causal or material 
aggravating factor of the conditions in her right shoulder and upper arm.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. Blue 
Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce Motor 
Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 10 
 
based determination.  The fact finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287-88 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-30 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994).   
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1960). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
In cumulative injury claims, the issue of whether an injury arose out of and in the 
course of employment is highly intertwined with the issue of medical causation. 
While I suspect that Ms. Ela did, in fact, sustain an injury to her right shoulder 
and upper arm, I am unable to find by a preponderance of evidence that she has met 
her burden of proof.  Stated another way, the evidence in the record supports a finding 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 11 
 
that the claimant was possibly injured by her work activities.  It does not support a 
finding of probability.  She is unable to meet her burden of proof in this record. 
There are numerous challenges for the claimant in this record.  The first is that 
there is no real timeline of when she did which jobs for the employer.  The claimant’s 
employment records, including plant nursing records, in evidence are incomplete and 
offer little assistance in filling in the gaps.  Her own explanation of the injury is confusing 
at best.  While her attorney attempted to present her injury as a cumulative trauma 
injury which developed gradually over time, Ms. Ela repeatedly described it as an 
incident of injury.  Her initial diagnosis was tuberosity fracture of the right tibial.  The 
initial treating physicians did not describe whether this was an old fracture or recent to 
the time she received initial x-rays.  While it is certainly possible that either her repetitive 
work injury or an incident of injury is a cause of such condition, this is not well-
documented in the contemporaneous medical file.  The information she provided to the 
initial medical providers was inconsistent, probably due to the language barrier.  
Moreover, it does seem less likely that repetitive work activities were a cause of this 
type of fracture.  The physicians at Broadlawns eventually diagnosed a degenerative 
labral tear, but this was well after she had stopped working for Osceola Foods.  In 
addition, even if she did prove a cumulative trauma injury, she has failed to prove when 
or how such injury manifested. 
Most importantly though, Dr. Bansal’s expert opinions are based upon facts 
which are simply not supported in this record.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-6, 9-10)  Thus, even if 
the other challenges in the record did not exist, I simply cannot rely upon his medical 
opinion.  Dr. Bansal based his opinion on the fact that Ms. Ela was repeatedly lifting 30 
to 40 pounds and performing heavy overhead work.  These facts are simply not 
established in this record. 
For all of the foregoing reasons, I am unable to find that the claimant has met her 
burden of proof either that she sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of her employment or that her condition is causally connected to any alleged work 
injury. 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing further from these proceedings. 
Each party shall pay their own costs. 
 
 
 

ELA V. OSCEOLA FOODS 
Page 12 
 
Signed and filed this _18th _ day of June, 2025. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
 Mark King   
 
(via WCES) 
 
Abigail Wenninghoff  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be rece ived 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
