Case Number: 1666197.01
Case Title:  ROSALES, MELISSA V. SHINE BROS CORP A/K/A GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Rosales Melissa-1666197.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MELISSA ROSALES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 1666197.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB &, 
  : 
GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  :      Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1402.40, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
     1803.1, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  :   
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Melissa Rosales, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Shine Brothers Corporation a/k/a Grab and Go Auto 
Salvage, LLC, employer, and New Hampshire Insurance Company, insurance carrier, 
as defendants.  Hearing was held on July 18, 2022.  This case was scheduled to be an 
in-person hearing occurring in Sioux City, Iowa.  However, due to the declaration of a 
pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings 
to occur via Internet-based video.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video 
hearing via Zoom with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Melissa Rosales was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record also includes claimant’s exhibits 1-9 and defendants’ exhibits A-D.  It should be 
noted that defendants initially only offered exhibits A-C.  During the course of the 
hearing defendants learned that claimant was seen for a medical appointment in July 
2022.  The record was left open for the defendants to obtain and submit those clinical 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Oct-17  09:26:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 2 
notes.  Defendants submitted and those records were received as exhibit D.  All exhibits 
were received without objection.  The evidentiary record closed with the submission of 
exhibit D on July 18, 2022.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 1, 2022, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained any permanent disability as the result of the 
June 27, 2019 work injury.  If so, the nature and extent of permanency. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an Independent Medical 
Examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
3. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Melissa Rosales, sustained a work injury with Shine Brothers 
Corporation a/k/a Grab & Go Auto Salvage, LLC (“Shine Brothers”) on June 27, 2019.  
Ms. Rosales began working for Shine Brothers in October 2018.  Shine Brothers is a 
scrap metal business.  When Ms. Rosales was first hired, she worked in the metals 
department where she sorted and stacked different types of metals.  She sorted by 
hand and by using skid loaders and other equipment.  (Tr. pp. 18-21) 
 
On the date of the injury, June 27, 2019, Ms. Rosales was helping a co-worker 
hook up hydraulic lines on the pay loader bucket when the bucket was inadvertently 
dropped on the top of her left foot.  Ms. Rosales was taken from her workplace to the 
hospital.  (Tr. pp. 33-36) 
 
Ms. Rosales was seen at the Spencer Hospital Emergency Room on June 27, 
2019.  X-rays of her left foot revealed no acute bony or joint abnormality.  The overlying 
soft tissues were unremarkable.  (Cl. Ex. 1) 
 
On July 1, 2019, Ms. Rosales saw Timothy Blankers, DPM, at Northwest Iowa 
Bone, Joint & Sports Surgeons, for evaluation of her left foot.  The assessment was 
contusion left midfoot with possible navicular fracture.  She was to remain 
nonweightbearing.  Dr. Blankers recommended an MRI to evaluate for further soft tissue 
and osseous injuries.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 8-9) 
 
After the MRI, Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers on July 8, 2019.  She 
continued to have burning and stinging in her foot.  The MRI shows bone marrow 
edema within the subtalar joint, along the talus at the anterior aspect of the posterior 
facet.  Dr. Blankers felt there was evidence of change to the navicular consistent with 

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 3 
injury.  His assessment was contusion left midfoot.  He recommended continuing the 
cam boot for an additional 10 days.  He noted she was motivated to get back to work.  
(Cl. Ex. 2; Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 10-11)   
 
Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers on July 16, 2019.  She reported she was 
doing fairly well and would like to attempt to return to work.  She is able to weight-bear 
and notes tenderness with single leg heel rise.  The assessment was contusion left 
midfoot.  He placed her on a tapering dosage of prednisone.  She was allowed to return 
to work progressing from 4 to 6 to 8 to 10 hours per day.  She was to return in two 
weeks.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 12-14) 
 
On July 30, 2019, Ms. Rosales returned to see Dr. Blankers.  She continued to 
have tenderness over her left foot.  She discontinued the use of her cam boot two 
weeks ago and has since been wearing her regular work boots.  Overall she has no 
complaints and feels she is doing well.  Ms. Rosales requested to be and was released 
to return to work without restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 15-16) 
 
Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers on September 8, 2020 for a recheck of her 
left foot contusion.  She reported a burning sensation in the midfoot with occasional 
shooting pains in her foot.  New x-rays were obtained.  Dr. Blankers noted that the x-
rays of the left foot taken that day showed a mottled appearance to the bones.  He had 
concerns for ongoing reaction to her contusion.  He recommended physical therapy to 
help reduce some of her pain and try to improve some of the coloration and appearance 
of blood flow to her foot.  She was to return in 3 to 4 weeks.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 17-19)     
 
Ms. Rosales began physical therapy at NWIA Bone, Joint & Sports Surgeons on 
September 15, 2020.  Over the past six months she has experienced increased soft 
tissue, pain, tingling and numbness on the top of her left foot.  She does not tolerate 
cold or pressure across the top of her left foot without excruciating pain.  She attempted 
to have a pedicure and started sweating and experienced 7-8/10 pain on the top of her 
foot from massage.  Her foot gets very white when it is cold, she feels it does not have a 
good blood supply.  The plan was to undergo therapy 1-2 times per week for up to 6 
weeks.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 20-21)   
 
On October 6, 2020, Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers for follow-up.  She felt 
therapy was helping a little.  The doctor’s examination revealed some patchy areas of 
hyperemia and pallor.  He did not appreciate full-blown Raynauds or CRPS; however, 
Dr. Blankers had concerns for both.  He questioned whether there was some nerve 
injury along the lateral foot.  His assessment included contusion left midfoot, 
paresthesias left foot, and left ankle instability.  He recommended continued therapy 
regarding paresthesias and sensory and vascular changes.  She was to return in 3 to 4 
weeks and if no impairment may consider nerve conduction study.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 22) 
 
Ms. Rosales continued to attend physical therapy.  On October 21, 2020, she 
reported that her feet get really cold at work.  By the end of her work shift her left foot 
was white in discoloration on the top of her foot.  She had burning pain and felt she 

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 4 
needed to itch the top of her foot.  She scratched so much she created an abrasion on 
the top of her foot.  The therapist called the physician to express her concerns of 
possible Raynauds/circulation issues within her left foot.  Ms. Rosales had more cold 
sensitivity than sensory or RSD issues at this point.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 24) 
 
Dr. Blankers saw Ms. Rosales on November 3, 2020.  She reported continued 
burning pain across the top of her foot.  Her foot was always cold, even when wearing 
two pairs of socks.  Her therapy was almost creating more discomfort than benefit.  The 
discoloration of her right foot appeared to be somewhat global as opposed to patchy.  
Ms. Rosales also has decreased function of her toes.  Her left foot is cool compared to 
the right.  She was referred to rheumatology due to the doctor’s concerns of Raynaud’s.  
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26)    
 
On November 23, 2020, Ms. Rosales saw Mark T. Vercel, D.O., at Avera Medical 
Group Rheumatology.  She presented with chief complaints of pain and circulation 
changes in the foot after a crush injury.  She has generalized local swelling, with new 
enlargement of her left foot, with purple changes, numbness, shooting pain from the 
ankle.  The circulation changes came from the midfoot down on the left side only.  Dr. 
Vercel’s impression was symptoms most consistent with a complex regional pain 
syndrome (CRPS) after having a crush injury at work.  He recommended she see a 
neurologist to establish a more concrete diagnosis and treatment options.  He did not 
believe she had an active rheumatic condition contributing to her condition.  (Cl. Ex. 4, 
pp. 44-50)      
 
Ms. Rosales saw Andrew J. Ridder, M.D. at AMG Neurology on January 7, 2021.  
Ms. Rosales had a lot of numbness and pain in her left foot following a crush injury.  
The numbness did not go higher than her ankle.  She had intermittent color changes 
and substantial pain from the ankle on down.  Her feet also felt very cold.  Physical 
exam did note slight decrease in sensation in the left foot.  The doctor felt CRPS was 
definitely a consideration, although focal nerve injury around the tarsal tunnel or the 
peroneal nerve was also a possibility.  Another consideration was mononeuritis 
multiplex.  He recommended an EMG of her left lower extremity and some blood work.  
(Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 56-65)  
 
Ms. Rosales returned to AMG Neurology on January 10, 2022.  Her EMG, NCS 
and lab work were all unremarkable.  She had ongoing neuropathic pain with 
combination gabapentin, duloxetine therapy, with symptoms most bothersome at night.  
Her presentation was likely consistent with CRPS.  Her left foot is sensitive to the cold.  
She puts a hot pack in her shoe during work.  Once her foot becomes cold her 
neuropathic pain is very intense.  Working in the cold, standing in certain positions 
contribute to increased pain with discomfort described as burning, crawling, itching 
sensation to her left foot.  Standing in certain positions causes shooting pain from the 
foot into her proximal left lower extremity.  The diagnosis was paresthesia and CRPS of 
left lower extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 66-70)       

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 5 
 
On January 28, 2022, Jamie Busch, CNP of AMG Neurology Sioux Falls issued a 
note.  She stated Ms. Rosales’ pain is exacerbated by cold weather.  Ms. Busch 
recommended Ms. Rosales be excused from working outdoors if the temperature is 
below 15 degrees.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 71)  On February 9, 2022, Ms. Busch recommended 
Ms. Rosales work outside for no more than 1 hour when temperatures are below 15 
degrees without an inside break of 15 minutes to warm up.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 72) 
 
On March 2, 2021, Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers for a recheck of her left 
foot.  She had been taking Gabapentin for her nerve pain and that was helping.  Dr. 
Blankers noted she had a bone on the dorsal left foot that was rubbing on her shoes.  
She wanted to have the prominence removed.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 27-28) 
 
On March 25, 2021, Ms. Rosales underwent an osteophyte resection.  The 
operative notes state she had a previous injury that she attempted to treat 
conservatively but continued to have pain over the site of the injury from a prominence 
to the medial cunelform.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 3-5) 
 
Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers on April 6, 2021, two weeks post-op.  Her 
foot was still painful, but the incision was well healed and sutures were removed.  She 
still had numbness and decreased function to her toes.  She was to continue with the 
cam boot and remain off work.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 30-31)   
 
Dr. Blankers saw Ms. Rosales again on April 20, 2021.  She had some swelling 
and tenderness along her incision.  She was instructed to work on desensitization over 
the next two weeks.  If she is able to return to regular shoes, then the doctor would 
consider gradual return to work.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 32-33) 
 
Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers on May 4, 2021.  She still had mild swelling 
along the dorsal foot.  When she moves her foot too quickly, she occasionally gets a 
catching feeling.  She wanted to return to full duty and Dr. Blankers allowed her to do 
so.  Follow-up in one month.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 34-35) 
 
On July 13, 2021, Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers.  He felt that her skin 
condition had improved slightly as she did not have as much discoloration.  She 
continued to have shooting pains throughout her foot.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 37) 
 
On January 20, 2022, Ms. Rosales reported to Dr. Blankers that her foot was still 
very sensitive to the cold weather.  Her nerve pain had been getting worse and her 
neurologist increased her nighttime medication to help with the pain.  She felt her left 
foot was bigger than the right and there was swelling coming back into her dorsal foot 
and a tendon catching in her dorsal foot.  Consideration was given to an injection into 
her foot at the site of the pain, but it was decided to wait.  Regarding her RSD/CRPS, 
Dr. Blankers deferred to her neurologist.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 38-396)  
 
 
 
 

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 6 
On February 3, 2022, Ms. Rosales returned to Dr. Blankers.  She was at the 
point where she wanted to consider a cortisone injection.  She continued to try to work 
but questions whether the cold is the cause of the increase in her CRPS-type 
symptoms.  She has had to miss work on severely cold days due to her foot pain.  She 
continues to have tenderness over the first metatarsal cunelform joint.  She was given 
an injection.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 40) 
 
On February 16, 2022, Dr. Blankers opined that Ms. Rosales’ symptoms were 
consistent with CRPS and the direct result of her injury in June 2019.  He noted that 
from the start of her injury she expressed her desire to keep working. Dr. Blankers felt 
that Ms. Rosales’ flare-ups may make it difficult for her to stand.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 41-42)    
Ms. Rosales followed-up with Dr. Blankers on March 15, 2022.  The injection 
helped lessen the catching sensation in her left foot.  She continued to have deep pain 
in her left forefoot.  Her foot appeared discolored; there is a purplish color over her foot.  
Dr. Blankers instructed her to continue to follow-up with neurology.  He felt he could not 
provide any additional surgical benefit to her.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 43) 
On April 21, 2022, at the request of her attorney, Ms. Rosales saw Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., for an independent medical examination (IME).  Dr. Bansal noted Ms. Rosales’ 
injury and development of symptoms.  He noted she developed discoloration of her foot, 
and extreme hypersensitivity.  A neurologist diagnosed her with CRPS.  Ms. Rosales 
continued to have pain and sensitivity of her foot.  Due to her ongoing symptoms, it was 
difficult for Ms. Rosales to work on inclines and uneven ground.  Dr. Bansal placed Ms. 
Rosales at MMI on April 21, 2022.  His diagnosis includes crush injury to her left 
midfoot, painful osteophyte of the left first metatarsocuneiform joint, CRPS.  He stated, 
“as a result of her left foot crush injury, her condition evolved to CRPS (complex 
regional pain syndrome).  The pathogenesis of these types of conditions that have to do 
with an aberrant host response by the central nervous system is a chronic pain 
condition, characterized by excessive pain.”  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 83) Dr. Bansal assigned 
impairment as follows: 
Utilizing the AMA Guides of Evaluation for Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, we find the CRPS of the lower extremity is rated per Table 13-15.  
Her functional limitations are best defined by the criteria set forth for Class 
2 impairments, as well as some from Class 3.  She has difficulty walking 
on inclined surfaces.  She also has difficulty if surfaces are not level.  
Therefore, she is assigned 10% whole person impairment.  This is a 
stand-alone impairment, and accounts for any other impairment to the 
foot. 
(Cl. Ex. 6, p. 85) 
 
 

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 7 
Dr. Bansal permanently restricted Ms. Rosales to no prolonged standing or 
walking greater than 60 minutes at a time.  She is to avoid multiple stairs, as well as 
walking on inclines or uneven ground.  Avoid exposure to freezing temperatures.  (Cl. 
Ex. 6, pp. 73-85) 
The first issue to be addressed is permanent impairment.  There is no dispute 
that she sustained a crush injury to her left foot which resulted in a diagnosis of CRPS.  
I find Ms. Rosales sustained a crush injury to her left foot which resulted in CRPS 
which, based on the opinion of Dr. Bansal, is an aberrant host response by the central 
nervous system.  I find Ms. Rosales sustained a work injury that affects her central 
nervous system.  I find the opinions of Dr. Bansal regarding permanent impairment to 
carry the greatest weight.  His opinion is unrebutted and is based on The Guides.  Thus, 
I find Ms. Rosales sustained 10 percent impairment of her body as a whole as the result 
of the work injury.         
At the time of the hearing Ms. Rosales was 40 years old.  She was still employed 
with Shine Brothers and was earning $21.12 per hour.  She was averaging 
approximately 50 hours per week.  At the time of her injury, she was paid approximately 
$17.00 per hour.  At the time of hearing, she was making significantly more than she 
was at the time of the injury.  (Tr. pp. 8-9, 19-20, 67-68) I find that after the work injury 
Ms. Rosales returned to work and receives greater wages than she did at the time of 
the injury.     
 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for the IME conducted by Dr. Bansal.  
Defendants to not dispute claimant’s entitlement to reimbursement for the IME.  (Tr. p. 
5).  I find claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the IME in the amount of three 
thousand four hundred eighty and no/100 dollars ($3480.00).  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 86-87) 
 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 8.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner or by the hearing deputy.  I find that claimant was 
generally successful in her claim and exercise my discretion to find that an assessment 
of costs against the defendants is appropriate.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 8 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v).  The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
“limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312 (Iowa 1998). 
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole. Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability. It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) are applied. Lauhoff Grain Co. v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 
1986); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley 
Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943). Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 
272, 268 N.W. 598 (1936). 
Iowa has adopted the majority view set forth by Professor Arthur Larson in his 
treatise on workers’ compensation law concerning “spill-over” effects of a scheduled 
injury.  Larson states that if the effects of the loss of the member extend to other parts of 
the body and interfere with their efficiency, the schedule allowance for the lost member 
is not exclusive.  4-87 Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law Section 87.02.  Therefore, 
various spill-over conditions resulting from a scheduled injury are now compensation 
industrially in this state.  This includes RSD or what is now termed chronic regional pain 
syndrome (CRPS).  Collins v. Department of Human Services, 529 N.W.2d 627,629 
(Iowa App. 1995) & Barton v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660-664 
(1961); (regional pain syndrome formerly called Sudeck’s atrophy, causalgia or reflex 
sympathetic dystrophy (RSD)).   

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 9 
Defendants submit that a blanket application of Collins to any CRPS case is 
erroneous.  Defendants contend it is the anatomical situs of the permanent injury or 
impairment which determines whether an injury is contained to the schedule.  See 
Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosch, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986).  Defendants argue that the 
Collins and Barton cases involve situations where the claimant’s RSD resulted in pain 
and restrictions beyond the scheduled member.  In the present case defendants 
contend the medical records indicate symptoms and impairment are contained to the 
left lower extremity.  I do not find defendants’ argument to be persuasive.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that as the result of the June 27, 
2019 work injury claimant sustained a crush injury to her left foot that resulted in CRPS 
which is an aberrant host response by the central nervous system.  I conclude claimant 
sustained an injury to her central nervous system.  I conclude that claimant’s left foot 
injury includes CRPS as a spill-over effect of the scheduled injury.  This spill-over effect 
results in an unscheduled injury.  See Barton v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 
N.W.2d 660-664 (1961). I conclude that Ms. Rosales has sustained an injury to her 
body as a whole.  Because claimant established by the preponderance of the evidence 
that her injury extends into the body as a whole and should be compensated pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’ hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee's functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee's earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
In this case, I conclude Ms. Rosales returned to work and receives the greater 
wages than she did at the time of the injury. Thus, compensation should be based on 
Ms. Rosales’ permanent impairment resulting from his injury. As such, I conclude that 
her current recovery is limited to her permanent functional impairment rating resulting 
from the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 10 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) permanent disabilities states: 
 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when 
determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x) (emphasis added). 
 
This agency has adopted The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for 
determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial 
disabilities. See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Dr. Bansal's impairment rating is 
unrebutted and based solely on The Guides. I accepted the impairment rating offered by 
Dr. Bansal and found that claimant proved a 10 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the whole person as a result of the June 27, 2019 work injury.  This 
finding entitles claimant to an award equivalent to 10 percent of the whole person.  
  
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), unscheduled injuries are 
compensated based upon a 500-week schedule. Ten percent of 500 weeks is 50 
weeks. Therefore, I conclude that claimant is currently entitled to an award of 50 weeks 
of permanent partial disability benefits as a result of the June 27, 2019 work injury. 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 8.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner or by the hearing deputy.  Based on the above findings of 
fact, I conclude that an assessment of costs against the defendants is appropriate.  
Claimant is seeking costs for the filing fee in the amount of $100.00.  I find this is an 
appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Defendants are assessed costs totaling one 
hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00).     
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred fifteen and 
02/100 dollars ($515.02).   

ROSALES V. SHINE BROS CORP. a/k/a GRAB & GO AUTO SALVAGE, LLC 
Page 11 
Defendants shall pay fifty (50) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of April 21, 2022. 
Defendant shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.    
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the cost of the IME in the amount of 
three thousand four hundred eighty and no/100 dollars ($3,480.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs totaling one hundred and no/100 
dollars ($100.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _17th _ day of October, 2022. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Willis Hamilton (via WCES) 
Timothy Clausen (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
