Case Number: 21001402.02
Case Title:  VAN VEEN, JOHN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Van Veen John-21001402.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOHN VAN VEEN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 21001402.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC,   : 
 
 ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  : 
      Head Notes: 1100; 1108; 1402.20;  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
      1402.40; 1802; 1803; 2500; 2701; 
 
Defendants. 
  :              3003          
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant John Van Veen filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Old Dominion Freight Line, employer, and Indemnity 
Insurance Company, insurer, for an alleged work injury date of January 12, 2021. The 
case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on November 1, 2023. 
Pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 9, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through R.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record was left open until 
November 15, 2023, to allow defendants to submit a rebuttal exhibit. The parties 
submitted post-hearing briefs on January 16, 2024, and the case was considered fully 
submitted on that date. 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-26  10:50:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant has sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
his employment on January 12, 2021; 
2. 
If so, whether the injury caused any temporary disability; 
3. 
Whether the injury caused any permanent disability; 
4. 
The nature and extent of any permanent disability; 
5. 
The commencement date for payment of permanent disability benefits, if any; 
6. 
The proper rate of compensation; 
7. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
8. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical evaluation; 
9. 
Alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27; and 
10. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 61-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
21) He is a high school graduate, and later earned a certificate from DMACC after 
taking a transportation class. (Tr., pp. 21-22)  
 
Claimant started working at Old Dominion Freight on April 23, 2013. (Tr., p. 23) 
He was still employed by Old Dominion at the time of hearing, and continues to perform 
the same job. (Tr., p. 26) Claimant’s job title is line haul driver. (Tr., p. 23) His job 
involves driving from terminal to terminal or “meet and turn” points. (Tr., p. 24) He works 
overnights, and his route is from Ankeny, Iowa, to Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and back. 
(Tr. p. 25) He works between 50 and 55 hours per week. (Tr., p. 27) 
 
Claimant described his job. When he arrives at the facility, he locates his 
assigned truck, and does a walk around. He starts the truck and his computer, to check 
on his assignments. He said he usually goes to grab a JIF at that point, which he 
described as a piece of equipment that goes between the two trailers to give him double 
trailers. Once he has his assignments, he uses the JIF to attach and connect the two 
trailers to his truck. (Tr., pp. 27-28) He has to connect all the airlines and electrical on 
the trailers, do another walk around and inspection to make sure everything is good, 
and then enter all his information into his computer. (Tr., p. 28) Once all of that is done, 
he drives to Sioux Falls. He testified that the drive takes him approximately four hours 
and 40 minutes each way. (Tr., p. 32) 
 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 3 
 
Once in Sioux Falls, claimant gets his assignments as to where to place the two 
trailers he brought. He unhooks the trailers and places them where they go, and then 
uses the JIF to hook up two new trailers to take back with him to Ankeny/Des Moines. 
(Tr., pp. 28-29) Once he arrives back in Ankeny, he unhooks the two trailers, enters all 
of his information into the computer, and completes a post-trip inspection and fuel duties 
before returning to his home. 
 
Claimant has alleged an injury to his right knee, which occurred on January 12, 
2021. (Tr., p. 34) He testified that on that day, he had made his usual trip to Sioux Falls, 
South Dakota. He was at the point in his trip where he had received his return 
assignments and was preparing to hook the return trailers to his truck. As he was 
attaching the first trailer to his truck, the JIF was not lined up perfectly, so he had to 
push it into the proper position. (Tr., pp. 34-35) As he was pushing it, he slipped 
backwards into a hole in the lot. (Tr., p. 35) He said it hurt a little bit, but he did not think 
much of it at the time. His right foot slipped into the hole, and his right knee and waist 
twisted, but he did not fall to the ground. (Tr., pp. 36-37) He said this occurred after 
midnight, and he was able to complete his run, as he was just a little sore. (Tr., p. 37) 
 
After his duties were complete, he returned home and went to bed. (Tr., p. 38) 
When he woke up later that evening, around 4:00 or 5:00 p.m., he could not move his 
leg and knee. He said it was hurting and swollen and his wife had to help him out of 
bed. At that point, he called the terminal manager and explained what had happened, 
and was told to go to UnityPoint urgent care in Ankeny. 
 
Claimant saw Scott Penisten, M.D., at UnityPoint urgent care clinic on January 
12, 2021, at 5:45 p.m. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) The record states that claimant presented 
with a right knee injury sustained early that morning at work, when he was in the dark 
and accidentally stepped into a hole. He did not recall any painful popping but stated 
that his knee got twisted the wrong direction. His pain extended from the area of the 
medial side of the thigh just above the knee, extending through the entire knee joint 
itself and down into the lateral portion of the upper leg. He reported “no significant knee 
injuries in the past.” He reported walking with a significant limp, and that it locked up on 
him a couple of times. He denied any painful popping or clicking sounds. 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Penisten noted obvious joint effusion involving the 
right knee, and it was warm to the touch. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) Claimant had significant pain 
with palpation over the medial and lateral joint lines, and was also tender over the area 
of the LCL and MCL. X-rays of the knee showed some advanced degenerative 
changes, particularly in the medial compartment. There was a notable sized knee 
effusion but no evidence of any acute bony injury. Dr. Penisten was concerned that 
claimant may have injured the meniscus and/or main ligaments inside the knee. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 4) He noted claimant had advanced degenerative changes so he did not have 
much of a meniscus left, but was concerned about injury to what was remaining. He 
recommended referral to orthopedic surgery, and took him off work until he could be 
evaluated by an orthopedic surgeon. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 4, 6) 
 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 4 
 
At this point, the claim was accepted as compensable, and claimant was directed 
to Jeffrey Davick, M.D., at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons (DMOS). (Tr., p. 40) He 
saw Dr. Davick on January 18, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 7) His description of the injury 
remained the same. He again denied “any significant prior injuries.” On physical 
examination, Dr. Davick noted claimant ambulated with a severe limp on the right side. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8) His range of motion was from zero to about 20 degrees. He had a 
difficult exam due to pain and swelling. X-rays taken that day showed medial joint space 
narrowing. Dr. Davick’s impression was probable acute medial meniscus tear, right 
knee. Dr. Davick noted that claimant had some underlying osteoarthritis, but stated that 
claimant had an acute, distinct injury at work on January 12, 2021, which had caused 
pain and swelling. He ordered an MRI to evaluate the menisci and ACL. He released 
claimant to return to work doing “sit down” work only. (Defendants’ Exhibit C, p. 5) 
 
The MRI took place on January 23, 2021, and showed complex tearing body and 
posterior horn medial meniscus with surrounding marrow edema, likely stress related. 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 6) It also showed high-grade medial compartment cartilage loss, 
moderate sized joint effusion, and a small amount of prepatellar fluid. Claimant was 
advised of the MRI results on January 25, 2021, and a meniscectomy was discussed. 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 7) The record notes that claimant understood that if Dr. Davick 
recommended a knee scope, the scope “will not help with pain coming from the 
arthritis.”  
 
Dr. Davick responded to questions posed by the claims adjuster on February 4, 
2021. (Def. Ex. C, p. 8) The first question addressed causation, given claimant’s 
underlying osteoarthritis and medial compartment degenerative changes. Dr. Davick 
marked yes, that the right knee condition was related to claimant’s work activities on 
January 12, 2021, and wrote that he understood regarding the osteoarthritis and 
degenerative changes, but that was not what he was treating. Rather, he was treating 
the meniscus tear. Dr. Davick also marked yes, that the need for surgery was a result of 
the work injury.  
 
Dr. Davick performed a right knee arthroscopy with partial medial meniscectomy 
and loose body removal on March 4, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9) His postoperative diagnosis 
was right knee complex tear, posterior horn of medial meniscus with anterior loose 
bodies. With respect to the loose bodies, the operative report notes there were 3 large 
calcified loose bodies just anterior to the ACL, which were removed, and the ACL was 
intact. 
 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Davick on March 10, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) At that 
time his range of motion was from zero to 125 degrees. The record states that claimant 
“looks great,” and Dr. Davick reviewed exercises with him. He was also released to 
return to work with no restrictions beginning March 14, 2021, with his next follow up to 
be in six weeks. (Def. Ex. C, p. 9)  
 
Claimant testified that he returned to work for a short period of time, but then 
developed a blood clot. (Tr., p. 41) He saw David Harrison, D.O., on March 23, 2021, at 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 5 
 
MercyOne Ankeny Family Medicine Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25) Dr. Harrison noted that 
claimant had started noticing significant pain and swelling of his knee and right leg a 
couple of days earlier, and was ultimately seen at the emergency room where a deep 
vein thrombosis (DVT) was found. Claimant reported no personal history of previous 
DVT. Dr. Harrison noted risk factors of claimant being a truck driver and stationary for 
many hours at a time, his recent knee surgery, and obesity as his primary risk factors 
for developing a DVT. He prescribed anticoagulation medication Eliquis, and took 
claimant off work for at least one week. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 26) 
 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Harrison on March 30, 2021, at which time he 
reported his leg was still very sore, and he felt the pain was moving into his right knee. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 27) Dr. Harrison prescribed a short burst and taper of prednisone for his 
pain and swelling, and ordered another ultrasound of his leg to check the status of the 
clot. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 29) He kept claimant off work. 
 
At his next follow up with Dr. Harrison on April 9, 2021, claimant had improved 
after the prednisone. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 30) The follow-up ultrasound showed significant 
improvement of the DVT. The record notes that claimant felt much better and was 
desiring to get back to work. Dr. Harrison advised claimant to continue on prescription 
anticoagulants until June 13, after which he could transition to a full-strength aspirin. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 31) He also reviewed DVT prevention strategies with respect to when claimant 
would be driving.  
 
Claimant testified he again returned to work, but was still having quite a bit of 
pain. He returned to Dr. Davick on April 21, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) Claimant reported 
medial pain at that time. Dr. Davick noted mild effusion on exam, and range of motion 
was from zero to 110 degrees. He provided an injection into the right knee and told 
claimant to return in six weeks. At his next visit on June 2, 2021, he was still having 
pain, and said the injection had not helped. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 14) Dr. Davick referred him for 
viscosupplementation and physical therapy.  
 
Claimant saw Charles Keller, M.D., who is in the same clinic as Dr. Harrison, on 
June 14, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 32) Claimant reported he stopped his anticoagulant three 
weeks prior, as he was told, and had developed gradually increasing pain, swelling, and 
other signs of repeat DVT since that time. The record notes claimant had recently 
traveled to Florida, and the pain and swelling started there.  Dr. Keller recommended he 
restart Eliquis, and wanted a repeat ultrasound. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 34)  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Davick later that same day, who noted claimant’s continued 
right knee pain and pain in the calf. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) He ordered the repeat ultrasound, 
which showed the DVT. With respect to his knee, Dr. Davick took new x-rays, which 
showed bone-on-bone changes medially. Dr. Davick noted that claimant’s x-rays taken 
just before the arthroscopy showed some mild narrowing of the joint space, but he was 
not bone-on-bone. Dr. Davick opined that the knee arthroscopy and removal of the torn 
meniscus exacerbated the osteoarthritis, which explained the quick change in his x-
rays. As such, he stated that the medial compartment osteoarthritis, while preexisting, 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 6 
 
had been significantly exacerbated by the torn meniscus and the need for partial medial 
meniscectomy. Dr. Davick was not sure if his prior recommendation for 
viscosupplementation would be helpful given the bone-on-bone findings, and 
recommended referral to a joint specialist to determine if he was a candidate for a 
unicompartmental knee replacement. He allowed claimant to continue working full duty 
in the meantime. 
 
Claimant was sent for a second opinion with Matthew Bollier, M.D., at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). (Tr., p. 44) He saw Dr. Bollier on July 
26, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 64) Dr. Bollier’s record states that his opinions were based on the 
provided medical records, claimant’s reported history, review of provided radiological 
studies, and physical examination. Dr. Bollier’s note indicates that claimant reported “no 
pain prior to work injury” on January 12, 2021. On the date of his examination, claimant 
complained of medial knee pain, swelling, and pain with weightbearing activity.  
 
Dr. Bollier opined that claimant’s work injury increased pain in his knee, but did 
not cause or materially aggravate the preexisting degenerative arthritis. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 67) 
His impression was knee arthritis flare in the setting of underlying preexisting 
degenerative arthritis. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68) He stated that the MRI and x-rays showed 
severe osteoarthritis both preoperatively and postoperatively, “which we know develops 
gradually over many years.” He noted that on the January 18, 2021 x-ray claimant had 
advanced osteoarthritis and medial compartment narrowing. He further noted that the 
operative arthroscopy pictures revealed advanced chondral loss, bone-on-bone arthritis. 
Finally he stated that the x-ray on June 14, 2021 revealed advanced osteoarthritis and 
medial compartment narrowing. Based on his review of these findings, the arthritis 
started many years ago. He stated he does not know why an injury sets off arthritis 
pain, but the work injury did not cause any new structural tearing. 
 
Dr. Bollier opined that claimant had had corticosteroid injections, physical 
therapy, and a knee arthroscopy related to the work injury without improvement in 
symptoms, and will need arthroplasty in the future. However, he stated that the need for 
knee replacement would not be related to the work incident on January 12, 2021. He 
placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) on July 26, 2021, with no 
activity restrictions related to the work incident. Future care for claimant’s right knee, 
including possible arthroplasty, would be related to preexisting osteoarthritis and not the 
work injury. Finally, Dr. Bollier provided a zero percent rating of the lower extremity 
using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
 
Claimant testified that after his evaluation with Dr. Bollier, defendants denied 
further workers’ compensation benefits, including medical care for his right knee. (Tr., p. 
44) Claimant sought treatment on his own, and first saw Matthew DeWall, M.D., on 
November 18, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 18) Dr. DeWall reviewed prior x-rays and noted 
claimant’s bone-on-bone arthritis. Dr. DeWall opined that claimant ultimately would 
require a total joint arthroplasty, but felt he was high risk due to his size and because of 
the chronic DVT. As such, he recommended they continue to treat his knee 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 7 
 
conservatively until he had lost weight and was cleared for surgery from a DVT 
perspective. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 18-19) He provided claimant with an injection that day. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. DeWall on February 18, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 20) He had 
been working on weight loss and had achieved some. His most recent scan of his DVT 
showed it was resolving. The prior injection had helped for about 2.5 months. Dr. 
DeWall felt claimant needed to lose a little more weight to reduce his postoperative risk, 
and provided claimant with another injection.  
 
On March 2, 2022, Dr. Davick signed a letter written by claimant’s attorney, 
which confirmed his opinion that after reviewing Dr. Bollier’s records, he still believed 
the need for claimant’s right knee replacement was due to the work injury of January 12, 
2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 21) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. DeWall on May 24, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22) Claimant 
reported that his knee had been a “great deal of bother” to him, and had been limiting 
his activity. He was frustrated and wanted to pursue arthroplasty. Dr. DeWall noted 
claimant had gained a few pounds since his last visit. Dr. DeWall continued to believe 
claimant should hold off on surgery given his risk factors, which disappointed claimant. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 24) He was provided with another steroid injection, and Dr. DeWall 
indicated they could try viscosupplementation if it did not last three months.  
 
Claimant testified that at that point, he was “not real happy” with Dr. DeWall, so 
he decided to seek treatment elsewhere. (Tr., p. 45) He saw Craig Mahoney, M.D., at 
Iowa Ortho on July 15, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 73) Dr. Mahoney noted claimant’s severity 
level was at a 7 out of 10 at that time. He reviewed claimant’s history, and claimant’s 
complaints of no relief following surgery. Claimant reported ongoing pain and stiffness, 
especially with excess weightbearing and stairs. Claimant had not been working with 
physical therapy, but had been taking over-the-counter anti-inflammatories daily, and 
had previous cortisone injections.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Mahoney noted claimant walked without an 
assistive device, but with a compensated gait. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 74) Dr. Mahoney advised 
claimant that he needed to get his weight down to 285 pounds, at which point he would 
be able to schedule surgery. He provided claimant with a cortisone injection and also 
wrote a prescription for physical therapy. Claimant testified that the physical therapy 
was very helpful, and combined with regular injections, his pain was reduced. (Tr., p. 
46) Dr. Mahoney’s records support this testimony. On September 2, 2022, claimant 
reported “tremendous improvement” since starting physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 75) He 
continued with physical therapy, and had regular follow-up visits with Dr. Mahoney, 
including periodic injections. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 77-84; Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 97-118) He eventually 
lost about 20 pounds, and was cleared for knee replacement surgery. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 84) 
 
On March 7, 2023, Dr. Bollier wrote to defense counsel in response to a letter he 
received asking him to review updated records from Dr. Davick. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 1-2; Jt. 
Ex. 5., pp. 70-72) Dr. Bollier stated that he did not agree with Dr. Davick’s opinion in his 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 8 
 
June 14, 2021 clinic note that claimant’s right knee radiographs from January 23, 2021 
showed “mild” narrowing of the joint space. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 70) Rather, Dr. Bollier stated it 
showed severe narrowing, nearly bone-on-bone. He also was not surprised to learn the 
joint space narrowed more over time, as that is the natural history of severe knee 
arthritis. He further opined that the medial meniscus tear was not caused by the January 
12, 2021 work incident. He also reiterated his previous opinions from his July 26, 2021 
IME report. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 71) He opined that the need for a right knee replacement was 
related to claimant’s preexisting degenerative arthritis, and not the work incident. He 
stated that it was just as likely that claimant’s knee pain from his preexisting arthritis 
started with getting out of bed as a work incident. He stated there was no way to know 
when an asymptomatic arthritic knee would become symptomatic, and the moment pain 
develops in an arthritic knee, such as with the work incident, is not necessarily the 
cause of a material and permanent aggravation. As such, it was still his opinion that the 
work incident on January 12, 2021 was not the reason claimant needed a knee 
replacement. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 72) Rather, the reason he needed the replacement was 
because “his knee is worn out, which takes many years to develop.”  
 
Claimant underwent right total knee arthroplasty with Dr. Mahoney on April 18, 
2023. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 85) At his first post-operative follow up on May 1, 2023, he reported 
making progress. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 87) He continued to work with physical therapy on range 
of motion. At his next follow up on May 26, 2023, he was still in physical therapy but his 
range of motion had not improved much. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 90) He had also been to the 
emergency room a couple of times and reported being referred to a cardiologist due to 
his D-Dimer labs. On physical examination, Dr. Mahoney noted nearly full extension, but 
flexion to only 85 degrees. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 91) He increased his pain medication and the 
frequency of physical therapy, and asked him to return in two weeks.  
 
On June 16, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Mahoney and had 110 degrees of 
flexion. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 93-94) He asked to return to work the week after July 4, 2023, and 
Dr. Mahoney provided a return to work release for July 10 or 11, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 
94-96)1 Claimant testified that after July 10th or 11th, he was released to return to work, 
and he took the paperwork to the office. (Tr., p. 49) He then had to pass the DOT 
physical and a push/pull test, and he was ultimately allowed to return to work shortly 
after. He has continued to work there since. 
 
Claimant testified that there is “about 150 percent difference in the way I can 
move” now as compared to before the total knee replacement. (Tr., p. 49) He said the 
pain is just a nagging pain now, rather than a sharp pain that he was not able to 
tolerate. Additionally, he is no longer taking pain medication. (Tr., pp. 49-50) At the time 
of hearing, claimant testified that he was back to almost normal in the way he performs 
his work. (Tr., p. 52) He testified that the pain is present in his knee all the time, but it is 
generally very mild or minimal. (Tr., p. 62) 
 
                                                                 
1 There are two patient status reports in evidence, both from Dr. Mahoney, one with the return to work 
date as July 10 and the other with July 11. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 95-96)  

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 9 
 
Prior to the January 12, 2021 work injury, claimant had some treatment for his 
right knee. On June 30, 2020, claimant saw David Harrison, D.O., his primary care 
physician. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 12-13) Claimant testified that Dr. Harrison has been his 
primary care physician for 27 to 28 years. (Tr., p. 53) At that visit, claimant complained 
of right knee pain for the past three weeks. (Def. Ex. E, p. 12) The record states that 
claimant woke up one morning with significant pain of the anteromedial knee. Claimant 
did not recall any particular injury, but noted that he used his right foot to shift his truck, 
and had to get in and out of his truck routinely. He also reported that he recently went 
for a bike ride. At hearing he clarified that the bike was a motorcycle, and he had taken 
a longer ride to Red Wing, Minnesota around the time the knee pain started. (Tr., p. 55) 
He further clarified that his motorcycle is actually a three-wheeled trike, not a two-
wheeled motorcycle. (Tr., p. 88) He testified that he generally did not ride for as long as 
that particular trip, which took around five hours. (Tr., p. 89) He said that his knee was 
not extended right during the trip, and that is when he started to notice it “wasn’t feeling 
real good.” (Tr., p. 89) However, nothing specific happened during the trip that caused 
his knee to hurt. (Tr., p. 90) 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Harrison noted some mild swelling of the anterior 
knee. (Def. Ex. E, p. 13) He had full range of motion although it was painful. X-rays 
showed minimal medial meniscus thinning and mild-to-moderate osteoarthritic changes. 
Dr. Harrison’s assessment was right knee sprain/bursitis, and he provided an injection. 
He told claimant if it did not improve to consider physical therapy, an MRI, and 
orthopedic consultation.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Harrison on August 27, 2020. (Def. Ex. E, p. 14) He 
continued to have knee pain, and requested another injection. Dr. Harrison’s record 
states that he discussed options for knee pain management, and that “[u]ltimately, he 
may likely need a knee replacement.” They also discussed getting a copper knee 
support sleeve, which Dr. Harrison thought was an “excellent idea with low risk.” Dr. 
Harrison provided another cortisone injection, and directed claimant to continue with 
conservative management. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 14-15)  
 
Claimant testified that the two visits to Dr. Harrison in 2020 were the first time he 
ever had treatment for his right knee. (Tr., p. 56) He acknowledged that Dr. Harrison 
had discussed a knee replacement, but said he was told that would be “a long time 
down the road,” and that it was not necessary at that time. He testified that the first 
injection Dr. Harrison provided gave him some relief, and after the second injection in 
August his knee progressively got better until it was not hurting at all. (Tr., p. 57) He did 
not seek any other treatment for the right knee after the injection in August 2020 until 
after the work injury on January 12, 2021. (Tr., pp. 58-59) He testified that before the 
work injury, his knee was fine, and he was not having any problems whatsoever. (Tr., p. 
59) He did not have any work restrictions at the time of the injury, and was only taking 
medications related to diabetes, cholesterol, blood pressure, and anxiety. (Tr., p. 60) 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Mark Taylor, M.D., 
which took place on June 5, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1, p.1) Dr. Taylor’s report is dated July 12, 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 10 
 
2023. Dr. Taylor reviewed claimant’s medical records and history. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 2-6) At 
the time of the IME, claimant was still attending physical therapy three times per week, 
and still taking Tylenol as needed for pain. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) He was still off work at the 
time as well, but reported that his condition was improving with therapy. 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Taylor noted a mild limp due to the relatively recent 
knee surgery. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) He was able to actively flex the right knee to 85 degrees, 
with nearly full extension. Dr. Taylor provided diagnoses related to the January 12, 2021 
work injury, including the medial meniscal tear and related surgery by Dr. Davick; 
persistent right knee arthralgia status post multiple injections; and right knee total 
arthroplasty by Dr. Mahoney. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9) With respect to causation, Dr. Taylor 
noted that claimant denied prior right knee injuries, and acknowledged the visits to Dr. 
Harrison in June and August of 2020. At the time, claimant thought those injections had 
been in his left knee. Either way, Dr. Taylor noted that claimant did very well following 
the injections and had no further problems and required no additional follow-up. He also 
noted claimant’s x-ray on June 30, 2020 showed moderate joint space narrowing in the 
medial compartment per the radiologist’s review.  
 
Dr. Taylor stated that after claimant’s work injury, the x-ray findings were again 
described by the radiologist as showing moderate osteoarthritis with a joint effusion. 
When claimant had the first surgery, Dr. Davick identified moderate degenerative 
changes of the patellofemoral and medial compartments. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) Given the 
history and medical records, Dr. Taylor agreed with Dr. Davick that claimant’s work 
injury was a significant contributing factor to his right knee symptoms and the need for 
surgery, including the surgery with Dr. Davick and subsequent arthroscopy with Dr. 
Mahoney. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) Dr. Taylor noted that the radiology report and Dr. Davick’s 
operative report described the arthritis as “mild” or “moderate.” While he agreed that 
radiographic arthritic changes take several years to develop, claimant was not 
experiencing right knee pain or swelling prior to the injury. After the injury, he developed 
substantial swelling and was found to have a meniscal tear, along with moderate 
arthritic changes. As such, Dr. Taylor opined that the right knee condition changed from 
an asymptomatic state to a symptomatic state, consistent with a “lighting-up.” He also 
stated it could be viewed as an accelerating factor, in that it was very unlikely that 
claimant would have sought or required a knee replacement at the time that he did but 
for the work injury. He also noted that even Dr. Bollier agreed that the work injury 
increased claimant’s knee symptoms and “set off” the arthritis pain. Therefore, in 
summary, while Dr. Taylor agreed that claimant had preexisting arthritis, it was not 
symptomatic prior to the injury. There was an acute injury with swelling and objective 
findings on exam, and he was unable to return to his asymptomatic baseline and 
eventually required surgery. Dr. Taylor opined that the work injury was a significant 
contributing factor to claimant’s pain and symptoms for which he required surgery, first 
with Dr. Davick and then with Dr. Mahoney. 
 
At the time of the IME, claimant had not yet reached MMI, and was still 
undergoing treatment with Dr. Mahoney and physical therapy. He provided an outline of 
the possible impairment ratings under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 11 
 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, but noted that until he was placed at MMI an impairment 
rating was inappropriate. (Cl. Ex. 1, p., 11) At the time of the IME, claimant was still off 
work, and Dr. Taylor agreed he should continue with the restrictions recommended by 
Dr. Mahoney. 
 
On September 5, 2023, Dr. Taylor issued a supplemental letter to his IME report. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) He had reviewed claimant’s additional medical records from Dr. 
Mahoney and physical therapy. He also spoke to claimant on the morning of August 29, 
2023, who indicated his right knee had improved. He rated his pain levels as generally 
mild, up to a 3 or 4 out of 10, and mainly with stairs. He noticed some occasional 
swelling, and was told that could take up to a year to resolve. He noted some stiffness 
when sitting too long, and some trouble with descending stairs or performing any type of 
squatting motion.  
 
Based on the updated information, Dr. Taylor opined that claimant reached MMI 
on July 10, 2023. He noted that Dr. Mahoney documented 110 degrees for range of 
motion. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) Using the AMA Guides, he placed claimant in the “good result” 
category, and assigned 37 percent right lower extremity impairment. He noted claimant 
had returned to work, and recommended he avoid kneeling directly on the right knee, or 
at the very least rare kneeling and rare crawling. He also recommended occasional and 
only partial squatting-type maneuvers. Finally, he recommended occasional stairs, 
preferably with a handrail. He noted that if claimant is able to continue to self-restrict, he 
should be able to continue in his current job. He did not have any additional treatment 
recommendations, and told claimant to return to Dr. Mahoney if he noticed any new or 
increasing symptoms associated with the right knee. 
 
On October 23, 2023, the parties took Dr. Bollier’s deposition. (Def. Ex. P) By 
that time, Dr. Bollier had reviewed updated medical records, including Dr. Harrison’s 
records of treating claimant’s right knee in 2020. (Def. Ex. P, p. 52; Depo. Tr., p. 7) He 
noted that claimant’s x-rays from 2020 showed evidence of arthritic changes and joint 
space narrowing, which indicates a long-standing wear and tear process. (Def. Ex. P, p. 
52; Depo. Tr., pp. 7-8) He also noted that the 2020 medical records did not change his 
opinion, but they did give support to his opinion that claimant’s problem was a 
preexisting, wear-and-tear, degenerative problem. (Def. Ex. P, p. 53; Depo. Tr., p. 13) 
 
He reiterated his opinion that the work incident in January 2021 did not cause or 
worsen claimant’s right knee arthritis. (Def. Ex. P, p. 52; Depo. Tr., p. 8) He stated that 
he looked at the pictures from Dr. Davick’s arthroscopy, and there was not much 
cartilage left in the medial compartment of claimant’s knee. (Def. Ex. P, p. 52; Depo. Tr., 
p. 9) In fact, he states that when looking at the MRI, he does not believe the work 
incident even caused the meniscal tear, as he viewed it as a degenerative-type tear 
rather than an acute tear.  
 
Dr. Bollier also opined that the work incident and meniscus surgery did not cause 
claimant to need the knee replacement sooner than he would have otherwise. (Def. Ex. 
P, p. 53; Depo. Tr., pp. 10-11) He noted that research suggests that doing a knee 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 12 
 
arthroscopy on a knee with bone-on-bone arthritis is unlikely to improve pain, which is 
exactly what happened in claimant’s case. (Def. Ex. P, p. 53; Depo. Tr., p. 11) He then 
discussed that some patients with bone-on-bone arthritis have no symptoms, and then 
have something happen where they twist their knee or miss a step, and then they 
develop pain. (Def. Ex. P, p. 53; Depo. Tr., pp. 11-12) He stated that it is not understood 
why some patients have pain and others do not, but he sees it happen all the time.  
 
With respect to the x-rays, Dr. Bollier explained that on his viewing, the x-rays 
from January 2021 clearly show claimant had severe joint space narrowing without 
much joint space left. (Def. Ex. P, p. 54; Depo. Tr., p. 15) He explained that once there 
is severe narrowing on an x-ray, it is “kind of a ticking clock” on when a knee 
replacement will need to be done. (Def. Ex. P, p. 54; Depo. Tr., p. 17) Sometimes it is a 
couple of months, sometimes a couple of years, but either way, he said that claimant 
was on that path regardless of the work incident. However, he reiterated his opinion that 
nothing about the work injury caused or otherwise materially aggravated claimant’s right 
knee condition. (Def. Ex. P, p. 55; Depo. Tr., p. 18) While he agreed that the incident 
caused claimant to experience increased symptoms and pain, he opined that it was a 
temporary increase in pain, and that it did not light up or cause an aggravation of his 
underlying condition. (Def. Ex. P, p. 54; Depo. Tr., pp. 16-17) 
 
On further questioning, Dr. Bollier agreed that there is no way to determine when 
claimant would have needed the knee replacement, just that he would have needed one 
eventually. (Def. Ex. P, p. 59; Depo. Tr., p. 37) He stated that while claimant’s pain was 
worse, there was no structural tearing related to the work incident, and the need for 
treatment and for the knee arthroscopy and replacement was all related to his 
preexisting arthritis. (Def. Ex. P, p. 63; Depo. Tr., p. 50) Nothing about the work incident 
changed the progression or accelerated the need for the knee replacement. (Def. Ex. P, 
p. 64; Depo. Tr., pp. 54-55) He again reiterated that the increased pain after the work 
incident was temporary in nature, and the pain he had closer to the knee replacement 
was due to the arthritis in his knee, not the work incident. (Def. Ex. P, p. 64; Depo. Tr., 
pp. 56-57) He then explained that he cannot give an exact date of when a temporary 
aggravation is permanent, which is why he tries to leave pain out of his causation 
opinions and base them more on objective findings. (Def. Ex. P, p. 64; Depo. Tr., p. 57) 
 
On October 24, 2023, Dr. Davick wrote a letter to defense counsel following a 
phone conversation and his review of Dr. Harrison’s records related to treating 
claimant’s right knee in 2020. (Def. Ex. O, p. 49) Dr. Davick noted that Dr. Harrison’s 
records were not previously available, and he did not know that claimant had previous 
treatment for his right knee osteoarthritis. Dr. Davick noted that claimant had denied any 
significant prior issues with the knee, and that after the arthroscopic surgery he 
performed, claimant’s arthritis progressed quickly. However, given the new information, 
Dr. Davick stated that claimant’s knee osteoarthritis was significant and required 
treatment before the work injury, and it was more likely than not that he would have 
gone on to need a knee replacement even without the work-related injury. 
 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 13 
 
On October 27, 2023, Dr. Davick signed a letter authored by claimant’s attorney, 
following discussion and review of the medical records. (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 121) Dr. Davick 
agreed with the statement that claimant’s meniscus tear and related surgery was related 
to the work incident on January 12, 2021. He further agreed that more likely than not, 
claimant would have needed a knee replacement at some point even if he had not had 
the work injury. However, the work injury and meniscus tear and repair more likely than 
not accelerated the need for the total knee replacement.  
 
On October 31, 2023, Dr. Taylor wrote to claimant’s attorney after reviewing 
additional records, including Dr. Bollier’s deposition testimony. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18) In 
summary, Dr. Taylor noted that claimant was doing well prior to the work incident in 
January 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 19) While he had two injections in the right knee in 2020, he 
had no further problems after the second injection in August 2020. He was not 
experiencing pain or swelling in the right knee. The radiology report from June 2020 
revealed moderate joint space narrowing in the medial compartment. On the date of 
injury, the urgent care doctor noted obvious joint effusion, and the knee was warm to 
the touch. X-rays again revealed moderate degenerative joint disease. When claimant 
first saw Dr. Davick, he noted swelling, and claimant described a distinct injury.  
 
Dr. Taylor noted that during surgery Dr. Davick identified grade two 
chondromalacia of the patellofemoral joint; a complex tear of the posterior horn of the 
medial meniscus; and grade two changes on the medial femoral condyle. While 
acknowledging that he is not an orthopedic surgeon, Dr. Taylor explained that grade two 
changes involve less than fifty percent of the cartilage depth, and therefore represent a 
partial-thickness defect. He opined that grade two changes at the time of arthroscopy 
seem to be consistent with the moderate joint space narrowing described on the x-rays. 
He further noted that Dr. Davick referenced “quick changes” in claimant’s x-rays by 
June 2021, and noted that claimant’s preexisting arthritic changes were exacerbated by 
the torn meniscus and subsequent surgery. 
 
Dr. Taylor pointed out that when claimant received the injections in 2020, he was 
not taken off work, and continued to perform his regular duties. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 20) He 
responded favorably to the injections and required no additional treatment because he 
was asymptomatic. After the work incident in January 2021, he developed acute pain 
and swelling, which Dr. Taylor opined to be related to the work injury. Dr. Taylor’s 
review of the additional documents did not change his original opinions, and he 
reiterated that while claimant may have required a knee replacement at some point in 
the future, the work incident accelerated or lit up the need. He was asymptomatic 
immediately prior to the injury, became acutely symptomatic with the injury, and 
remained symptomatic even after the arthroscopic surgery. With the persistent 
symptoms, he required a knee replacement. Based on the history and medical records, 
Dr. Taylor again opined that it was unlikely claimant would have required the knee 
replacement at the time he did but for the work injury. In conclusion, he outlined Dr. 
Davick’s more recent correspondence and stated that he agreed with Dr. Davick that 
the work injury and meniscal tear more likely than not accelerated the need for a total 
knee replacement. 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 14 
 
 
On November 20, 2023, Dr. Bollier provided a letter to defense counsel after he 
reviewed Dr. Taylor’s October 31, 2023 letter, as well as the radiographs and MRI of the 
right knee from January 2021, Dr. Davick’s operative note from March 4, 2021, and the 
June 2021 radiographs. (Def. Ex. S, p. 57) He continued to disagree with Dr. Davick’s 
opinion that claimant’s January 23, 2021 radiographs showed only “mild” joint space 
narrowing. He maintained that it showed severe narrowing, “near bone on bone.” He 
also reviewed the medical records from 2020, and stated that injections are typically 
performed for patients with severe right knee pain in the setting of knee arthritis. As 
such, he opined that claimant’s right knee arthritis was already lit up prior to the work 
incident. (Def. Ex. S, pp. 57-58) He opined that claimant was well on his way to 
receiving a total knee replacement prior to January 2021, and stated that he stood by 
his previous opinions from his July 26, 2021 IME report. (Def. Ex. S, p. 58) 
 
I find the opinions of Dr. Davick and Dr. Taylor to be more convincing than that of 
Dr. Bollier. Dr. Davick was the treating physician who performed surgery and saw inside 
of claimant’s knee. He has repeatedly opined that while claimant had arthritis prior to 
the work injury, the injury and subsequent arthroscopic surgery significantly 
exacerbated the arthritis to the point he needed a total knee replacement. As Dr. Taylor 
summarized, claimant was asymptomatic immediately prior to the work injury. Despite 
the two injections he had in 2020, he was able to continue working with no interruption, 
and required no additional treatment until the work incident in January 2021. He had a 
specific incident on January 12, 2021, which caused pain and swelling of the right knee, 
and resulted in arthroscopic surgery. His pain did not resolve after this incident, like it 
did in 2020, and ultimately, he had a total knee replacement. 
 
Additionally, the opinions of both Dr. Taylor and Dr. Davick more accurately 
comport with the standards of causation under Iowa law, as discussed further below. Dr. 
Bollier’s opinion that the work incident only caused a temporary increase in claimant’s 
pain is not consistent with the evidence in the record. Claimant’s preexisting arthritis 
was not causing him any serious or long-term problems prior to the January 12, 2021 
work injury. After the injury, his condition did not resolve, and it ultimately resulted in a 
total knee replacement. As such, I find that the work injury materially and substantially 
aggravated claimant’s preexisting condition, and is therefore compensable. 
 
Because the injury is compensable, claimant is entitled to temporary total 
disability benefits. The parties stipulated that claimant was off work from April 12, 2023, 
through July 17, 2023. (Hearing Report, p. 1) Therefore, claimant is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during that time period. 
 
With respect to permanent disability, there are only two impairment ratings in the 
record. Dr. Bollier’s zero percent rating is based on his opinion that the work injury did 
not cause any diagnosis-based reason to assign impairment. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68) I have 
rejected that opinion. Dr. Taylor provided a 37 percent impairment rating of the right 
lower extremity, and I found his opinion to be reliable. As such, claimant is entitled to 
permanent partial disability benefits for 37 percent impairment of the right lower 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 15 
 
extremity, which is equal to 81.4 weeks of benefits. The parties stipulated that claimant 
was off work through July 17, 2023. As such, permanent partial disability benefits will 
commence on July 18, 2023. 
 
The parties dispute the proper rate of compensation. Claimant testified that he is 
paid by the mile, close to 80 cents per mile. (Tr., p. 78) His trip to Sioux Falls and back 
is approximately 600 miles. However, he is also paid for fueling the trucks and hooking 
up the trailers. (Tr., pp. 78-79) He normally works five days per week, but at times he 
does extra runs. (Tr., pp. 79-80) He also gets paid holidays and additional birthday pay. 
(Tr., p. 76) For vacation time, he is paid a straight rate based on the nine-hour average. 
(Tr., p. 77) At the time of the injury, the nine-hour average was $428.85. 
 
In reviewing claimant’s wage records, there are a couple of weeks that stand out 
as potentially being non-representative of claimant’s customary earnings. (See Def. Ex. 
H) For example, week ending December 31, 2020, included a $500.00 bonus. (Def. Ex. 
H, pp. 30-31) Week ending December 3, 2020 included additional birthday pay. (Def. 
Ex. H, pp. 32-33) Week ending November 19, 2020 included a $600 safety bonus, 
which is an annual bonus received for each year an employee goes without an accident. 
(Def. Ex. H, pp. 32-33; See also Tr., pp. 74-75) Week ending October 29, 2020 appears 
to be for two weeks of vacation. Claimant was not sure why he was paid for two weeks 
of vacation at once, but thought he was likely paid out some extra vacation time he was 
not going to use. (Tr., pp. 72-73) 
 
Claimant’s bonuses were regular yearly bonuses and should be divided by 52 
before including in the rate calculation. With respect to week ending October 29, 2020, 
claimant was paid for two weeks of vacation in one pay period, so the simple solution is 
to eliminate one of those weeks. As such, I find the following rate calculation to be the 
most representative of claimant’s typical full week of work: 
 
WEEK 
WEEK ENDING 
GROSS WAGES 
1 
01/14/21 
$2241.38 
2 
01/07/21 
$2387.44 
3 
12/31/20 
$1596.81 
 
Bonus ($500/52) 
$9.62 
4 
12/24/20 
$1950.60 
5 
12/17/20 
$1956.60 
6 
12/10/20 
$2385.45 
7 
12/03/20 
$3430.80 
 
Bonus ($428.85/52) 
$8.25 
8 
11/25/20 
$1561.28 
9 
11/19/20 
$2347.92 
 
Bonus ($600/52) 
$11.54 
10 
11/12/20 
$1981.82 
11 
11/05/20 
$2422.98 
12 
10/29/20 
$2144.25 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 16 
 
13 
10/22/20 
$1948.60 
 
 
 
TOTAL: 
 
$28,385.34 
Average Weekly Wage: 
 
$2183.49 
Rate at M2: 
 
$1329.59 
 
Therefore, all weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of $1,329.59. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to determine is whether claimant’s injury arose out of and in the 
course of employment. The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established 
ordinarily has the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. 
Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both 
arose out of and in the course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 
1996).  
The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in 
the course of” refer to the time, place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. 
Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment 
when a causal relationship exists between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 
551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected 
with the employment and not merely incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. 
Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in 
the course of” employment when it happens within a period of employment at a place 
where the employee reasonably may be when performing employment duties and while 
the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 17 
 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  
It is well-established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation. Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990). The Iowa Supreme Court has held: 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to finally 
disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is whether 
the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the employment was a 
proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967). 
In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. Davick and Dr. Taylor to be more 
convincing than that of Dr. Bollier. Dr. Davick was the treating physician who performed 
surgery and saw inside of claimant’s knee. He has repeatedly opined that while claimant 
had arthritis prior to the work injury, the injury and subsequent arthroscopic surgery 
significantly exacerbated the arthritis to the point he needed a total knee replacement. 
As Dr. Taylor summarized, claimant was asymptomatic immediately prior to the work 
injury. Despite the two injections he had in 2020, he was able to continue working with 
no interruption, and required no additional treatment until the work incident in January 
2021. He had a specific incident on January 12, 2021, which caused pain and swelling 
of the right knee, and resulted in arthroscopic surgery. His pain did not resolve after this 
incident, like it did in 2020, and ultimately, he had a total knee replacement.  
 
Additionally, the opinions of both Dr. Taylor and Dr. Davick more accurately 
comport with the standards of causation under Iowa law, as discussed further below. Dr. 
Bollier’s opinion that the work incident only caused a temporary increase in claimant’s 
pain is not consistent with the evidence in the record. Claimant’s preexisting arthritis 
was not causing him any serious or long-term problems prior to the January 12, 2021 
work injury. After the injury, his condition did not resolve, and it ultimately resulted in a 
total knee replacement. As such, I find that the work injury materially and substantially 
aggravated claimant’s preexisting condition, and is therefore compensable. 
 
As stated above, all weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of $1,329.59. 
Because the injury is compensable, claimant is entitled to temporary total disability 
benefits. The parties stipulated that claimant was off work from April 12, 2023, through 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 18 
 
July 17, 2023. (Hearing Report, p. 1) Therefore, claimant is entitled to temporary total 
disability benefits during that time period. 
With respect to permanent disability, I found Dr. Taylor’s 37 percent impairment 
rating of the right lower extremity to be reliable. Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p), 
compensation for the loss of a leg is based on a percentage of 220 weeks of benefits. 
Permanent partial disability benefits for 37 percent impairment of the right lower 
extremity is equal to 81.4 weeks of benefits. The parties stipulated that claimant was off 
work through July 17, 2023. As such, permanent partial disability benefits will 
commence on July 18, 2023. 
 
The next issue involves payment of medical expenses and claimant’s IME. 
Claimant’s exhibit 6 contains the medical expenses for which claimant seeks 
reimbursement. Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for medical bills unless 
claimant shows that they were paid from his or her own funds. See Caylor v. Employers 
Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). Where 
medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did not contribute, the 
claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 
N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the commissioner did not err 
in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical expenses paid through 
insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of any employer 
contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 
2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323.   
The parties stipulated that the itemized medical expenses were at least causally 
related to the medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury was based. (Hearing 
Report, p. 3) Because the injury is compensable, defendants are responsible for the 
medical expenses contained in claimant’s exhibit 6. Defendants shall reimburse 
claimant for his out-of-pocket expenses and are responsible for any remaining balances 
with the providers or liens submitted on behalf of claimant’s health insurance provider. 
With respect to claimant’s IME with Dr. Taylor, defendants argue they are not 
liable for reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39 because there is no employer-
retained impairment rating to contest. However, this is incorrect, as Dr. Bollier, an 
employer-retained physician, provided a zero percent rating on July 26, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, 
p. 68) As such, claimant was entitled to an examination under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Defendants are not responsible for paying for the portion of the examination related to 
the Second Injury Fund claim, which Dr. Taylor itemized. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 25) Therefore, 
defendants are responsible to reimburse claimant for Dr. Taylor’s IME in the amount of 
$4,230.00. 
Claimant also submitted two additional bills from Dr. Taylor for his two 
supplemental reports. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 27-29) Claimant is only entitled to one IME under 
section 85.39. However, the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports is an allowable cost under Iowa Administrative Rule 876-433. 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 19 
 
Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 10A.328. 
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. As claimant was 
successful in his claim, I use my discretion and award costs for reimbursement of each 
of Dr. Taylor’s supplemental reports. The first supplemental report cost $570.00 and the 
second cost $760.00, for a total of $1,330.00. Claimant did not seek any additional 
costs. 
The final issue to address is alternate medical care. Claimant has a compensable 
injury to his right knee, and is entitled to ongoing medical care related to the right knee if 
needed. He has requested Dr. Mahoney be designated as the authorized treating 
provider, which is reasonable given he was claimant’s surgeon.  
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of one thousand three hundred 
twenty-nine and 59/100 dollars ($1,329.59). 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits from April 12, 2023 
through July 17, 2023. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant eighty-one and four-tenths (81.4) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits, commencing July 18, 2023. 
 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all weekly benefits previously paid. 
 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) as 
stipulated by the parties. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
 
Claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. Dr. Craig Mahoney shall be 
designated as claimant’s authorized treating provider with respect to his right knee 
claim. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s medical expenses as outlined above. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Taylor’s IME in the amount of four 
thousand two hundred thirty and 00/100 dollars ($4,230.00). 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of one thousand 
three hundred thirty and 00/100 dollars ($1,330.00). 

VAN VEEN V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, LLC 
Page 20 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___26TH ___ day of June, 2024. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Joanie Grife (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
