Case Number: 22003959.02
Case Title:  CURETTE, TYBOIS V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Curette Tybois-22003959.02d.PDF
========================================================================

 BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TYBOIS CURETTE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 22003959.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
    
UNITED WISCONSIN INSURANCE CO., : 
   Head Notes:  1108.20; 1803.1; 2204; 
 
  
  : 
 
 
    3000 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Tybois Curette, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from AAA Airporter Services, employer, and United Wisconsin 
Insurance Co., as defendants.  The hearing was held on March 26, 2025.  Pursuant to 
an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case was heard via 
videoconference using Zoom with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  Those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed 
in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
On March 25, 2025, claimant’s counsel objected to Defendants’ Exhibit E and 
moved to exclude it from the record, as well as moved for an order from the Agency 
declaring that defendants may not assert an unauthorized treatment defense at hearing 
or assert any other claims or defenses not documented on the previously filed hearing 
report.  According to the file, defendants originally filed proposed exhibits on March 13, 
2025, one day after the 14-day deadline.  Defendants then filed proposed amended 
exhibits on March 25, 2025. The late-filed exhibits contained two new exhibits—1) 
several pages of correspondence between the parties’ attorneys, and 2) a benefit 
payment log.  Claimant’s motion only moved to exclude Exhibit E from the hearing 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Sep-05  15:15:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 2 
record.  As rationale for the request to exclude, claimant’s counsel stated that the newly 
proposed exhibit was untimely, violated the exhibit deadlines established by the 
Agency, and that is was unduly prejudicial.  
At the start of the hearing, the parties provided additional argument on claimant’s 
Motion to Exclude. (Hearing Transcript, pages 11-17).  Claimant’s counsel reiterated the 
arguments made in his Motion to Exclude. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel argued that the 
correspondence contained in Exhibit E was over two years old and had been in 
claimant’s possession since its creation. (Id. at 13-14).  Given this, defendants argued 
there was no unfair surprise or undue prejudice to claimant if the correspondence was 
included in the hearing record. (Id.).  Additionally, defendants indicated that claimant 
was seeking the payment of medical expenses in this action, so he should have known 
that defendants’ prior authorization, or lack thereof, would be an issue at hearing. (Id.). 
Lastly, defendants’ counsel indicated they had no objections to keep the record open for 
rebuttal evidence from the claimant. (Id.).  In reply, claimant’s counsel clarified that the 
correspondence was with claimant’s former attorney, and she was not aware of its 
existence until defendants served the Amended Exhibits. (Id. at 16-17).   
 
The undersigned reserved ruling on the objection until issuance of the decision, 
but instructed claimant to file any potential rebuttal evidence within the next two weeks 
in light of defendants’ agreement to keep the record open. (Tr., pp. 17-18).  On April 2, 
2025, claimant filed Exhibit 7. (See Claimant’s Second Amended Exhibits). Exhibit 7 
includes a copy of defendants’ Answer to claimant’s Alternate Care Petition, wherein 
defendants deny liability for claimant’s alleged mental sequela, as well as two pages of 
emails exchanged between the parties’ attorneys confirming the denial. (Cl Ex. 7, pp. 
49-52).  Additionally, both parties addressed claimant’s Motion to Exclude in their post-
hearing briefs. (See Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 16-18; Defendants’ Post-Hearing 
Brief, pp. 13-14).  In his brief, in addition to his previous arguments, claimant alleged 
defendants’ late service of Exhibit E demonstrated a pattern of disregard for the 
Agency’s rules, and admittance of the late exhibit was highly prejudicial because those 
emails had not been previously disclosed to claimant’s current counsel. (Claimant’s 
Post-Hearing Brief, p. 17).  Defendants argued that claimant was aware that medical 
expenses were a disputed issue prior to the exchange of the defendants’ amended 
exhibits and that claimant failed to demonstrate unfair prejudice from admittance of the 
emails. (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 13-14).   
 
After reviewing the arguments made by the parties, I overrule claimant’s Motion 
to Exclude Exhibit E.  As defendants indicated at hearing, the correspondence they 
sought to introduce was over two years old and was with claimant’s prior counsel. 
Additionally, claimant knew ahead of time that he was seeking medical expenses in this 
action and that there would be evidence submitted on this issue.  Ultimately, however, I 
find that inclusion of Exhibit E is not unfairly prejudicial to claimant because the defense 
defendants seek to bolster with this evidence, a lack of authorization defense, is not 
available to them in this proceeding.  In the alternate care proceeding, defendants filed 
an answer denying liability for claimant’s mental health condition. (See Claimant’s 
Exhibit 7).  Under prior Iowa Supreme Court precedent, “[T]he employer has no right to 
choose the medical care when compensability is contested.”  Bell Bros. Heating and Air 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 3 
Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).  Defendants are precluded 
from asserting an authorization defense as to any treatment received during their period 
of denial.  Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 244 (Iowa 2018).  Defendants 
filed an answer denying liability for claimant’s mental health sequela on January 18, 
2023. (Cl Ex. 7, pp. 49-50).  They have never amended that answer.  On the hearing 
report, defendants again disputed liability for claimant’s alleged mental health condition. 
(Hearing Report).  Given this, an authorization defense is not available to them.  
Claimant’s Motion to Exclude is denied.  Exhibit E is not unduly prejudicial to claimant 
because defendants are not entitled to utilize an authorization defense in this 
proceeding.  
Tybois Curette was the only witness to testify live at the trial.  The admitted 
evidentiary record also consists of Joint Exhibits 1-4; Claimant’s Second Amended 
Exhibits 1-7; and Defendants’ Amended Exhibits A-F.  On April 23, 2025, the parties 
submitted post-hearing briefs, at which time the case was fully submitted to the 
undersigned.  
ISSUES 
 
The parties identified the following disputed issues on the hearing report: 
1. The nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits.   
2. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to additional healing period benefits.   
4. Claimant’s weekly rate. 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of the medical expenses in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 4. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
8. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds as follows: 
At the time of the hearing, Tybois Curette (hereinafter “Curette”) was 38 years 
old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 21).  Curette attended North Central High School in Lebeau, 
Louisiana, graduating in 2006. (Id. at 22).  After high school, Curette attended the 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 4 
Universal Technical Institute (UTI) for one semester. (Id. at 23).  He studied gas 
automotive technology. (Id.).  He did not obtain a degree or certificate from UTI. (Id.).   
After leaving UTI, Curette worked at Force Corporation doing railroad construction from 
2010-2012.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 26). Curette then took a job with Pointer Smith 
Corporation. (Id.).  At Pointer, he worked as a foreman and equipment operator. (Id.).  
Both Force and Pointer Smith specialize in rehabilitating railroad track, changing out 
cross ties. (Ex. A, depo. pp. 9-10).  He worked for Pointer Smith from 2012 through 
2018. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 26).   
Curette started working for AAA Airporter Services (hereinafter “AAA”), in 2018.1 
(Cl Ex. 2, p. 26). AAA is a temporary staffing agency. (Tr., p. 26).  At the time of his 
injury, AAA had placed Curette in a chipping and grinding position at a John Deere 
Plant in Waterloo, Iowa. (Id. at 27).  At the hearing, Curette testified that this position 
required him to take metal tractor parts out of molds and then use air tools, such as 
chipping hammers, to remove excess metal from the part. (Id. at 28).  After Curette was 
finished, the part was sandblasted and sent to be painted. (Id.).  Curette testified that 
the parts came in containers. (Id. at 29).  They could weigh up to 1,000 pounds. (Id.).  
Before Curette could perform his work, the parts had to be lifted up out of the containers 
with a chain harness and set on the floor. (Id.).  Curette testified he made $20.00 an 
hour and worked approximately 60 hours per week. (Id.).   
Curette was injured on February 21, 2022. (See Hearing Report).  He testified 
that he was lifting a part out of the container with the chain harness, when another part 
in the box fell and struck the part loaded in the harness. (Tr., p. 30).  This caused the 
part to rock and fall from the harness. (Id.).  Curette stated the part looked like it was 
going to fall on top of him, so he reached out to push it away. (Id.).  He testified the part 
was a tractor axel housing and was very heaving, weighing more than 1,000 pounds. 
(Id.).  The part caught Curette’s fingers as it fell back into the container, severing the 
tips of his left pinky and ring fingers. (Id. at 32).  Mr. Curette is left-hand dominant. (Id. at 
21; Cl Ex. 1, p. 5).   
According to the medical records, after the accident Curette was taken to the 
emergency room at Allen Hospital. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1).  He was treated by attending 
physician Paul McCaughey, D.O. (Id.).  Dr. McCaughey’s treatment note states Curette 
was injured when a cast iron engine block weighing approximately 200 pounds fell on 
his fingers at work. (Id.).  Dr. McCaughey diagnosed fifth finger distal phalanx 
amputation and almost complete fourth finger distal phalanx amputation. (Id. at 4).  Dr. 
McCaughey referred Curette to Todd Johnson, M.D., in orthopedics. (Id. at 5).  Dr. 
Johnson performed a revision amputation of his left 4th and 5th fingers with skin graft 
that day. (Id. at 8-10).  Curette was taken off work after the surgery. (Tr., p. 35).   
Curette received follow-up care from Dr. Johnson. (See JE 2, pp. 11-22). He saw 
Dr. Johnson on March 3, 2022; March 31, 2022; and April 28, 2024. (Id.).   Dr. Johnson 
prescribed occupational therapy, work restrictions, and pain medication. (Id. at 12-13; 
JE 3, pp. 24-47).  On March 31, 2022, Curette was released to return to work with 
restrictions of no use of his left 4th and 5th fingers. (JE 2, p.18).  On April 28, 2022, Dr. 
Johnson placed him at maximum medical improvement (MMI) for the February 21, 2022 
                                                                 
1 At the hearing, Curette testified that AAA is also known as Madi Corporation. (Tr., p. 26).   

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 5 
work injury. (Id. at 13).  Dr. Johnson’s treatment note indicates that Curette’s finger 
movement was improving but he was still experiencing soreness. (Id. at 12).  Dr. 
Johnson told Curette that he might have soreness and achiness for up to a year after 
the injury. (Id. at 13).  Curette was discharged from occupational therapy on May 19, 
2022. (JE 3, p. 46).  The discharge papers mention that he was still experiencing 
stiffness in his fingers and sleep issues. (Id.).  
On June 12, 2022, Dr. Johnson issued a report assigning Curette 9 percent 
permanent impairment of his left hand as a result of the work injury. (JE 2, p. 23).  This 
was broken down as 4 percent of the hand for the amputation of his 5th finger through 
the DIP joint, under Figure 16-5 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, and 5 percent of the hand for the amputation of his 4th finger 
through the DIP joint, again under Figure 16-5 of the AMA Guides. (Id.).  Dr. Johnson 
indicated Curette could continue to work full duty and did not need any permanent work 
restrictions for his work injury. (Id.).  
In addition to his finger amputations, Curette is alleging a mental health sequela 
as a result of the February 21, 2022 work injury. (See Petition).  According to the 
hearing evidence, on December 14, 2022, Curette’s counsel sent defendants an email 
asking them to approve mental health treatment, that he alleged was necessary 
because of the work injury. (Cl Ex. 7, pp. 51-52).  The email indicated that if the request 
was not granted by December 21, 2022, Curette would file an application for alternate 
medical care. (Id.). Curette filed an application for alternate medical care on January 4, 
2023, requesting an evaluation and treatment for an alleged mental condition. (See 
Petition for Alternate Care, File No. 22003959.01). On January 18, 2023, defendants’ 
counsel responded, indicating that Curette was welcome to return to Dr. Johnson and 
request a referral to a mental health specialist, but defendants did not have sufficient 
information to approve treatment for a causally related mental injury.2 (Cl Ex. 7, p. 51).  
That same day, defendants filed an answer denying liability for claimant’s alleged 
mental sequela.  (Id. at 49-50).   
According to the medical records, Curette presented to the Cottonport Family 
Clinic on February 27, 2023. (JE 4, p. 65).  He was first evaluated by Shannon Rozas, 
FNP-C. (Id.).  He complained of anxiety and depression symptoms, as well as 
nightmares and flashbacks of the injury. (Id. at 66).  Ms. Rozas diagnosed panic 
                                                                 
2Defendants’ exhibits contain further correspondence between the parties. (See Ex. E, pp. 53-56).  
According to the correspondence, on January 18, 2023, defendants’ counsel sent an email indicating they had 
insufficient information to accept claimant’s alleged mental claim at that time but offered to send the claimant back 
to Dr. Johnson and see if Dr. Johnson thought he needed a referral to a mental health profes sional. (Id. at 53).  
Claimant’s then counsel, responded by stating “OK well if you are denying liability for the mental health condition, 
then he is free to see any provider he wants without the potential for an authorization defense, so that won’t be 
necessary.” (Id. at 54).  Defendants’ counsel wrote back indicating he hadn’t even been diagnosed with a mental 
condition. (Id.).  On March 30, 2023, defendants’ counsel sent a new email indicating that Curette had requested 
treatment from Nurse Rozas on February 27, 2023, but she refused because she does not provide care in litigated 
cases. (Id. at 55).  Defendants’ counsel then asked if claimant was seeking unauthorized care anywhere else.  (Id.).  
Claimant’s counsel replied that he was seeking mental health treatment, which defendants had denied, but did not 
answer defendants’ question about the provider or location of that treatment. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel wrote back 
arguing defendants had not denied liability, they had offered a return visit to Dr. Johnson to see if he thought 
Curette’s mental complaints were causally related to the injury date. (Id. at 56).   

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 6 
disorder, nightmares, and mixed anxiety and depressive disorder. (Id. at 66-67).  She 
prescribed Prazosin and Paroxetine and referred Curette to another office for treatment 
because her office does not handle litigated claims. (Id. at 67).  That same day, 
February 27, 2023, Curette presented to Angela Huval, LCSW, at the Cottonport Psych 
Clinic. (Id. at 61).  Ms. Huval diagnosed mixed anxiety and depressive disorder.  (Id. at 
62).  She recommended weekly psychotherapy and medication. (Id.).   
The next treatment record is from the Palmetto Family Clinic.  (JE 4, p. 57).  It is 
dated April 14, 2023. (Id.).  On that date, Curette sought treatment with Shannon Rozas, 
FNP-C. (Id.).  According to the treatment note, Curette stopped taking both the Prazosin 
and Paroxetine because they made him feel sluggish. (Id. at 58).  He, however, 
reported that he was still having some issues with anxiety, depression and nightmares, 
but indicated they did not interfere with his activities of daily living. (Id.).  The treatment 
note stated he was having trouble falling asleep and staying asleep at night. (Id.).  He 
reported getting approximately four hours of sleep per night, but did not want to try any 
new medications. (Id. at 58-59).  Ms. Rozas recommended counseling with Angela 
Huval, LCSW. (Id. at 58-59).   
Curette saw Ms. Huval on April 25, 2023. (Id. at 54).  He told her that the prior 
medication made him feel weird and made it hard to wake up for work. (Id. at 55).  He 
stated that he was using THC daily and it had increased his appetite and improved his 
mood overall. (Id.).  Curette requested a medical marijuana card. (Id.).  Huval 
recommended he try Buspar, an anxiety medication, as needed. (Id.).  The treatment 
note indicates Curette was “working daily and enjoys the wor[k].” (Id. at 55).  The last 
treatment note in the hearing record is also dated April 25, 2023. (JE 4, p. 50).  It is from 
Shannon Rozas, FNP-C. (Id.).  The note indicates that Ms. Rozas changed Curette’s 
diagnosis to anxiety disorder and prescribed buspirone as needed. (Id. at 51). Ms. 
Rozas indicated he was going to pursue a medical marijuana card on his own. (Id.).3 4  
At his attorney’s request, Curette attended an independent medical exam (IME) 
with Kunal K. Patra, M.D., on July 3, 2024. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).  According to Dr. Patra’s 
report, Curette told him that whenever he hears a loud noise at work, it reminds him of 
his injury, and then his heart starts to race and he becomes jumpy. (Id. at 5).  He stated 
that he preferred not to think about his injury.  (Id.).  Curette also stated that his 
therapist thought he had PTSD. (Id.).  Curette said his left hand makes him feel 
disfigured, self-conscious and embarrassed. (Id.).  He indicated he tries to keep his left 
hand in his pocket. (Id.).  Curette stated he was not taking any prescription medication 
for his mental complaints because of the side-effects, but did use medicinal marijuana. 
(Id. at 5-6).  He thought therapy with Ms. Huval helped with his symptoms, but found it 
difficult to attend his appointments because of his work schedule. (Id.).  Curette also 
described having difficulty with daily activities such as holding dishes, driving his car, 
using his cell phone, writing, laundry, cleaning, cooking, mowing the lawn, using 
equipment at work, and playing sports. (Id. at 6).  Curette indicated that his primary care 
provider thought he was starting to get an overuse injury to his right elbow because of 
                                                                 
3 The treatment note indicates Curette was scheduled to follow-up with Angela Huval, LCSW, on May 9, 
2023. (JE 4, p. 52).  There, however, is no treatment note from this visit in the hearing record. (Id.).   
4 During his deposition Curette testified that he was able to get a prescription for medical marijuana from 
Dr. McCulloch. (Ex. B, p. 10).   

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 7 
increased demands. (Id.).  Curette told Dr. Patra that he was still experiencing 
nightmares five to six times a month. (Id. at 7-8).  He also described incidents of 
hypervigilance, frustration, and depression. (Id. at 8).   
Dr. Patra administered a health questionnaire, the generalized anxiety disorder 
item scale, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) checklist for DSM-5. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 
10).  Dr. Patra diagnosed Curette with chronic PTSD, which he causally related to the 
February 21, 2022 work injury. (Id. at 14-17).  Dr. Patra placed Curette at MMI for this 
mental health condition on July 3, 2024. (Id. at 19).  He opined that Curette would 
continue to experience PTSD symptoms despite undergoing counseling, medication 
trials, and use of medical marijuana, but indicated that Curette was successfully 
managing his symptoms with occasional counseling and medical marijuana. (Id.).   Dr. 
Patra opined that Curette had suffered permanent impairment because of his mental 
condition. (Id.).  Dr. Patra assigned him 30 percent whole person impairment based 
upon his espoused difficulty with household chores, driving, recreational activities, work 
duties, as well as issues with social isolation. (Id. at 20).  As support for this rating, Dr. 
Patra cited to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Second 
Edition, because the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, does not provide numerical 
impairments. (Id.).  Dr. Patra thought it was unlikely that Curette could return to factory 
work like he did at John Deere. (Id.).  Dr. Patra indicated that Curette will likely continue 
struggling with adapting to work environments, as well as have issues with sustained 
concentration and persistence, social interactions, and work-related stressors. (Id. at 
21).   
On January 28, 2025, Curette attended a second IME with Terry A. Davis, M.D., 
at defendants’ request via Zoom. (Ex. B).    Prior to issuing his IME, Dr. Davis reviewed 
Curette’s medical records, his deposition transcript, as well as interviewed him and sent 
him to Rosanna Jones-Thurman, Ph.D, for psychological testing, including the MMPI-3 
and the MCMI-IV. (Id. at 2, 14, 20). Dr. Jones-Thurman found Curette’s responses 
inconsistent and suggestive of malingering and somatic symptom disorder, as well as 
possibly generalized anxiety, depression and PTSD. (Id. at 20).   
Dr. Davis’ IME report indicates that Curette had several additional visits with Ms. 
Rozas and Ms. Huval that were not submitted into the hearing record. (See Ex B, p. 9).  
He saw Ms. Rozas for gastritis and abdominal pain on September 29, 2023 and 
November 2, 2023. (Id.).  He saw her again on February 5, 2024, and April 18, 2024. 
(Id.).  A sleep study was ordered on the first visit. (Id.).  After the second appointment, 
Curette was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea and given a CPAP machine. (Id.).  
His annual physical exam took place on May 23, 2024, with Ms. Rozas. (Id.).  Curette 
also saw Ms. Huval on May 23, 2024. (Id.).  At that appointment, she diagnosed him 
with acute reaction to stress, and ruled out PTSD. (Id.).  She recommended 
psychotherapy once a week for the next 4-6 weeks. (Id.).  Curette returned to Ms. 
Rozas on December 11, 2024. (Id. at 10).  At that time, he reported difficulty with 
GERD, anxiety about his grades and trouble focusing in school. (Id.).  Curette was 
prescribed Wellbutrin and referred for an evaluation for a possible learning disorder. 
(Id.).   
Curette told Dr. Davis that he was sleeping okay and was getting 5-6 hours of 
sleep per night. (Ex. B, p. 5). He also stated that he stopped using THC because of 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 8 
work. (Id.).  He denied having issues concentrating or with his energy levels. (Id.). He, 
however, indicated that his mood was down and he felt bad because he had difficulty 
performing activities at work and school. (Id.).  Curette thought he was significantly 
depressed and described crying because of his hand pain. (Id.).   Dr. Davis diagnosed 
resolved adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression and malingering. (Id. at 
21).  Dr. Davis stated that adjustment disorder is a temporary maladaptive reaction to 
an identifiable stressor. (Id. at 22).  He did not think that Curette qualified for a diagnosis 
of PTSD because he questioned whether the work incident was traumatic enough to 
qualify under the criteria. (Id. at 24).  Dr. Davis placed Curette at MMI for his adjustment 
disorder on April 25, 2023. (Id.).  He did not think Curette had any permanent 
impairment from his mental condition, nor did he believe he required any permanent 
work restrictions for his mental condition. (Id. at 25).  He also did not recommend any 
future treatment for his diagnosed mental condition. (Id.).   
The record contains several different opinions addressing Curette’s alleged 
mental injury.  There are opinions from Shannon Rozas, FNP-C, Angela Huval, LCSW, 
Kunal K. Patra, M.D., Terry A. Davis, M.D., and Rosanna Jones-Thurman, Ph.D.  Of 
these, I find Curette's treaters, Shannon Rozas, FNP-C, and Angela Huval, LCSW, the 
most credible and the most persuasive.  The opinions of Dr. Patra and Dr. Davis are 
polar opposites.  Dr. Patra opined that Curette has causally related PTSD and suffered 
a 30 percent whole person impairment due to ongoing difficulties with household 
chores, driving, recreational activities, work duties, and socializing. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 20). He 
recommended a return to mental health counseling and medication management or 
non-medication biological treatment. (Id.).  In contrast, Dr. Davis diagnosed resolved 
adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and malingering. (Ex. B, 
p. 21).  He did not think that Curette qualified for a diagnosis of PTSD because he 
questioned whether the work incident was traumatic enough to qualify under the criteria. 
(Id. at 24).  Dr. Davis did not believe Curette had any permanent impairment from his 
mental condition, nor did he believe Curette required any permanent work restrictions 
for his mental health. (Id. at 25).  He also did not recommend any future treatment. (Id.).  
Based upon Curette’s treatment records, however, I think his mental condition and its 
affects lies somewhere in between these two extremes.   
In February 2023, Curette sought treatment for anxiety, nightmares and 
flashbacks. (JE 4, pp. 65-66).  At that time, he was prescribed anxiety medication and 
psychotherapy. (Id. at 61-67).  Curette has continued to seek intermittent treatment for 
anxiety issues since that time.  (See id. at 51-67; Ex. B, pp. 9-10).  He has received 
psychotherapy from Ms. Huval, and been prescribed a number of different medications 
by Ms. Rozas.  (Id.).  While his adherence to the recommended treatment plans was 
less than stellar, his symptoms are well documented. To address these symptoms, he 
sought out medical marijuana, with a self-proclaimed benefit. (Id.).  Curette’s last 
recorded appointment with Ms. Huval was on May 23, 2024. (Ex. B, p. 9).  At that 
appointment, Huval diagnosed an acute reaction to stress; she ruled out PTSD. (Id.). 
She recommended psychotherapy once a week for another 4-6 weeks. (Id.). Curette’s 
last documented appointment with Ms. Rozas was on December 11, 2024. (Id. at 10).  
During that appointment, he espoused anxiety and was prescribed Wellbutrin. (Id.).  
These records show that Curette did suffer a mental condition as a result of the work 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 9 
injury on February 21, 2022.  While that condition might not be PTSD, it exists and has 
affected Curette’s functionality.5 
 
After Curette was released by Dr. Johnson, he obtained a job with a door 
company in Mason City, Iowa, picking parts off the assembly line. (Tr., pp. 56-57).  He 
did that job for three months before he decided to move back to Louisiana. (Id. at 57).  
In Louisiana, Curette took a job as a foreman/operator with Pointer Smith Construction. 
(Id.).  Pointer Smith is a company that builds and maintains railroad tracks. (Id.).  He 
made $23.40 an hour and worked full time with optional overtime. (Ex. A, depo p. 10). In 
October 2024, Curette quit his job at Pointer Smith because they refused to give him a 
raise. (Tr., p. 59).   Shortly after that, he got a job with Coastal Bridge Construction as a 
laborer building bridges. (Id. at 59-60).   Curette worked full time and earned $17 an 
hour with an $80 a day per diem, (Id. at 61).  He worked there until December 2024, 
when he was eligible to attend school. (Id. at 59, 61).   
Curette testified that construction jobs hurt his left hand—causing him to have 
more nerve pain, swelling, locking, and shaking. (Id. at 44-45; 59-60).  He also stated 
that he struggled will loss of grip strength and range of motion in his hand and had to 
learn to write with his right hand. (Id.).  Curette estimated that he could only lift and hold 
5 pounds with his left hand. (Id. at 45).  Curette also stated that the noise of construction 
sites increased his mental health symptoms. (Id. at 58-60).  Loud booms and/or falling 
metal sounds cause him anxiety and panic attacks. (Id. at 48).  He testified that he 
continues to experience monthly nightmares and has trouble sleeping. (Id. at 48-49).   
In January 2025, Curette enrolled at Southern Louisiana Community College to 
obtain a certification as a heavy equipment operator. (Tr., p. 23).  He graduated from 
that program on March 13, 2025. (Id.).  At the time of the hearing, he was looking for a 
new job as a heavy equipment operator. (Id. at 62).  Curette testified that he expects to 
make around $25 or more an hour as a heavy equipment operator. (Id.).   
The parties have a rate disagreement.  They agree Curette was single and 
earning $1,098.57 per week at the time of the injury but disagree on the number of 
exemptions he is entitled to claim. (Hearing Report).  On the hearing report, Curette 
claims entitlement to four exemptions. (Id.).  Defendants, however, contend he is only 
entitled to one exemption. (Id.).  The crux of the parties’ dispute is whether Curette is 
entitled to claim his three children as dependents.  Curette did not submit any tax 
returns into the hearing record.  He was asked about dependents during both his 
deposition and during the hearing. (Ex. A, depo p. 24; Tr., pp. 65-66).  His testimony is 
confusing and inconsistent. During his deposition, Curette stated that he does not have 
custody of his children; all three live with their mothers, and he only pays child support 
for his oldest child. (Ex. A, depo. pp. 24-25).  However, he thought he might have 
claimed two of them as dependents in 2022. (Id. at 24).  In contrast, during the hearing, 
Curette made three different and contradictory statements about his dependents for 
                                                                 
5 In his report, Dr. Davis asserts that Curette does not qualify for a diagnosis of PTSD because the work 
incident on February 21, 2022 was not traumatic enough. (See Ex. B, p. 24).  The undersigned does not find this 
rationale persuasive.  While it is questionable whether Curette meets all seven of the criteria for PTSD set forth in 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the undersigned does not question 
the traumatic nature of his injury.  (See, e.g., Cl Ex. 1, pp. 16-17).   

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 10 
taxes. (Tr., p. 65).  First, he testified that he could not remember if he claimed any of 
them as dependents in 2022. (Id.).  Then, he testified that he claimed one of his children 
as a dependent on his taxes, but did not remember which one. (Id.).  Still later, he 
stated that the child’s mother claimed her on her taxes. (Id. at 66).  Additionally, in his 
post-hearing brief, Curette points to his 2021 employee withholding certificate as proof 
that he is entitled to claim all three of his children as exemptions.  (See Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Brief, p. 6).  The undersigned, however, notes that Curette claimed 6 
exemptions on this certificate.  (See Cl Ex. 3, p. 31).  Given this confusion and the lack 
of objective evidence in the record, I find Curette failed to prove he was entitled to claim 
his three children as dependents in 2022.  He is entitled to one exemption for the 
February 21, 2022 date of injury; his weekly rate is $674.92.   
Curette alleges entitlement to additional healing period benefits due to an 
underpayment. (See Hearing Report).  According to defendants’ exhibits, Curette was 
paid $6,757.20 in healing period benefits from February 22, 2022, through May 2, 2022. 
(Ex. F, p. 57).  Curette agrees with the payment dates but claims the benefits should 
have been paid at a higher rate.  Under Iowa law, Curette’s weekly rate for the February 
21, 2022 date of injury is $674.92.  Defendants did not underpay his healing period 
benefits.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal relationship exists between 
the injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  The injury must be a 
rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 11 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  Expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, 420 
(Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995).  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-92 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
When an expert's opinion is based upon an incomplete or incorrect history, it is 
not necessarily binding on the commissioner or the court. It is then to be weighed, 
together with other facts and circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder 
of the fact.  Musselman v. Central Telephone Company, 261 Iowa 352, 360, 154 
N.W.2d 128, 133 (1967); Bodish v. Fischer, Inc., 257 Iowa 516, 522, 133 N.W.2d 867, 
870 (1965).  The commissioner as trier of fact has the duty to determine the credibility of 
the witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and 
circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion.  Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
Curette is alleging a work-related injury to his left hand on February 21, 2022, 
and a mental health sequela. (See Petition).  Defendants admit that he sustained a 
work-related injury to his left hand and have paid Dr. Johnson’s impairment rating.6 (See 
Ex. F, p. 57).  They, however, dispute whether Curette sustained a mental health 
sequela. (See Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 6-7).   
“[W]here an accident occurs to an employee in the usual course of his 
employment, the employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and proximately 
flow from the accident.” Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 266 N.W. 480, 482 
(1936).  For example, an employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury 
if the employee sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability 
that is a proximate result of the original injury. Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 
5029834 (App., February 15, 2012).  
A sequela can be an after-effect or secondary effect of an injury. Lewis v. Dee 
Zee Manufacturing, File No. 797154 (Arb., September 11, 1989). One form of sequela is 
an adverse effect from medical treatment for the original injury. Where treatment 
rendered with respect to a compensable injury itself causes further injury, the 
subsequent injury is also compensable. Young v. United Fire & Casualty Co., 256 Iowa 
813, 817, 129 N.W.2d 75, 77 (1964). For example, the death of a claimant who died on 
                                                                 
6 This is the only proposed rating for Curette’s left hand in the hearing record.  

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 12 
the operating table during surgery for a work injury may be compensable, since the 
injury caused the need for surgery. Breeden v. Firestone Tire, File No. 966020 (Arb., 
February 27, 1992). As another example, a claimant who fell as a result of dizziness 
from medication he was taking to treat a work injury was compensated for both the 
original injury and the resulting fall as a sequela of the injury. Hamilton v. Combined Ins. 
of America, File Nos. 854465, 877068 (Arb., February 21, 1991). 
 
A sequela can also take the form of a secondary effect on the claimant's body 
stemming from the original injury. For example, where a leg injury causing shortening of 
the leg in turn alters the claimant's gait, causing mechanical back pain, the back 
condition can be found to be a sequela of the leg injury. Fridlington v. 3M, File No. 
788758 (Arb., November 15, 1991). A sequela can also take the form of a later injury 
that is caused by the original injury. For example, where a leg injury leads to the 
claimant's knee giving out in a grocery store, the resulting fall is compensable as a 
sequela of the leg injury. Taylor v. Oscar Mayer & Co., Ill Iowa Ind. Comm. Rep. 257, 
258 (1982). 
 
Defendants have stipulated that Curette suffered a work-related injury to his left 
hand on February 21, 2022, but dispute whether he sustained a compensable sequela 
to his mental health as a result of that injury. (See Hearing Report; Defendants’ Post-
Hearing Brief, pp. 6-8).  Above, I found the opinions of Curette’s treaters, Shannon 
Rozas, FNP-C, and Angela Huval, LCSW, persuasive and adopted them.  According to 
their treatment records, Curette has sought intermittent treatment for anxiety, 
flashbacks, and nightmares since February 2023.7  At the time of the hearing, more 
than two years after the injury date, he testified that he was still experiencing 
nightmares and panic attacks at work when there are loud unexpected noises. (Tr., pp. 
48-51). In their Post-Hearing Brief, defendants acknowledge that Curette needed to 
seek mental health treatment after his traumatic work injury, but argue that he has not 
established a permanent mental impairment as a result of the work injury. (Defendants’ 
Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 6-9).  As justification for this assertion, defendants point to Dr. 
Davis’ expert report. (Id.).  Dr. Davis’ findings, however, do not support this argument.  
 
According to his report, Dr. Davis diagnosed causally related resolved 
adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety, depression and malingering. (Ex. B, p. 21).  Dr. 
Davis placed Curette at MMI for his related adjustment disorder on April 25, 2023. (Id. at 
24). According to the medical records, on that day, Curette saw Ms. Huval and Ms. 
Rozas for anxiety. (JE 4, pp. 50-55).    Ms. Rozas diagnosed him with an anxiety 
disorder and prescribed buspirone. (Id. at 51).  Thus, the medical records support Dr. 
Davis’ causally related anxiety diagnosis, but they do not support his assertion that the 
disorder was resolved as of April 25, 2023.  According to Dr. Davis’ own report, Curette 
continued to seek treatment for anxiety through at least December 11, 2024, and still 
espoused anxiety symptoms at the hearing in March 2025.  Curette’s treatment records 
and Dr. Davis’ report are substantial evidence that Curette has anxiety as a result of the 
work injury on February 21, 2022.  In their Post-Hearing Brief, defendants appear to 
acknowledge this, but argue Curette still has not met his burden to prove permanent 
impairment from the mental health condition. (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 8-9). 
                                                                 
7 He, however, first requested mental health treatment back in December 2022. (See Cl Ex. 7, pp. 51-52).   

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 13 
They assert Curette’s mental permanency claim is solely based upon Dr. Patra’s report, 
which they label fatally flawed due to its reliance on subjective factors and an 
impairment rating that cites to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Second Edition. (Id.).  However, the Commissioner has previously held that 
a numerical impairment rating is not necessary to prove permanent impairment for a 
mental condition.  
 
In Garcia v. Smithfield Foods, Inc., File No. 1657969.01, 2022 WL 17170655 
(App., Oct. 28, 2022), the Commissioner was tasked with deciding whether a specific 
numerical rating was necessary to prove permanent impairment from a mental injury 
under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Id.).  He determined it was not.  (Id.).  Ratings for 
mental injuries are covered by Chapter 14 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.   See AMA 
Guides, p. 357.  According to the Commissioner, this Chapter 
 
[D]irects the examiner to assess and record the extent of function for 
activities of daily living, social functioning, concentration, and adaptation. 
After assessing and recording the extent of function, the AMA Guides direct 
the examiner to assign a class of impairment, from Class 1, no impairment, 
to Class 5, an extreme impairment precluding useful functioning. Id. at 363. 
The categories recommended as “anchors for the categories of the scale,” 
are: 
1. None means no impairment is noted in the function. 
  
2. Mild implies that any discerned impairment is compatible with most useful 
functioning. 
  
3. Moderate means that the identified impairments are compatible with 
some, but not all, useful functioning. 
  
4. Marked is a level of impairment that significantly impedes useful 
functioning. Taken alone, a marked impairment would not completely 
preclude functioning, but together with marked limitation in another class, it 
might limit useful functioning. 
  
5. Extreme means that the impairment or limitation is not compatible with 
useful function. Extreme impairment in carrying out activities of daily living 
implies complete dependency on another person for care. In the sphere of 
social functioning, extreme impairment implies that the individual engages 
in no meaningful social contact, as with a person who is in a withdrawn, 
catatonic state. An extreme limitation in concentration, persistence, and 
pace means that the individual cannot attend to a conversation or any 
productive task; this might be seen in a person who is in an acute 
confusional state or a person with a complete loss of short-term memory. 
  
A person who cannot tolerate any change at all in routines or in the 
environment, or one who cannot function and who decompensates when 
schedules change in an otherwise structured environment, has an extreme 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 14 
limitation of adaptive functioning and an extreme psychiatric impairment. 
Such an individual might, for example, experience a psychotic episode if a 
meal is not served on time or might have a panic attack if left without a 
companion in any situation. 
  
When assessing the severity of impairment, the AMA Guides direct the 
examiner to examine: (1) the effects of treatment; (2) the effects of 
structured settings; (3) the variability of mental disorders; (4) an assessment 
of workplace function; and (5) the effects of common mental and behavioral 
conditions. Id. at 364-365. 
 
. . . . 
 
Translating these guidelines for rating individual impairment on ordinal 
scales into a method for assigning percentage of impairments, as if valid 
estimates could be made on precisely measured interval scales, cannot be 
done reliably. One cannot be certain that the difference in impairment 
between a rating of mild and moderate is of the same magnitude as the 
difference between moderate and marked. Furthermore, a moderate 
impairment does not imply a 50% limitation in useful functioning, and an 
estimate of moderate impairment in all four categories does not imply a 50% 
impairment of the whole person. Id. at 364. 
 
Id at *12-14.  The Commissioner found that under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, a 
claimant provided proof of impairment when there was expert testimony assessing and 
observing his or her ability to function under each of the listed impairment 
classifications. Id. at *14.   
 
 
In his report, Dr. Patra provides a proposed numerical impairment rating under 
the AMA Guides, Second Edition, but he also goes through each of the four categories 
listed on Table 14-1 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, and assigns Curette a 
classification. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 19).  His report reads as follows: 
 
 
Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, with regards to Mr. Curette’s diagnosis of PTSD, I would 
assign him class 2 on activities of daily living; class 3 on social functioning; 
class 3 on concentration, persistence, and pace; and class 3 on adaption to 
a competitive and dynamic work environment.  
 
It is my opinion, based upon a reasonable degree of medical and psychiatric 
certainty, that pursuant to Table 14-1 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation 
of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Mr. Curette’s Impairment Level from 
the above-diagnosed PTSD would fall at the Moderate Level of Impairment. 
This is based on Mr. Curette’s narrative, where he mentions difficulty doing 
household chores, difficulty managing grocery shopping, difficulty driving, 
difficulty engaging in lifestyle and recreational activities, social isolation, and 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 15 
difficulty managing work responsibilities at his current work, making railway 
tracks, among others.  
 
The AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition 
does not provide numerical impairment, but if one were to look at AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Second Edition, the 
corresponding impairment rating for Moderate Level of Impairment would 
fall between 25% and 50%. Based on Mr. Curette’s current presentation 
with PTSD, this evaluator assigns him a 30% permanent impairment of the 
Whole Person. This impairment rating is related to Mr. Curette’s work injury 
date of February 21, 2022. 
 
(Id.at 19-20). Contrary to defendants’ assertion, Dr. Patra’s impairment opinion complies 
with the requirements of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. While his PTSD diagnosis might 
not have robust support in Curette’s treatment records, there is no reliable evidence in 
the hearing record countering his opinion that Curette’s mental health symptoms/work 
induced anxiety attacks are permanent.  Curette has met his burden to prove 
permanent impairment from his causally-related mental health condition.  
 
In Iowa, when physical trauma causes a mental condition (physical-mental) 
which increases or prolongs disability, the whole disability, including the effects of the 
nervous disorder, is compensable. Gosek v. Garmer and Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 
733 (Iowa 1968). Curette has suffered a mental injury, which is an impairment to the 
body as a whole, therefore his claim will be adjudicated under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v).  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2022) states as follows: 
 In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those described 
or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u”, the compensation shall be paid 
during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability bears 
in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed when the 
injury occurred. A determination of the reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the disability shall take into account the permanent 
partial disability of the employee and the number of years in the future it 
was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the time of the 
injury. If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or would 
receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based 
only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, 
and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity. Notwithstanding 
section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is eligible for compensation 
under this paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated from 
employment by that employer, the award or agreement for settlement for 
benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 16 
reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s 
permanent partial disability. 
Id.  Curette did not return to work for the defendants after the February 21, 2022 injury 
date, nor is there any evidence in the record that defendants offered him work at the 
same or greater wages after the injury. Under the language of Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v), Curette should be compensated industrially.  
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 
587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963). There 
are no weighting guidelines that indicate how each of the factors is to be considered. 
See Christensen v. Hagen, Inc., Vol. 1 No. 3 Industrial Commissioner Decisions, 529 
(App., March 26, 1985). Industrial disability can be equal to, less than, or greater than 
functional impairment. Taylor v. Hummel Insurance Agency, Inc., 2-2, Iowa Industrial 
Comm’r Dec. 736 (1985); Kroll v. Iowa Southern Utilities, 1-4, Iowa Industrial Comm’r 
Dec. 937 (App., 1985); Birmingham v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Company, II, Iowa 
Industrial Comm’r Rep., 39 (App., 1981).  Compensation for permanent partial disability 
shall begin at the termination of the healing period. Compensation shall be paid in 
relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to the body as a whole. Iowa Code § 85.34.  
Curette is 38 years old.  He graduated from high school in 2006, and has taken 
courses in automotive technology at UTI.  In January 2025, Curette obtained his heavy 
equipment operator certification from Southern Louisiana Community College.  Prior to 
his injury, he worked in railroad construction, as a laborer, a foreman and an equipment 
operator.  At the time of his injury, Curette was working for a staffing agency in a 
manufacturing plant.  Since being released by Dr. Johnson, Curette worked briefly on 
an assembly line before returning to railroad construction work as a foreman/operator, 
making more per hour than he did working for the defendants.  At the time of the 
hearing, Curette was not working, however, he had just completed his training program 
at Southern Louisiana Community College and was looking for a new job as a heavy 
equipment operator.  Curette expects to make around $25 or more an hour as a heavy 
equipment operator. Based on his hearing testimony, it appears that Curette can 
physically perform the work of a railroad construction foreman, but struggles mentally 
with the noise of that environment, which can cause him to have panic attacks. Curette 
indicated he also expected to have some issues with performing the work of a heavy 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 17 
equipment operator, due to the joystick and setting, but sought further training in this 
area because it is the type of work he knows.  It is, however, noted that Curette was 
able to successfully complete the hands-on portion of the heavy equipment operator 
certification.   
Considering all the relevant factors for determining the extent of lost earning 
capacity under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, Curette has sustained an 
industrial disability of 20 percent as a result of the February 21, 2022 work injury.8  Five 
hundred weeks multiplied by 20 percent equals 100 weeks.  Curette is entitled to 100 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. According to defendant’s payment report, 
prior to hearing Curette was paid $11,541.13 in permanency benefits. (Ex. F, p. 57).  
Defendants are entitled to credit for these prior paid benefits, as well as credit for any 
permanency benefits paid since the hearing.  
The parties have a dispute as to the proper commencement date of Curette’s 
permanent partial benefits.  Defendants believe the commencement date should be 
April 28, 2022, the date Dr. Johnson placed Curette at MMI for his finger amputations.  
Curette alleges the commencement date is July 3, 2024, the date of his evaluation with 
Dr. Patra. (See Hearing Report).  Iowa Code section 85.34(2) states, “compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically indicated that maximum 
medical improvement from the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment can be determined.”  Curette’s anxiety is causally 
related to the February 21, 2022 work injury.  Curette sought treatment for anxiety after 
April 28, 2022.  Under the language of Iowa Code section 85.34, that is not the proper 
commencement date.  The records show Curette continued to seek mental health 
treatment until through at least the summer of 2024.  Given this, the undersigned 
accepts Curette’s proposed commencement date of July 3, 2024, as the proper 
commencement date for his permanent partial disability benefits.      
The next issue to be addressed is Curette’s entitlement to tax exemptions.  
Curette alleges he is entitled to four exemptions. Defendants contend he is only entitled 
to one exemption. The agency has long established precedent that the actual 
dependents claimed on the workers’ income tax return controls when determining how 
many exemptions a claimant is entitled to claim for purposes of the weekly 
compensation rate. Webber v. West Side Transport, Inc., 1278549 (App., December 20, 
2002); DeRaad v. Fred's Plumbing and Heating, No. 1134532 (App., January 16, 
2002), Rhoades v. Torgerson Construction Co., No. 1012085 (App., January 31, 
1995), Keeling v. Cedar Rapids Community Schools, No. 891809 (App., February 26, 
1993). The number of exemptions claimed is based upon tax law because tax law is 
what is utilized to calculate the claimant’s spendable weekly earnings. See Iowa Code § 
                                                                 
8 The undersigned acknowledges that this figure is less than the functional impairment provided by Dr. 
Patra.  Functional impairment is just one element considered in determining an individual’s industrial disability; it is 
not the equivalent of industrial disability.  Even though Curette continues to suffer from anxiety and situational panic 
attacks, he was able to return to full time railroad work after the injury, making more than he did at the time of the 
injury.  He has also successfully obtained a certificate to work as a heavy equipment operator, a job he can physically 
perform that makes around $25.00 an hour.  This evidence shows that he retains the qualifications, skills and ability 
to find suitable work after the injury.  

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 18 
85.61(6)(a)(b) and (9).  This presumption is rebuttable.  However, the party seeking to 
overcome the presumption must present sufficient evidence at hearing to rebut the 
presumption.  Curette did not submit his 2022 tax returns into evidence.  Thus, the 
presumption does not apply and it is Curette’s burden to show that he could legally 
claim his three children as dependents on his 2022 tax returns.   
At the hearing, Curette’s testimony was contradictory.  During his deposition, he 
stated that he does not have custody of his children; all three live with their mothers, 
and he only pays child support for his oldest child. (Ex. A, depo. pp. 24-25).  However, 
he thought he might have claimed two of them as dependents in 2022. (Id. at 24).  In 
contrast, during the hearing, Curette made three different and contradictory statements 
about his dependents for taxes. (Tr., p. 65).  First, he testified that he could not 
remember if he claimed any of them as dependents in 2022. (Id.).  Then, he testified 
that he claimed one of his children as a dependent on his taxes, but did not remember 
which one. (Id.).  Still later, he stated that the child’s mother claimed her on her taxes. 
(Id. at 66).  Given this testimony, Curette is not entitled to claim exemptions for any of 
his children.  According to the Internal Revenue Service, both Curette and the children’s 
mother cannot simultaneously claim them as dependents in the same tax year.  See 
U.S. Department of the Treasury. Internal Revenue Service (2022). Publication 501: 
Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing Information (Cat. No. 15000U). Retrieved 
from https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/p501--2022.pdf.  Additionally, in order for Curette’s 
children to qualify as dependents for tax purposes, he must show the following: (1) the 
child was a student under twenty-four years of age, (2) the child lived with Curette for 
more than half the year, (3) the child did not provide more than half his or her own 
support for the year, and (4) the child did not file a joint tax return for the year.  See id. 
(emphasis added).  Based on his prior testimony, the children live with their mothers. 
Curette has not met his burden to prove he is entitled to exemptions for his three 
children.  Curette is entitled to one exemption and his weekly rate is $674.92.   
Curette seeks payment of the medical expenses listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 4. 
For all compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer must 
“furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  
Claimant’s Exhibit 4 shows Curette received bills from Allen Memorial Hospital 
and Cedar Valley Medical Specialists for treatment on February 21, 2021; Mercy 
Physical Therapy for treatment dates from April 5, 2022 through May 19, 2022, and 
Louisiana Health Care Practitioners for visits on February 27, 2023; April 14, 2023; April 
25, 2023; and May 23, 2024. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 38). Above I determined that Curette suffered 
a mental health sequela as a result of the February 21, 2022 work injury.  The treatment 
Curette received at Allen Memorial Hospital, Cedar Valley Medical Specialists, and 
Mercy Physical Therapy was for his left-hand injury. Additionally, on the above listed 
dates he received care for his causally-related mental health condition.  The listed 
medical visits were causally related and necessitated by the February 21, 2022 date of 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 19 
injury.9 It appears that most of the bills listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 4 have already been 
paid. (Id. at 38-43).  Curette is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid 
the treatment costs; otherwise, he is entitled to an order directing the responsible 
defendants to make payments to the provider. See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463, 
464-465 (Iowa 1988).   
Curette is also asserting a claim for alternate medical care. (See Hearing 
Report).  In his Post-Hearing Brief, Curette requests counseling and medication 
management for his causally-related mental health condition. (Claimant’s Post-Hearing 
Brief, p. 15).  He also requests treatment for his left hand, if it worsens in the future. 
(Id.). Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care .... The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Id.; see also, Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436-37 (Iowa 
1997). 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195-97 (Iowa 2003)). “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), our 
legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the competing 
                                                                 
9 In their Post-Hearing Brief, defendants also argue that Curette is not entitled to reimbursement for his 
treatment at Louisiana Health Care Practitioners because it was unauthorized.  (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 
15).  As stated above, this defense is no longer available to defendants. On January 18, 2023, defendants filed an 
official answer with this Agency denying liability for Curette’s mental health sequela.  (See Cl Ex. 7).  Apparently, 
defendant’s counsel also emailed Curette’s counsel on the same day stating they were not actually denying his 
mental health sequela and offering a return visit to Dr. Johnson, his hand surgeon. (See Ex. E, p. 53).  Defendants do 
not get to talk out of both sides of their mouth.  They do not get to file a denial with the Agency and thereby avoid 
an official decision addressing the merits of Curette’s request for mental health care, while also insisting they are 
not denying liability for the condition behind the scenes and attempting to keep control of his care for that condition.  
It is notable that defendants did not actually make an appointment for Curette with Dr. Johnson to request a referral 
for mental health care.  Nor have they scheduled care with any other provider or filed an Amended Answer to 
Curette’s Alternate Care Petition.  In short, the evidence shows that they have never wavered from their initial 
liability denial.  Given this, a lack of authorization defense is not available to them.  

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 20 
interests of their employers.” Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing Bell Bros. Heating 
and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 202, 207 (Iowa 2010); IBP v. Harker, 
633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 2001)).  
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury. Iowa Code § 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975). An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 18, 1988). Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, June 17, 1986). 
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.” Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) (emphasis in original). Such 
employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care - 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See e.g., 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995). An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer 
and if the parties cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, 
upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order the 
care.” Iowa Code § 85.27(4). “Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is 
a question of fact.” Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123; see also Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436. As 
the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the employee bears the burden of 
proving that the authorized care is unreasonable. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124; Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436. Because “the employer’s obligation under 
the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured 
employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough 
to find such care unreasonable. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
Curette is seeking ongoing mental health treatment with a doctor and/or a 
therapist in Louisiana near his home, including counseling and medication management 
as recommended by Dr. Patra.10 (Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 15). In this case, 
                                                                 
10In his Post-Hearing Brief, Curette also requests future treatment for his left hand. (Claimant’s Post-Hearing 
Brief, p. 15).  A review of the hearing record does not reveal any treatment recommendations from Dr. Johnson that 
still need to be completed.  Given this, a determination for future medical care is not ripe.  Curette’s request for 
alternate medical care for his left hand is denied at this time.  This determination does not change defendants’ future 
responsibility for medical care.  Defendants remain liable for all future care reasonably necessary because of the 
February 21, 2022 injury date.  

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 21 
Curette’s anxiety symptoms are causally related to the work injury on February 21, 
2022.  At his last appointments, Ms. Rozas prescribed Wellbutrin and Ms. Huval 
recommended a course of psychotherapy.  These recommendations echo Dr. Patra’s 
suggested future care. The need for this care is related to the work injury.  
Curette has established by a preponderance of the evidence that there is 
reasonable and necessary treatment that can and should be offered to him.  Curette 
has proven he is entitled to alternate care, specifically treatment for his anxiety.  
Defendants shall designate a treater near Curette’s residence in Louisiana to provide 
that care. 
Curette requests reimbursement for the IME performed by Dr. Patra.  Iowa Code 
section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for a subsequent examination by a 
physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has 
previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial 
evaluation is too low. The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of 
the plain language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the 
employee to obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an 
evaluation of permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained 
physician.  Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015). Dr. Patra performed his IME exam on July 3, 2024. (Cl Ex. 1).  His report was 
issued on January 30, 2025. (Id.).  Dr. Davis, defendants’ expert, however, did not 
physically evaluate Curette for permanent mental impairment until January 28, 2025, 
and his report was not issued until February 24, 2025.  Given this, Curette is not entitled 
to reimbursement of Dr. Patra’s IME report under Iowa Code section 85.39.  
In Young, the Supreme Court noted that in cases where Iowa Code section 85.39 
is not triggered to allow for IME reimbursement, a claimant can still be reimbursed 
expenses associated with the preparation of a written report as a cost under 
administrative rule 876 IAC 4.33 because the report is used as evidence in lieu of the 
doctor’s testimony.  Young, 867 N.W.2d at 846-47.  However, only the cost of the report 
can be assessed, not the underlying exam or treatment. Id. 
Iowa Administrative Rule 876-4.33 outlines what costs may be assessed at 
hearing. It provides, as follows:  
Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 22 
reviewing health service disputes. 
876 IAC 4.33; see also Iowa Code § 10A.328. Under the language of the rule, costs are 
assessed at the deputy’s discretion. 876 IAC 4.33 
 
Curette provided a breakdown of Dr. Patra’s IME bill in his exhibits.  According to 
that breakdown, Dr. Patra charged $2,790.00 for drafting his IME report. (Cl Ex. 5, p. 
45).  Curette was successful in this action—he was awarded additional permanent 
indemnity benefits.  I conclude it is reasonable to assess the cost of Dr. Patra’s IME 
report.  Curette also incurred costs of $125.00 for the filing fee of his petition and $85.25 
for his deposition transcript. (Id. at 44, 46).  I conclude it is reasonable to assess his 
filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  I found Curette’s deposition transcript helpful and 
cited to it in this decision. Given this, it is appropriate to assess the cost of Curette’s 
deposition transcript pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
 
I assess costs totaling $3,000.25.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred (100) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of six hundred seventy-four and 92/100 dollars ($674.92) 
per week commencing on July 3, 2024.  Defendants are entitled to a credit for all prior 
paid permanency benefits.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.    
If claimant has paid for the medical expenses listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 4, he is 
entitled to reimbursement of those expenses.  If he has not paid the expenses listed in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 4, defendants are ordered to pay the listed providers directly. 
Defendants shall promptly select and authorize a local medical provider to furnish 
claimant treatment for his causally related anxiety, including therapy and medication 
management.  Defendants shall retain the right to select and authorize a medical 
provider of their choosing to provide the above ordered medical care provided 
defendants authorize this care promptly. 
Defendants shall pay costs of three thousand and 25/100 dollars ($3,000.25).  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 

CURETTE V. AAA AIRPORTER SERVICES 
Page 23 
Signed and filed this __5th __ day of September, 2025. 
 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Rachael Neff  
(via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
