Case Number: 5067813.02
Case Title:  WILLIAMS, RICHIE V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Williams, Richie-5067813.02.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 22-2075 
Filed December 20, 2023 
 
 
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND, 
 
Petitioner-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
RICHIE WILLIAMS, 
 
Respondent-Appellee/Cross-Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Joseph W. Seidlin, 
Judge. 
 
 
An employer appeals the district court’s ruling on judicial review of the 
workers’ compensation commissioner decision.  An employee cross-appeals the 
district court’s ruling affirming that he is not entitled to healing period benefits.  
REVERSED AND REMANDED ON APPEAL; AFFIRMED ON CROSS-APPEAL.  
 
 
Peter J. Thill and Brandon W. Lobberecht of Betty, Neuman & McMahon, 
P.L.C., Davenport, for appellant/cross-appellee. 
 
Andrew M. Giller of Rush & Nicholson, P.L.C., Cedar Rapids, for 
appellee/cross-appellant. 
 
 
Considered by Ahlers, P.J., Badding, J., and Danilson, S.J.* 
 
*Senior judge assigned by order pursuant to Iowa Code section 602.9206 
(2023). 

 
2
AHLERS, Presiding Judge. 
In 2018, while working at Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), Richie Williams 
fell on his right side and sustained an injury.  Williams eventually underwent 
surgery to his right shoulder.  After recovering from surgery, Williams returned to 
work without restrictions. 
 
Williams filed a claim for workers’ compensation benefits for his injury.  He 
sought industrial disability benefits based on a claim that his injuries occurred 
proximal to the glenohumeral joint, so the injury was to his body as a whole rather 
than a scheduled shoulder injury under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2018).  He 
also sought healing period benefits for days he called in sick to work before his 
surgery.  Following a hearing, the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner 
found that the injury was to a scheduled member (i.e., the shoulder) rather than to 
Williams’s whole body and he was not entitled to healing period benefits for days 
when he called in sick to work.1  Both parties appealed to the workers’ 
compensation commissioner on multiple issues, and the commissioner affirmed 
the deputy commissioner’s decision.   
 
Both parties sought judicial review of the commissioner’s decision through 
Iowa Code chapter 17A.2  Williams sought reversal of the commissioner’s decision 
that his injury was limited to a scheduled shoulder injury and that he was not 
entitled to healing period benefits.  ADM argued that Williams failed to preserve 
 
1 The hearing involved other issues that were resolved by the deputy 
commissioner, but we confine our discussion to the issues that are raised on 
appeal. 
2 The parties raised several issues, but we again confine our discussion to the 
issues raised on appeal. 

 
3
error on his challenge to the scheduled nature of his injury because he took a 
different tack on judicial review when claiming his injury extended to his whole 
body.  The district court determined the issue was preserved and reversed the 
commissioner, remanding to the agency to make further disability findings as to all 
body parts affected.  The district court affirmed the commissioner’s decision 
denying Williams’s claim for healing period benefits for his sick days.   
 
ADM appeals, arguing Williams failed to preserve error on the issue of 
whether the injury extended to his whole body.  Williams cross-appeals, arguing 
the district court erred by failing to reverse the commissioner’s decision denying 
him healing period benefits. 
 
Iowa Code chapter 17A guides our review of agency decision-making.  
Chavez v. M.S. Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 666 (Iowa 2022).  We assess whether 
we come to the same conclusions as the district court.  Id.  When reviewing 
decisions of the workers’ compensation commissioner interpreting Iowa Code 
chapter 85, we review for correction of errors at law rather than deferring to the 
agency’s interpretation “because the legislature has not clearly vested the 
commissioner with authority to interpret that chapter.”  Id.  That said, “[w]e accept 
the commissioner’s factual findings when supported by substantial evidence.”  Id. 
(quoting Gumm v. Easter Seal Soc’y of Iowa, 943 N.W.2d 23, 28 (Iowa 2020)).  
“Evidence is substantial if a reasonable mind would find it adequate to reach the 
same conclusion.”  Evenson v. Winnebago Indus., Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 366 (Iowa 
2016) (quoting Coffey v. Mid Seven Transp. Co., 831 N.W.2d 81, 89 (Iowa 2013)).  
Evidence is not insubstantial just because it could lead reasonable minds to 
different conclusions.  Id. 

 
4
I. 
Error Preservation 
 
We begin with ADM’s claim that Williams did not preserve error on his 
argument that he is entitled to body-as-a-whole benefits because he suffered 
injuries to his shoulder and arm.  This issue stems from the differences in 
compensation for injuries to scheduled body parts and unscheduled body parts.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)‒(u) provides a schedule of injuries to specified body 
parts and how they are compensated, while section 85.34(2)(v) covers injuries that 
do not fall under the scheduled-member subsections.3  See Chavez, 972 N.W.2d 
at 666–67 (describing the difference between scheduled injuries and unscheduled 
injuries).  In addition to providing a greater potential number of weekly benefits 
than any scheduled injury, section 85.34(2)(v) also calls for disability to be based 
on the worker’s industrial disability, which is based on loss of earning capacity 
rather than strictly functional impairment.  Id. 
 
To better understand the issue over error preservation, a timeline in the 
development of this case, legislative amendments, and interpretation of those 
amendments is useful.  Prior to 2017, shoulder injuries were considered 
unscheduled injuries to the body as a whole.  See Second Inj. Fund v. Nelson, 544 
N.W.2d 258, 269 (Iowa 1995) (“We have previously held that an injury to a joint 
such as a hip or shoulder should be treated as an injury to the body as a whole, 
not as a scheduled injury.”).  However, “[i]n 2017, the legislature amended 
 
3 Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) provides: “For the loss of a shoulder, weekly 
compensation during four hundred weeks.”  And Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
provides: “In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those [previously 
described,] the compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation 
to five hundred weeks . . . .” 

 
5
section 85.34(2) to add ‘shoulder’ to the list of scheduled injuries and set the 
benefits schedule for ‘the loss of a shoulder’ to ‘weekly compensation during four 
hundred weeks.’”  Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 667 (citation omitted).  But the legislation 
did not define “shoulder.”  Id.   
The lack of definition in the new legislation led to legal tussles over what 
constitutes a “shoulder.”  Resolution of those tussles started to shape the definition 
of the term, beginning with two decisions by the workers’ compensation 
commissioner in Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883, 2020 WL 
5893577 (Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n Sept. 29, 2020), and Chavez v. MS 
Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270, 2020 WL 6037534 (Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm’n Sept. 30, 2020).  In Deng, the commissioner determined that the term 
“shoulder” in section 85.34(2)(n) is not limited to the glenohumeral joint but also 
includes the muscles that make up the rotator cuff.  Deng, 2020 WL 5893577, 
at *10.  In Chavez, the commissioner built on the foundation laid in Deng and 
concluded that a labral tear, a subacromial decompression, or both would be 
injuries to the “shoulder.”  Chavez, 2020 WL 6037534, at *3–4. 
The commissioner’s decision in Chavez posed a problem for Williams, 
because, as he admitted in his brief to the deputy, the injured parts of his body “fall 
within the [c]ommissioner’s definition of the shoulder [the commissioner] 
articulated in Chavez.”  Of course, having the same injury that was found to be a 
shoulder injury in Chavez hampered Williams’s ability to argue before the agency 
that his injuries were unscheduled injuries to his body as a whole.  To try to 
overcome that problem, Williams took one and only one tack.  He argued the 
commissioner’s Chavez decision on the issue of what body parts constitute the 

 
6
shoulder was “wrongly decided” and he “hereby preserves this issue for appeal.”  
After losing this argument before the deputy due to the commissioner’s Chavez 
decision, Williams appealed to the commissioner and repeated his argument on 
this issue verbatim. 
After briefs were submitted to the commissioner on intra-agency appeal, the 
supreme court filed its decision ruling on the commissioner’s interpretation of the 
term “shoulder” in Chavez.  972 N.W.2d at 667–68.  The supreme court agreed 
with the commissioner’s interpretation and held that “shoulder” is not limited to the 
glenohumeral joint but also includes “all of the muscles, tendons, and ligaments 
that are essential for the shoulder to function.”  Id. at 668.  In Williams’s case, the 
commissioner affirmed the deputy’s decision limiting Williams to benefits from a 
scheduled shoulder injury. 
As Williams pursued judicial review of the commissioner’s ruling, his entire 
argument before the agency on the extent of his injury—that the commissioner’s 
Chavez decision was wrongly decided—was dead in the water due to the supreme 
court’s decision on judicial review.  So, Williams charted an entirely new course.  
He argued that he sustained an injury to both his shoulder and his arm.  This new 
argument triggered the error-preservation issue here. 
The district court found that Williams preserved this issue for judicial review 
because the parties have always disputed whether Williams’s injury qualified as a 
scheduled-member shoulder injury or a body-as-a-whole industrial disability.  We 
respectfully disagree.  “[J]udicial review of administrative action is limited to 
questions considered by the agency.”  Pruss v. Cedar Rapids/Hiawatha 
Annexation Special Loc. Comm., 687 N.W.2d 275, 285 (Iowa 2004).  To preserve 

 
7
error on an issue, Williams needed to raise the issue during the agency 
proceedings and not for the first time during judicial review.  Staff Mgmt. v. 
Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d 640, 647 (Iowa 2013) (“We have held a party preserves error 
on an issue before an agency if a party raises the issue in the agency proceeding 
before the agency issues a final decision and both sides have had an opportunity 
to address the issue.”).  The question is whether Williams’s argument that the injury 
extends to the body as a whole because he suffered impairment in both his arm 
and shoulder is a wholly new argument or simply “additional ammunition for the 
same argument.”  See JBS Swift & Co. v. Ochoa, 888 N.W.2d 887, 893 (Iowa 
2016). 
 
Neither party introduced evidence to support or rebut the contention that the 
elbow/arm impairment was separate from the shoulder impairment, nor did either 
party make any arguments before the agency to support or rebut the contention 
that the elbow/arm impairment should cause the injury to be classified as an 
industrial disability.  See Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d at 647 (recognizing error is 
preserved if there is a final ruling and both sides have been able to address the 
issue).  The argument must be made specifically enough “to alert the court and 
opposing counsel to the claims he now raises.”  Pharaoh-Carlson v. Hy-Vee, Inc., 
No. 13-1446, 2015 WL 566666, at *4 (Iowa Ct. App. Feb. 11, 2015).  The specifics 
of Williams’s argument are factually different such that neither the agency nor ADM 
were alerted to it until it was raised on judicial review.  On judicial review, the district 
court found error on an issue the agency never actually considered.  And even if 
that was a mistake on the part of the agency, it was Williams’s responsibility to 
obtain a ruling on the issue.  See KFC Corp. v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue, 792 N.W.2d 

 
8
308, 329 (Iowa 2010) (“When an agency fails to address an issue in its ruling and 
a party fails to point out the issue in a motion for rehearing, we find that error on 
these issues has not been preserved.”). 
 
This is not an instance where Williams clearly made the argument but 
simply failed to cite a specific legal authority.  See Ochoa, 888 N.W.2d at 893.  Nor 
is it a case where it is clear that he was arguing the issue but did not specifically 
name the theory upon which he relied.  See Off. of Consumer Advoc. v. Iowa State 
Com. Comm’n, 465 N.W.2d 280, 283‒84 (Iowa 1991) (finding error was preserved 
when a party raised a Fourteenth Amendment due process claim even though it 
never specifically mentioned the due process clause because it could not have 
been arguing anything other than procedural unfairness).  Rather, it is a case of 
Williams finding an alternative way to make his case late in the process and trying 
to dress it up as a preserved issue.  We are not persuaded that Williams raised 
this issue before the agency.  Thus, we find the district court erred in deciding the 
issue was preserved for judicial review.  Cf. Schoenberger v. Acuity, No. 22-1613, 
2023 WL 2908622, at *2–3 (Iowa Ct. App. Apr. 12, 2023) (finding error preserved 
where claimant raised his industrial disability argument based on the combination 
of shoulder and arm injuries on appeal to the commissioner).  As a result, we 
reverse on ADM’s appeal and remand for entry of an order denying Williams’s 
petition for judicial review as it relates to challenging the commissioner’s ruling that 
his injury is limited to a scheduled shoulder injury. 
II. 
Healing Period Benefits 
 
Williams called in sick from work several times due to his shoulder pain and 
sought healing period benefits for those days.  The commissioner denied his 

 
9
request, and Williams seeks reversal of the commissioner’s decision denying him 
healing period benefits. 
 
From the date Williams injured his shoulder until he underwent surgery for 
the injury, Williams worked at ADM under restrictions.  The deputy commissioner 
found that ADM did not provide a formal or written offer of suitable work but instead 
simply had Williams find work to do within his restrictions.  At least once, Williams 
was reprimanded for not working when he was unable to find something he could 
do.  During this period when Williams had returned to work under restrictions, he 
experienced shoulder pain and called in sick, resulting in him missing fifty-two days 
of work.   
 
The commissioner4 found the work ADM provided to Williams suitable and 
that Williams “does not have license to just call in when his injured body part is 
particularly sore and then later claim healing period for those dates.”  The 
commissioner also addressed ADM’s failure to put the offer of work in writing.  The 
commissioner determined that, in an instance where the employee returned to 
work, the failure to provide a written offer of work does not give the employee the 
option to collect healing period benefits for days the employee does not feel well 
enough to come in.   
 
Williams insists ADM did not meet its responsibility to offer him suitable work 
for two reasons.  First, he claims the work was not suitable because it is not clear 
 
4 Because the commissioner adopted the deputy commissioner’s proposed ruling, 
we treat the two decisions as one and refer to them collectively as the 
commissioner’s ruling.  See Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 
556 n.2 (Iowa 2010) (following the same method for referencing the two decisions 
of the agency). 

 
10 
from the record that Williams was able to avoid work outside his restrictions.  
Second, he points out that the offer was not in writing, as required by 
section 85.33(3)(b).  As part of his argument, he contends his return to work should 
not preclude him from collecting healing period benefits for his sick days.   
 
As to Williams’s first argument, substantial evidence supports the 
commissioner’s finding that the work offered to Williams was suitable.  See Neal 
v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 519, 524 (Iowa 2012) (noting that the 
question whether an employer offered suitable work is ordinarily a fact question, 
the resolution of which must be affirmed if supported by substantial evidence).  
ADM allowed Williams to return to work while only working within his restrictions.  
Williams’s supervisor, whom the commissioner found credible, explained the light-
duty jobs given to Williams during this time.  Williams argues that the reprimand 
he received for sitting around when he couldn’t find a task to do raises the question 
of whether he was allowed to avoid work outside his restrictions.  But nothing in 
the record suggests ADM ever asked Williams to do anything outside his 
restrictions.  We cannot find lack of substantial evidence that Williams was offered 
suitable work simply because one could look at the reprimand and perhaps 
conclude that the work offered to Williams was not within his restrictions.  See 
Evenson, 881 N.W.2d at 366 (“An agency’s decision does not lack substantial 
evidence because inconsistent conclusions may be drawn from the same 
evidence.” (quoting Coffey, 831 N.W.2d at 89)).  The evidence in the record is 
sufficient to allow a reasonable factfinder to conclude that ADM offered Williams 
suitable work.  See id.   

 
11 
 
We also do not find it appropriate to permit ADM’s failure to put the offer of 
work in writing to lead to the extreme result Williams requests.  Section 85.33(3)(a) 
precludes an employee from receiving healing period benefits if the employer 
offers suitable work and the employee refuses.  Under section 85.33(3)(b), the 
offer of work must be in writing.  The employee’s refusal must also be in writing.  
Iowa Code § 85.33(3)(b).  Williams suggests that because the offer was not in 
writing, ADM cannot now argue that it offered suitable work.  He reasons that 
because the offer of work was not in writing, it is not necessary to address whether 
he refused the work and we should reverse the denial of healing period benefits.  
But we find this section simply adds a hurdle to an employer’s defense—a defense 
not applicable here due to Williams’s acceptance of the work.  See Cent. Iowa 
Fencing, Ltd. v. Hays, No. 21-1530, 2022 WL 2826011, at *6 (Iowa Ct. App. July 
20, 2022) (holding that an employer may not defend against a claim for healing 
period benefits by asserting that the employee refused work when the offer of work 
was not in writing).  Because ADM is not claiming Williams refused work, it is not 
defending his claim for healing period benefits on that basis.  Williams’s undisputed 
return to work made any failure to put the offer of work in writing inconsequential.  
The writing requirement does not independently create grounds for an employee 
to recover healing period benefits, as Williams’s argument suggests.   
 
Regardless, Williams is only entitled to benefits for the days he did not work 
if we find he was otherwise eligible to receive them.  But Williams returned to work, 
and, under section 85.34(1), doing so cuts off his entitlement to healing period 

 
12 
benefits.5  Williams urges us not to use his return to work as a barrier to granting 
him healing period benefits.  He suggests that to find his return to work 
discontinued his healing period would create unfair results by punishing employees 
who accept unsuitable work and allow employers to act unscrupulously.  But the 
statute is clear that an employee is entitled to healing period benefits only until the 
employee returns to work.6  We cannot read in an exception to the statute to avoid 
potential undesirable outcomes.  See Goche v. WMG, L.C., 970 N.W.2d 860, 866 
(Iowa 2022) (“[I]t is not our role to rewrite the Iowa statute in the guise of 
interpretation.”).  We come to the same conclusion as the commissioner that, upon 
returning to work, Williams no longer qualified for healing period benefits. 
 
Because substantial evidence supports the finding that ADM offered 
Williams suitable work, Williams accepted that work, and Williams returned to 
work, he cannot now argue for healing period benefits for the days he called in sick 
following his return to work.  Therefore, on cross-appeal, we affirm the district 
court’s decision denying Williams’s petition for judicial review of the 
commissioner’s decision denying additional healing period benefits. 
 
5 Iowa Code section 85.34(1) states: 
 
If an employee has suffered a personal injury causing 
permanent partial disability for which compensation is payable as 
provided in subsection 2 of this section, the employer shall pay to the 
employee compensation for a healing period, as provided in section 
85.37, beginning on the first day of disability after the injury, and until 
the employee has returned to work or it is medically indicated that 
significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated or until the 
employee is medically capable of returning to employment 
substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, whichever occurs first. 
6 Of course, a new healing period as a result of additional treatment or 
reaggravating the injury is not precluded.  See Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 
N.W.2d 1, 8 (Iowa 2012). 

 
13 
III. 
Conclusion 
 
On ADM’s appeal issue, we reverse and remand.  We reverse that part of 
the district court’s decision granting Williams’s petition for judicial review 
challenging the commissioner’s decision to compensate Williams for a scheduled 
shoulder injury only.  We remand to the district court to issue an order denying 
Williams’s petition for judicial review on that issue. 
 
As to Williams’s cross-appeal, we affirm the district court’s decision denying 
Williams’s petition for judicial review challenging the commissioner’s decision to 
deny additional healing period benefits.  Costs on appeal are assessed to Williams. 
 
REVERSED AND REMANDED ON APPEAL; AFFIRMED ON CROSS-
APPEAL. 
