Case Number: 21005854.01
Case Title:  LANE, STEPHANIE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lane Stephanie - 21005854.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
STEPHANIE LANE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 21005854.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
 
  :                           
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
   D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :                       
 
Defendant. 
  : 
           Head Note No.:  3200 
 
 
  :                            
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Stephanie Lane filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  The claim originally 
included her employer, East Penn Manufacturing, and it’s insurance carrier.  On May 6, 
2024, the agency approved a settlement of the claim against East Penn.  The claimant 
was represented by Dillon Besser.  The Fund was represented by Adrienne Williamson. 
The matter came on for video hearing on May 23, 2024, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh originating in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The 
record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 6; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 
5; and Fund Exhibit AA.  The claimant testified at hearing.  Carin Eckhoff served as the 
court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on June 10, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained a first qualifying loss to the left leg on or about 
January 1, 2021, and, if so, the extent of the first loss. The Fund specifically 
denied that the claimant has sustained a first qualifying loss and therefore 
invocation of the Second Injury Fund Act is inappropriate. 
2. If Second Injury Fund benefits are allowed, what is the nature and extent of 
claimant’s industrial disability? 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jan-03  11:08:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
1. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment to her right arm on or about April 28, 2021. 
2. The permanent functional loss or impairment from claimant’s April 28, 2021, 
work injury is 7 percent of the right arm. 
3. The parties stipulate that the commencement date for any permanency 
benefits would be May 19, 2022. 
4. The Fund is entitled to a credit against any award of 21.9 weeks. 
5. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
6. Medical expenses, temporary disability and rate are not an issue in this case. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Stephanie Steenbock (f/k/a Lane) was 33 years old as of the date of hearing.  At 
the time of her work injury, she was unmarried and her name was Stephanie Lane.  Her 
petition was filed under the name Stephanie Lane and the parties refer to her in briefing 
as Stephanie Lane.  I will refer to her as “Stephanie” in this decision. 
Stephanie lives in Oelwein, Iowa, with her husband and four-year-old daughter.  
She graduated from high school in 2009 and La’James Cosmetology School in 2010.  
Her work history is varied and interesting.  She has worked as a hair stylist, beverage 
attendant, corrections officer, call center salesperson, hardware technician and 
assembler.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 4, pages 22-23)  She testified that she found the 
assembly work to be the most rewarding of all of her jobs to that point.  She appreciated 
the better pay, the people she worked with and the physicality of the work.  (Transcript 
pages 13-14)  Stephanie testified live and under oath during the video hearing.  Her 
testimony is highly credible.  Her answers were short, responsive and straightforward.  
Her demeanor was serious and otherwise appropriate.  Her testimony was highly 
consistent with other relevant portions of the record. 
The parties did an excellent job of narrowing the issues and presenting the facts 
at hearing.  There is no question that Stephanie sustained a work injury for East Penn 
Manufacturing (hereafter “East Penn”) on or about April 28, 2021.  The parties have 
stipulated that this occurred and, after a course of treatment, resulted in a 7 percent 
impairment to her right arm.  The fighting issue in this case is whether prior to this, she 
had sustained a “loss” to her left leg. 
Stephanie first sought treatment for her left knee from her primary care clinic on 
January 5, 2021.  She testified credibly that she had been experiencing these 
symptoms for several months leading up to her first medical visit.   
Patient presents with knee pain involving the left knee.  Onset of 
symptoms was several months ago.  Inciting event:  none known.  Current 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
symptoms include giving out, pain located anterior and posterior, popping 
sensation, stiffness and swelling.  Pain is aggravated by any weight 
bearing, going up and down stairs, inactivity, kneeling, lateral movements, 
rising after sitting, standing walking and sleeping.  States the pain is 
radiating and shooting up into her thigh and gluteal area.  Patient has had 
no prior knee problems.  Evaluation to date:  none.  Treatment to date: ice, 
OTC analgesics which are not very effective, rest and elevation, heat, 
OTC cooling pain rubs. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1)  The clinic performed x-rays, adjusted her medications and provided an 
Ace wrap.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
On January 11, 2021, Stephanie followed up with her clinic.  She was diagnosed 
with an osteochondral defect of the femoral condyle.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7)  An MRI was 
performed and physical therapy recommended.  She was provided with some medical 
restrictions.  The same day, she had her preemployment physical for East Penn which 
noted a “preexisting L knee problem encompassing stiffness …”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 14)  She 
passed her physical although East Penn had her complete physical therapy and be 
cleared to work before she could start working.  (Tr., p. 19) 
Two months later, on March 9, 2021, her primary care clinic released her to work 
without restrictions.  The following is documented.   
Steph presents to discuss being released to pursue employment at this 
time.  This was instated when she developed severe left knee pain with 
large joint effusion.  She did have a x-ray on January 5 for this which 
showed a subchondral lucency which was suspicious for an insufficiency 
fracture.  Follow-up MRI on January 8 revealed a 7 x 11 mm 
osteochondral defect of the medial femoral condyle without evidence of 
instability and moderate joint effusion.  As her pain and swelling were 
improving with medication, patient was referred to physical therapy and 
has made significant strides since that time.  She last visited with them on 
March 1.  At that time, patient states that she was released to pursue 
weight lifting, something she enjoys.  Notes from her physical therapy 
office indicate that she was 90% improved since the beginning of physical 
therapy which was on 19 January.  Further documentation from physical 
therapy on 5 March indicates that they did release her fully.  Staff did 
indicate that she would continue the exercises at home.  Today, patient 
denies any pain whatsoever.  She has had no swelling, warmth or 
redness.  She is able to squat, kneel, left [sic], twist and be on her feet as 
long as she needs to without pain or other symptoms.  She has continued 
exercises at home.  Patient is hopeful to start her work at East Penn on 
Monday. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8)  She was then released to return to work without restrictions 
immediately. 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
Stephanie testified about all of this in some detail at hearing.  She testified that 
when she attended the March 9, 2021, appointment with her primary care clinic she 
was, in fact, not fully healed.  (Tr., p. 18)  She had to obtain a full work release to begin 
work with East Penn, a position she desired.  (Tr., pp. 18-20) 
She began working as an assembler for East Penn on March 29, 2021.  She was 
paid $18.50 per hour.  As an assembler, she was required to stand, stoop, bend, squat, 
twist and occasionally lift up to 75 pounds.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 24; Tr., p. 20)  The work was 
fairly physical and involved filling heavy, assembled batteries with acid.  (Tr., p. 19)  
After she started working, which included standing all day, her knee symptoms 
worsened.  Stephanie testified that she did not complain about the increase in her 
symptoms because she was just starting a new job.  “I didn’t want to lose my job.”  (Tr., 
p. 20)  She testified that she had continually treated her knee with ice, home exercises 
and a topical gel for the pain.  (Tr., p. 21) 
On April 28, 2021, she sustained her stipulated work injury.  On that date she 
was training on a standing forklift.  The front of her right arm became stuck between the 
driving shaft of the forklift and a four-tiered rack of batteries.  (Tr., p. 22)  She was 
immediately taken to occupational health for evaluation.  She had sustained a fracture 
in her right wrist and surgery was performed the same day by Richard Naylor, D.O. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, pp. 27-28)  A second surgery was performed on June 17, 2021 to remove the 
pins.  Dr. Naylor released her from care without restrictions in August 2021 with a 7 
percent impairment of her right arm.  (Tr., p. 27; Jt. Ex. 3, p. 26)  Stephanie quit work for 
East Penn and began working for a company called VGM as a patient care coordinator 
in June 2021.  Her position involved coordinating therapy services for injured workers. 
On October 8, 2021, Stephanie returned to her primary care clinic for further 
evaluation of her left knee. 
Stephanie H. Lane is a 31 y.o. female who presents for follow up on a 
knee problem involving the left knee.  Onset was sudden, starting about 
several months ago.  Inciting event:  none known.  Current symptoms 
include:  locking, popping sensation, stiffness and swelling.  Pain is 
aggravated by kneeling, lateral movements, pivoting, rising after sitting 
and squatting.  Patient has had prior knee problems. Patient has had an 
MRI and has done formal PT.  Treatment to date:  avoidance of offending 
activity, ice, OTC analgesics which are ineffective and PT which was not 
very effective.  Patient has been very aggressive in her home exercises to 
help her knee.  She has also lost a substantial amount of weight to help 
with her knee pain as well.  She continues to experience pain with long 
walks.  She has frequent swelling of her knee. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10)  Her exam was positive for lateral joint line tenderness.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
11)  RICE therapy was recommended (rest, ice, compression, elevation) and she was 
referred to orthopedics.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 12) 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
It is evident that this is the same symptoms and condition she had experienced 
and sought treatment for in January 2021.  I find Stephanie’s testimony entirely credible 
that while her symptoms had improved following her physical therapy in 
January/February 2021, they had not healed completely.  Based upon this record, I 
suspect she may have exaggerated her level of healing at her March 9, 2021, 
appointment in order to secure the job at East Penn, or at least downplayed her level of 
ongoing symptoms. 
On October 22, 2021, Stephanie was evaluated at Cedar Valley Orthopedics.  
After attempting a series of injections without relief, Benjamin Torrez, D.O., 
recommended surgery which was performed on September 16, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 58)  
Based upon the medical documentation, it is clear this surgery was for the left knee 
condition she developed and began treatment for in January 2021.  The surgery was 
successful and she had an ordinary course of recovery.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 46-47) 
There are expert medical opinions in the record from two physicians.  On April 
21, 2023, Stephanie was evaluated by John Kuhnlein, D.O.  She spoke with Dr. 
Kuhnlein on the phone for about an hour providing him details of her injuries and 
condition.  He then performed an in-person examination and reviewed all of the 
appropriate medical records.  For the left knee, he diagnosed chondromalacia and 
degenerative joint disease.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7)  He assigned a 2 percent permanent 
impairment using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 7-8)  For the right arm, 
he opined she sustained a mildly displaced transverse distal ulnar fracture.  He 
assigned a 3 percent right upper extremity impairment for this condition, which he 
causally connected to the April 28, 2021, work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7)  For both 
conditions he recommended some common sense work restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) 
In response, the Fund sent the medical file to Joseph Chen, D.O. for a record 
review report.  Dr. Chen thoroughly reviewed all of the records, including Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
report.  (Def. Ex. AA)  Dr. Chen never examined Stephanie or even spoke with her on 
the phone.  He opined that “these records indicate from the end of March 2021 to April 
27, 2021, Ms. Lane did not appear to have any permanent impairment with her left 
knee.”  (Fund Ex. AA, p. 6)  He went on to opine that any impairment Stephanie may 
have sustained to her knee from dysesthesias would have occurred after her April 28, 
2021, work injury.  (Fund Ex. AA, pp. 6-7)  He ultimately opined she had no ratable 
impairment whatsoever in her knee.  (Fund Ex. AA, p. 8)  Dr. Kuhnlein prepared a 
rebuttal report defending his rating.  (Cl. Ex. 2) 
At the time of hearing, Stephanie continues to work as a senior patient care 
coordinator.  She now earns $18.05 per hour.  She has had no medical treatment for 
either her right arm or left knee for over a year.  She testified credibly that she has 
ongoing symptoms in both of these areas.  In particular, she is worried for her safety 
when bending, squatting, lifting and walking for distances.  (Tr., p. 36)  This has 
impacted a number of her hobbies. 
 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is highly technical.  The issue is whether 
Stephanie’s right knee “loss” occurred or manifested before her left arm injury on April 
28, 2021. 
The first unnumbered paragraph of section 85.64 states:  
If an employee who has previously lost, or lost the use of, one 
hand, one arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye, becomes permanently 
disabled by a compensable injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss 
of use of another such member or organ, the employer shall be liable only 
for the degree of disability which would have resulted from the latter injury 
if there had been no preexisting disability. In addition to such 
compensation, and after the expiration of the full period provided by law 
for the payments thereof by the employer, the employee shall be paid out 
of the “Second Injury Fund” created by this division the remainder of such 
compensation as would be payable for the degree of permanent disability 
involved after first deducting from such remainder the compensable value 
of the previously lost member or organ.  
Iowa Code section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of 
the Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have 
lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain 
a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable 
injury.  Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second 
injury. 
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of workers with 
disabilities by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the individual as if the 
individual had had no preexisting disability. See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 262 
N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978). 
The Fund is responsible only for the industrial disability present after the second 
injury that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Section 
85.64. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second 
Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1979).  
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record and having listened to the 
arguments of counsel, I find that Stephanie did sustain a loss of use of her left leg prior 
to her “second injury” on April 28, 2021.  This finding is based primarily upon the report 
of Dr. Kuhnlein, as well as Stephanie’s credible testimony. 
The legal question herein is when the “loss of use” of her left knee occurred or 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
manifested.  The statute specifies that Fund liability is only applicable when an 
employee “who has previously lost, or lost the use of” a specific scheduled body part, 
sustains a second, work-connected loss or loss of use of a specific scheduled body 
part.  This begs the question of the precise date of the loss of use.  In this case, 
Stephanie testified credibly that her knee symptoms began in late 2020, and were 
diagnosed in January 2021.  She had never had any symptoms or treatment for a left 
knee condition until this time.  In January 2021, the condition became so symptomatic 
that she sought treatment from her primary care clinic.  Her clinic provided excellent 
care and quickly diagnosed her condition. 
The Fund argues that Stephanie’s left knee condition was fine on March 9, 2021.  
The Fund has a reasonable argument here.  In essence, the Fund’s argument is, she 
had no permanent impairment at this time, therefore, she had no “loss of use” of her left 
leg prior to her “second” work injury to her right arm. 
In January 2021, however, Stephanie was diagnosed with an osteochondral 
defect of the femoral condyle.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7)  At the time, she was unemployed and 
attempting to secure an assembler position at East Penn, which was highly desirable to 
her.  Stephanie knew she had to get better in order to secure this position.  She 
underwent the recommended treatment with significant success and returned to her 
clinic.  While the March 9, 2021, medical note from her clinic indicated that she had 
improved significantly, it does not document that her condition had resolved.  In fact, a 
careful reading of this report demonstrates that it had not fully healed.  While she 
professed she was pain free on March 9, 2021, it is evident her symptoms were not 
completely resolved.  Her provider noted that her physical therapist had opined she was 
90 percent improved during this time of active treatment, but recommended that she 
continue with her home exercises.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) 
I find Stephanie testified credibly that she sought to secure the assembly position 
at East Penn and avoided complaining about her knee to ensure she could keep her 
job.  The Fund disagrees with this, arguing: 
In contrast, Lane testified at hearing that her symptoms were not resolved 
when she began working for East Penn.  (Tr., p. 18)  Lane’s testimony at 
hearing is inconsistent with her statements to her primary care provider on 
March 9, 2021.  Lane either misrepresented her symptoms to her primary 
care provider during her appointment on March 9, 2021 to secure 
employment with East Penn or she misrepresented her symptoms during 
the hearing to secure industrial disability benefits.  Either calls Lane’s 
credibility into question. 
(Fund Brief, p. 7)  I disagree. Based upon the record before me, it appears that 
Stephanie made a completely rational decision to secure a good manufacturing job with 
East Penn in early 2021.  This was in the middle of the pandemic and she had been 
unemployed for some time.  Her symptoms had obviously improved significantly and I 
find it was a perfectly rational decision to attempt this assembly job.  It is equally 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
apparent from the medical documentation that her condition had not completely 
resolved.  She had been diagnosed with the condition of an osteochondral defect of the 
femoral condyle.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7)  The Fund may be correct that she downplayed her 
symptoms from this condition at the March 9, 2021, medical appointment to secure the 
position.  I simply do not believe this reflects poorly on her credibility. 
The facts further establish that when she did return to her primary care clinic to 
follow up on her knee a mere six months later in October 2021, it was for the exact 
same condition for which she was receiving treatment in January and March 2021.  
(Compare Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 8-9 with Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 10 and Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 33-34)  She had 
essentially the same diagnosis and symptoms.  I find that the question is not whether 
Stephanie had a permanent impairment prior to her April 28, 2021, work injury, rather 
the correct question is whether her condition which ultimately led to her permanent 
impairment had manifested by then.  In this case, I find, by a greater weight of evidence, 
that it did. 
There is a secondary issue here which is whether Stephanie has any permanent 
impairment or “loss of use” of her left leg from her January 2021, condition.  This is an 
issue of medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
By a greater weight of evidence, I find that she did sustain a permanent 
impairment from her left leg condition as evidenced by the rating from Dr. Kuhnlein and 
her own credible testimony.  I find the report of Dr. Kuhnlein is more believable than the 
report of Dr. Chen.  Most importantly, Dr. Kuhnlein actually examined Stephanie, 
including range of motion measurements, and reviewed her history with her for 
approximately one hour.  By contrast, Dr. Chen only reviewed the medical reports and 
he only knew what the medical file told him about her condition.  From this record, it 
appears that Dr. Kuhnlein has superior expertise in the use of the AMA Guides and 
disability evaluation.  I would add that it is simply not believable that a person who has 
Stephanie’s well-documented ongoing symptoms in her left knee has a zero 
impairment.  This would imply that her knee was as good as new. 
For all these reasons, I find that claimant has proven by a preponderance of 
evidence that the elements for Second Injury Fund liability are present.  She sustained a 
first loss of use of her left leg in early January 2021, and a second loss of use from a 
work-connected arm injury on April 28, 2021.  The only remaining question is the extent 
of any permanent industrial disability. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
Stephanie is only 33 years old as of the date of hearing.  She is bright, articulate 
and has good work skills.  Her work history is varied and interesting.  She now has 
minor impairments in her left leg and right arm.  These conditions are relatively minor 
but the evidence is they do produce ongoing, annoying and moderately disabling 
symptoms which interfere with her abilities in a number of ways.  She is probably not 
suited to return to medium or heavy assembly work given these conditions or positions 
which require her to be on her feet all day.  While Dr. Kuhnlein recommended some 
commonsense restrictions for her condition, she is not presently working under any 

LANE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
strict medical restrictions.  Both treating physicians released her without any restrictions. 
She is appropriately employed now as a senior patient care coordinator which is 
fairly comparable to her earnings in manufacturing.  It appears she is well-suited for this 
work and her vocational situation is stable.  Considering all of the factors of industrial 
disability, I find that Stephanie has sustained a 15 percent loss of earning capacity as a 
combined result of her scheduled disabilities.  I conclude this entitles her to 75 weeks of 
compensation commencing May 19, 2022.  The parties have stipulated that the Fund is 
entitled to a credit of 21.9 weeks of compensation for the combined impairments to her 
first left leg loss and her second right arm loss. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED 
The Fund shall pay the claimant seventy-five (75) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of four hundred eighteen and 75/100 ($418.75) per week 
from May 19, 2022. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the 21.9 weeks. 
Signed and filed this ____3RD ____ day of January, 2025. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dillon Besser  
 
(via WCES) 
Adrienne Williamson 
(via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
