Case Number: 5804484.02
Case Title:  PHILLIPS, SARAH V. REM IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Phillips Sarah-5804484.02R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SARAH PHILLIPS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                  File No.  5804484.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
REM IOWA, 
  : 
 
REVIEW-REOPENING 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
        DECISION 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :          Headnotes:  1803, 2403, 2501, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
     2502, 2905 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Claimant Sarah Phillips (“Phillips”) filed three petitions in arbitration on October 2, 
2013, alleging she sustained injuries to her head and neck affecting her cognitive and 
mental function when she was assaulted by residents while working for Defendant REM 
Iowa (“REM”), on October 15, 2011, File Number 5044838, on January 21, 2012, File 
Number 5044839, and on October 17, 2012, File Number 5804484.  REM and its 
insurer, Defendant New Hampshire Insurance Co. (“New Hampshire”), filed answers to 
the petitions on October 30, 2013, admitting Phillips had sustained work injuries.  
Following an arbitration hearing and briefing of the parties, an arbitration decision 
was issued on July 21, 2016, finding Phillips did not meet her burden of proof she 
sustained permanent impairments caused by the October 15, 2011 and January 21, 
2012 injuries, finding Phillips sustained a 40 percent industrial disability as a result of 
the October 17, 2012 injury, entitling her to 200 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on August 4, 2013, at the weekly rate of $206.98, and awarding 
Phillips additional relief. 
On April 23, 2020, Phillips filed a review-reopening petition, File Number 
5804484.02, alleging she had sustained a change of condition entitling her to additional 
benefits.  On June 2, 2020, REM and New Hampshire filed an answer. 
A hearing on the review-reopening action was held via CourtCall on April 22, 
2021.  Attorney Emily Anderson represented Phillips.  Phillips appeared and testified.  
Attorney Edward Rose represented REM and New Hampshire Insurance Co.  Joint 
Exhibits (“JE”) 1 through 3, and Exhibits 1 through 7 and A through D were admitted into 
the record.  The record was held open through June 11, 2021, for the receipt of JE 4 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Nov-09  09:25:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 2 
 
through 10 and post-hearing briefs.  JE 4 through 10 were received and admitted into 
the record, the briefs were also received, and the record was closed.   
The parties submitted a Hearing Report, listing stipulations and issues to be 
decided.  The Hearing Report was approved at the conclusion of the hearing.  REM and 
New Hampshire waived all affirmative defenses.   
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between REM and Phillips at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
2. 
Phillips sustained an injury on October 17, 2012, which arose out of and in 
the course of her employment with REM. 
3. 
The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
4. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute. 
5. 
The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
6. 
The disability is an industrial disability. 
7. 
The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any 
are awarded is April 23, 2020. 
8. 
At the time of the alleged injury, Phillips’s gross earnings were $303.49 
per week, she was single and entitled to one exemption, and her weekly benefit rate is 
$206.98. 
9. 
Prior to the hearing Phillips was paid 200 weeks of compensation at the 
rate of $206.98 per week. 
10. 
Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
1. 
Has Phillips established she has sustained a change of condition? 
2. 
If Phillips has established she has sustained a change of condition, what 
is the extent of disability? 
3. 
Is Phillips entitled to recover the cost of medical expenses set forth in 
Exhibit 6? 
4. 
Is Phillips entitled to alternate medical care? 
5. 
Is Phillips entitled to recover the cost of the independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
6. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
 
 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 3 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Phillips graduated from high school in Michigan.  (Arbitration Decision)  In 2007, 
Phillips received a bachelor’s degree in recreational leadership and management, and 
she is qualified to work as a camp director, park ranger, city parks worker, and 
community recreation worker.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips worked as a day care 
provider, server and hostess, and nanny, in camps for girls and adults and children with 
disabilities, in a bookstore, in direct sales, in a call center, and in a movie theater.  
(Arbitration Decision)  At the time of the review-reopening action Phillips was working as 
a nurse.   
In 2011, Phillips commenced full-time work with REM as a direct support 
professional.  (Arbitration Decision)  As a direct support professional, Phillips provided 
personal care and supervision to persons with intellectual and physical disabilities over 
the age of 18 living in a residential group home.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips was 
responsible for helping prepare food for the residents, assisting the residents with their 
behavioral and learning programs, transferring residents with mobility issues, and 
intervening when residents engaged in behavioral issues, including self-injury and 
aggressive behavior directed toward others.  (Arbitration Decision)  REM required 
Phillips to physically restrain aggressive residents, each weighing over 50 pounds.  
(Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips enrolled in a nursing program while working for REM and eventually 
moved to a part-time position.  (Arbitration Decision)  When Phillips reduced her hours 
to part-time, she earned $9.65 per hour.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips sustained three separate head injuries while working with combative 
REM residents on October 15, 2011, January 21, 2012, and on October 17, 2012.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Following an arbitration hearing I found Phillips did not sustain 
permanent impairments caused by the October 15, 2011 and January 21, 2012 injuries.  
(Arbitration Decision)  I found she sustained a 40 percent industrial disability caused by 
her third head injury on October 17, 2012.  (Arbitration Decision) 
After the October 2012 injury, Phillips developed head and neck pain.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Her roommate noted changes in her behavior, where Phillips 
talked to her like she was her sister, Phillips wore a resident’s clothing, and Phillips was 
mean and was short with her.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips sought emergency medical 
treatment and she was diagnosed with a head injury.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips received follow-up care with Ann McKinstry, M.D., with WorkWell.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips complained of pain down the right side of her neck down 
into her trapezius muscle, an intense, pounding headache, a feeling of falling when she 
closed her eyes, forgetfulness, and vertigo when her eyes were open.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Dr. McKinstry restricted Phillips from working.  (Arbitration Decision)  The day 
after her appointment, Phillips returned to the emergency room because her behavioral 
issues persisted and she reported she was continuing to have headaches, she was 
disoriented, and she was vomiting.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips was assessed with 
postconcussive syndrome and blunt head trauma.  (Arbitration Decision) 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 4 
 
Phillips continued to treat with WorkWell complaining she was forgetful, noting 
her roommate had to point out she had forgotten to rinse the shampoo out of her hair, 
and she was having difficulty concentrating on her nursing classes because of her 
headaches.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. McKinstry assessed Phillips with a concussion, 
headaches, and vertigo, and restricted Phillips from driving and working, and prescribed 
Zofran.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips’s symptoms persisted and she continued to complain of severe 
headaches, nausea, vertigo, difficulty sleeping, concentration problems, reading 
problems, and difficulty completing her nursing coursework and rotations.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips complained of two types of headaches, a throbbing headache that 
was constant and more frontal and temporal, and an intermittent occipital headache with 
pain extending down the right side of her neck and into her right trapezius muscle.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Dr. McKinstry diagnosed Phillips with post-concussion syndrome, 
headaches, and a cervical strain, noted she believed she “would benefit medically from 
a reduced course load,” restricted her from working, and ordered physical therapy.  
(Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips continued to complain of severe daily headaches and vomiting.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Dr. McKinstry referred Phillips to Jill Miller, ARNP, who worked 
with Andrew Peterson, M.D., a neurologist, for a neurological evaluation.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Dr. McKinstry restricted Phillips from working and Phillips commenced 
vestibular therapy in December 2012.  (Arbitration Decision) 
During her first appointment with Miller on January 14, 2013, Phillips reported 
she was experiencing migraines two days per week, and that she was struggling with 
concentration, attention, focus, depression, and anxiety.  (Arbitration Decision)  Miller 
adjusted Phillips’s medication, restricted her from working, ordered neuropsychological 
testing, and wrote a note for testing accommodations for Phillips’s nursing coursework.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips required reasonable accommodations and supervision 
during her clinical nursing rotations.  (Arbitration Decision)   
In February 2013, Stephen Peters, Psy.D., performed a neuropsychological 
evaluation of Phillips.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Peters found Phillips “demonstrated 
small measurable deficits including slowed cognitive processing speed, difficulty 
maintaining and shifting cognitive set, mild attentional difficulties, and mild deficits in 
working memory.”  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Peters noted “cognitive difficulties are 
typical in the setting of mild head injury and are likely to resolve over time.”  (Arbitration 
Decision) 
On February 20, 2013, Miller released Phillips to work four-hour shifts, on a 
part-time basis, for a maximum of 20 hours per week, and restricted Phillips from 
working with combative individuals.  (Arbitration Decision)   
During a follow-up appointment, Miller’s office administered a Sumavel injection 
for Phillips’s headaches, and referred her for chiropractic care because pharmaceutical 
treatment and physical therapy had not been effective in alleviating her migraines.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips received chiropractic treatment through Atlas Family 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 5 
 
Chiropractic from April 2013 through June 2014 and reported chiropractic care helped 
her.  (Arbitration Decision)   
During an appointment with Dr. Peterson on March 25, 2013, Phillips reported 
she was not doing well at school, she could not concentrate, and noted she never had 
problems with her grades or test anxiety in the past.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Peterson 
diagnosed Phillips with postconcussive syndrome, classic migraines with aura, and 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and released Phillips “to return to work with two 8 
hours shifts and one four hour shift (max 20 hour [sic] per week).  If she has a migraine 
HA then she needs to be permitted to skip her shift without penalty.  NO EXPOSURE 
TO ANY COMBATIVE PATIENTS.”  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips finished the fall semester of nursing school in 2012, but she had to 
withdraw in the spring of 2013 because she was struggling with focus problems during 
her clinical program.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips’s work restrictions were modified to 
allow her to work an additional four-hour shift, up to 24 hours per week.  (Arbitration 
Decision)   
During an appointment with Miller on August 2, 2013, Phillips reported her 
headaches had improved, but were still “hit and miss,” and her chiropractic care had 
helped with her tension headaches and neck pain.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips 
requested Miller remove her work restrictions because she had to pay her bills.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips received an occipital block injection on August 6, 2013, 
and continued to take medication.  (Arbitration Decision)   
When Phillips returned to nursing school she received accommodations.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Instead of shadowing a nurse on the floor, she shadowed the 
instructor, and she was not permitted to pass medication.  (Arbitration Decision) 
Phillips continued to receive treatment for her postconcussive syndrome and 
migraine headaches, including a greater and lesser occipital nerve block, a cervical 
occipital trigger point injection, and Botox.  (Arbitration Decision)  During a March 2014 
visit with Dr. Peterson Phillips reported the Botox treatment had helped, but Dr. 
Peterson believed a cervical epidural might be more effective stating, “[t]he meds are 
certainly not helping hugely.”  (Arbitration Decision) 
Phillips received a cervical epidural steroid injection, but continued to complain 
about her migraine headaches.  (Arbitration Decision)  On April 24, 2014, Miller 
administered an intravenous Kaniecki cocktail.  (Arbitration Decision)   
In June 2014, Phillips underwent a second neuropsychological evaluation with 
Linda Collins, Ph.D.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Collins concluded the testing results “did 
not indicate any deficits in cognitive processing speed, maintaining and shifting 
cognitive set, or working memory,” representing “significant cognitive gains in these 
areas,” but noted Phillips continued to have “[d]eficits in visual-motor speed and 
sustained attention,” mild depression, and mild to moderate anxiety.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Dr. Collins also noted Phillips’s “attention efficiency scores were impaired 
due to a strong speed/accuracy trade-off.  In other words, she sacrificed performance 
speed to achieve maximum accuracy (which would be the preferred compensation 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 6 
 
strategy for her profession of nursing).”  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Collins found the 
results were “highly consistent with the diagnosis of post-concussion syndrome,” 
exacerbated by her neck pain, headaches, anxiety, depression, and sleep disruption, 
and that her neck pain, headaches, anxiety, depression and sleep disruption were 
contributing to her attention problems and difficulties with everyday functioning.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Collins opined the results of the testing indicated Phillips 
should be able to be competitively employed in nursing, and “[i]t would be better for her 
to avoid jobs that involve frequently working with potentially combative patients” and to 
work in a job “where she can work at her own pace (rather than in a fast-paced setting 
such as the ER).”  (Arbitration Decision)   
During a follow-up appointment with Miller on June 9, 2014, Phillips reported the 
Botox treatment had helped with her tightness and neck pain, she had received 
injections through the pain clinic, and while her migraines had decreased, she was 
having daily tension headaches.  (Arbitration Decision)   
In June 2014, Phillips decided to move back near her family in Michigan.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips acknowledged she had always planned to move back to 
Michigan after she finished nursing school.  (Arbitration Decision)   
At the time of her last appointment with Dr. Peterson, Phillips’s symptoms had 
not resolved.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Peterson agreed Phillips had not reached 
maximum medical improvement and opined in the foreseeable future she would need 
medication, possibly Botox, physical therapy, and massage therapy.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Dr. Peterson concurred that Phillips’s depression, postconcussive syndrome, 
headaches, neck pain, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder were more likely than 
not caused by the concussion injuries she sustained at work, including the most recent 
injury on October 17, 2012.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Peterson opined Phillips needed 
permanent restrictions of not working in situations that would put her at risk for 
additional head injuries, including no work with combative patients or work in the 
emergency room or psychiatric ward.  (Arbitration Decision)   
After moving back to Michigan, Phillips took and passed her nursing boards.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips is licensed registered nurse in Michigan.  (Arbitration 
Decision)   
Phillips continued to receive chiropractic care in Michigan, but she did not find it 
as helpful as the treatment she received in Iowa.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips commenced treatment with Mark Garwood, M.D., a neurologist with the 
University of Michigan in November 2014.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Garwood 
assessed Phillips with chronic tension-type headaches, migraine headaches with aura, 
cervicalgia, insomnia, and depression, ordered physical therapy and a sleep study to 
exclude obstructive sleep apnea as a cause of her headaches, and adjusted her 
medication.  (Arbitration Decision)   
During an appointment on January 29, 2015, Dr. Garwood noted while medical 
providers had previously stated Phillips should avoid working in the emergency room or 
psychiatry unit due to risk for further head injuries, he did not believe Phillips needed to 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 7 
 
refrain from working in any specific area of nursing, noting she could be at risk working 
in any unit of a hospital and that her past injury should not prevent her from working in 
psychiatry.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Garwood diagnosed Phillips with chronic tension-
type headaches, migraine headaches with aura, cervicalgia, insomnia, and depression, 
attributed to post-concussion symptoms and post-concussive syndrome from a closed 
head injury, opined Phillips had reached maximum medical improvement, and found 
Phillips could return to full duty without restrictions on January 30, 2015.  (Arbitration 
Decision) 
 
Phillips participated in a sleep study, which revealed she had mild obstructive 
sleep apnea.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Garwood recommended CPAP titration to see if 
it would improve Phillips’s sleep related symptoms and headaches.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Dr. Garwood noted it was difficult to determine whether Phillips’s head injury 
caused the obstructive sleep apnea, but noted “there is an increased incidence of 
[obstructive sleep apnea] after a head injury.”  (Arbitration Decision)   
In June 2015, Phillips secured employment at a daycare working with infants and 
preschool children, working three ten-hour shifts, and earning $10.00 per hour.  
(Arbitration Decision)   
In August 2015, Wade Cooper, D.O., with the University of Michigan, examined 
Phillips and administered bilateral occipital nerve block and trigger point injections for 
her headaches.  (Arbitration Decision)  When she returned in September 2015, Phillips 
reported a slight improvement in her symptoms following the injections, noting she 
continued to experience dizziness and vertigo with some of her headaches, and 
reporting during the last 30 days, she experienced six days of severe headaches, 24 
days of low to moderate headaches, and zero days of no headaches.  (Arbitration 
Decision) 
Phillips commenced treatment with Pamela Summers, M.D., an interventional 
pain management specialist in September 2015.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Phillips 
assessed Phillips with cervicalgia, migraines, post-concussion syndrome, and 
depression.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips received additional injections in November 
2015.  (Arbitration)   
James Milani, M.D., performed an independent medical examination of Phillips 
for REM and New Hampshire in December 2015.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Milani 
opined Phillips had reached maximum medical improvement and using Chapters 15 and 
18 of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 
2001) (“AMA Guides”), found Phillips sustained an 11 percent whole person impairment 
relating to the October 17, 2012 injury.  (Arbitration Decision)  Using the range of motion 
method, for cervical flexion and extension Dr. Milani assigned a 1 percent impairment 
for 40 degrees of flexion and a 3 percent impairment for 30 degrees of extension under 
Table 15-12, for lateral bending he assigned a 1% impairment for 30 degrees left, and a 
1% impairment for 30 degrees right under Table 15-13, and for rotation, he assigned a 
1% impairment for 60 degrees left rotation and a 1% impairment for 60 degrees right 
rotation under Table 15-14, combining the impairments for an 8 percent whole person 
impairment for her cervical spine.  (Arbitration Decision) 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
For her pain and headache symptoms Dr. Milani used Chapter 18 of the AMA 
Guides, finding under Table 18-3 she fit in the Class II for moderate, and “[w]hen going 
through the worksheet on table 18-6, she totals up to 34, that then on table 18-7 gives 
her a moderate impairment pertaining to her total pain.  To get to the value of 34; she 
gets a 24 from the worksheet, a 0 from table 18-4, and a 10 on my clinical judgment of 
individual’s credibility.”  (Arbitration Decision)  Based on his findings and conclusions Dr. 
Milani assigned Phillips an 8 percent permanent impairment for her cervical spine and 
increased the impairment by 3 percent for her pain, for a total 11 percent whole person 
impairment caused by the October 17, 2012 work injury.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. 
Milani agreed with Dr. Garwood that Phillips could look for general employment in the 
nursing field.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Robin Sassman, M.D., performed an independent medical examination of Phillips 
on January 19, 2016.  (Arbitration Decision)  Using the AMA Guides, Dr. Sassman used 
the DRE method for assessing Phillips’s cervical spine, and placed her in DRE Cervical 
Category II, and assigned a seven percent permanent impairment due to her effects of 
the injury on her activities of daily living.  (Arbitration Decision)  For her head trauma, 
Dr. Sassman found Phillips had no impairment for aphasia or dysphasia under Table 
13-7, and she placed Phillips in Class 1 with a seven percent impairment under Table 
13-8 for mild limitations in activities of daily living and daily social and interpersonal 
functioning.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Sassman assigned Phillips an additional three 
percent permanent impairment for her headaches, and combined the impairments for a 
total 10 percent impairment for her head trauma.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Sassman 
then combined the cervical and head trauma impairments, for a combined 16 percent 
permanent impairment.  (Arbitration Decision) 
Dr. Sassman concluded Dr. Peterson’s restrictions were appropriate and found 
Phillips should not work in situations that would put her at risk for additional head 
injuries, including work where she would be exposed to combative patients, such as in 
an emergency room or a psychiatric ward.  (Arbitration Decision)  Dr. Sassman also 
recommended Phillips “limit lifting, pushing, pulling and carrying to 50 pounds 
occasionally from floor to waist and waist to shoulder height,” that “[s]he should limit 
lifting, pushing, pulling, and carrying above shoulder height to 20 pounds rarely,” and 
“[s]he should not use vibratory or power tools as these would likely exacerbate her 
symptoms.”  (Arbitration Decision)   
At the time of the arbitration hearing Phillips reported she continued to have 
issues with migraines, tension headaches, neck pain, and depression.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips testified her neck always hurt, and that she had been diagnosed with 
spasmatic torticollis, which she described as a head tilt to the right side.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips reported her tension headaches were worse on the right side and 
when she experienced a headache the whole base of her skull and her neck would 
become tight and painful.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips was taking muscle relaxers for 
the pain at night almost daily, and approximately three times per week during the day 
and that she did not feel comfortable driving or performing nursing duties while taking 
muscle relaxers.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips reported she often developed a tension 
headache and then a migraine, and relayed if she was able to take medication when 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 9 
 
she first experienced symptoms, the migraine may last an hour or two, but if she did not 
take medication early on, the migraine may last the whole day, and at times, two or 
three days.  (Arbitration Decision) 
Phillips further reported the migraines affected her right side and caused 
pounding vertigo, sensitivity to light, and nausea, which caused her to vomit.  
(Arbitration Decision)  Phillips relayed when she experienced a migraine at work she 
would go to her car and sleep for an hour or two before driving home.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips described the migraines as “unbearable” and reported that when she 
had a migraine she could not “even tell up from down.”  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips 
testified she was only experiencing one or two migraines per month because she was 
consistently taking her medication.  (Arbitration Decision)  Before Phillips began 
consistently taking her medication she would have a migraine once or twice per week.  
(Arbitration Decision)  
Phillips testified she had difficulty focusing, even though her ability to focus had 
improved.  (Arbitration Decision)  Before the October 2012 head injury Phillips could 
read two novels per week, and after her injury she could not sit and read a book, and 
instead listened to audiobooks.  (Arbitration Decision)  Before her October 2012 head 
injury Phillips was able to read textbooks and digest the information.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  At the time of the arbitration hearing she reported she had to take notes and 
use flash cards to digest new information.  (Arbitration Decision)  While in nursing 
school Phillips had to take tests at the test center and use tutors, which she did not 
need before her head injury.  (Arbitration Decision) 
At the time of the arbitration hearing Phillips was treating at the pain clinic at the 
University of Michigan, and taking Effexor for depression, Topamax for neuropathic pain 
and to prevent migraines, Zofran for nausea, Aleve for tension headaches, and Flexeril 
and Fioricet for tension headaches.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips was also using 
Biofreeze for her neck and shoulder a few times per day.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips worked for three employers after she left REM.  (Arbitration Decision)  In 
2014 Phillips worked seasonally, four of five weeks, for a Girl Scout camp, earning 
$8.10 per hour.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips was able to perform the physical tasks of 
the position and worked on arts and crafts projects, science projects, a talent show, 
hiking, swimming, and field trips.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips also sold products 
through 31 Bags for a period of time in 2014 and 2015.  (Arbitration Decision)  Phillips 
reported the income she received was inconsistent, and she earned a total of 
approximately $3,000.00.  (Arbitration Decision)   
Phillips commenced employment at a daycare center in June 2015 and 
continued to work at the daycare at the time of the arbitration hearing.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips worked 30 hours per week and earned $10.00 per hour.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips testified she had to take some time off from work due to migraines 
and headaches, and her supervisor allowed her to have a flexible schedule.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips reported she experienced pain when she had to carry toddlers or 
larger children.  (Arbitration Decision)   

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 10 
 
At the time of the arbitration hearing Phillips had applied for work as a nurse, but 
she had not been successful in securing employment as a nurse.  (Arbitration Decision)  
Phillips testified many of the job postings stated new graduates need not apply and 
required a bachelor’s degree in nursing, which she did not possess.  (Arbitration 
Decision)  Phillips volunteered at a free clinic administering shots and taking vital signs.  
(Arbitration Decision)  During the summer of 2015, she worked twice a week at the 
clinic, and in the fall she worked once or twice per month at the clinic.  (Arbitration 
Decision)   
On April 23, 2020, Phillips filed a review-reopening petition.  The matter 
proceeded to hearing on June 11, 2021.  At the time of the review-reopening hearing, 
Phillips was 37.  (Tr., p. 8)  Phillips lives in Ann Arbor, Michigan.  (Tr., p. 8)   
Phillips testified since the arbitration hearing she still has daily pain in her neck 
and the base of her skull, shoulder tension and headaches at the base of her head, and 
intermittent migraines.  (Tr., p. 9)  Phillips relayed she has increased anxiety about 
getting migraines because the migraines affect her activities, life, and ability to work and 
reported she gets depressed when she has long periods of increased pain because she 
does not feel like it is going to end.  (Tr., p. 9)  Phillips testified she has had these 
problems since the arbitration hearing, but her symptoms have increased or become 
worse.  (Tr., pp. 9, 60-61)   
In July 2016 Beaumont Troy hired Phillips as a full-time nurse in the Clinical 
Decisions Unit, working three 12-hour shifts per week, overnight.  (Tr., pp. 17, 19)  
Phillips enjoys working as a nurse.  (Tr., pp. 9-11)   
At the time of the review-reopening hearing Phillips was working on a Bachelor of 
Science degree in nursing (“BSN”),which is a requirement for her to remain in her 
current position with Beaumont Health System.  (Tr., pp. 11-12)  Beaumont Health 
System had an original deadline of July 2021 for Phillips to obtain a BSN, but that was 
extended to July 2022 due to the Covid-19 Pandemic.  (Tr., p. 12)  Phillips is enrolled in 
an on-line program, and reported she has a difficult time completing her coursework 
because it is difficult for her to work on the computer, reading for long periods of time 
trigger her migraines, the pace of the program is challenging when working full-time, 
and she has missed time due to migraine headaches and pain.  (Tr., pp. 12-13)   
Phillips originally enrolled in a BSN program at Southern New Hampshire, taking 
one class at a time for six weeks.  (Tr., p. 13)  Phillips reported she had to take breaks 
and sometimes she had to withdraw because she could not meet the course demands 
due to her migraines and symptoms from her work injury.  (Tr., pp. 13-14)  Phillips 
withdrew in December 2017 and again in January 2020 due to her medical issues from 
her work injury because she could not complete the work due to her symptoms and the 
required deadlines and she would have failed her courses and been terminated from the 
nursing program.  (Tr., p. 14)   
Phillips transferred to an online BSN program with Western Governors 
University, which is a slower-paced and more flexible program.  (Tr., pp. 14-15)  Phillips 
planned to complete the program during the summer of 2021, but she is off pace 
because she had to work more due to the Covid-19 pandemic and because she has 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 11 
 
had more symptoms.  (Tr., pp. 15-16)  After completing her BSN, Phillips will not receive 
additional pay and noted the program does not teach additional skills in terms of patient 
care, rather it focuses on resource management and administrative and budgeting 
tasks.  (Tr., p. 16)  
The Clinical Decisions Unit at Beaumont Troy is a progressive care unit in the 
emergency department.  (Tr., p. 17)  After a patient is admitted the patient comes to the 
Clinic Decisions Unit where the admitting tests and questioning are conducted before a 
room is available.  (Tr., p. 17)  The majority of the patients are elderly adults with 
cardiac and pulmonary problems.  (Tr., pp. 17-18)  Phillips had to turn some of the 
patients every two hours, perform personal care for the patients, assist the patients to 
the bathroom, and assist the patients with ambulating and getting up for meals.  (Tr., p. 
18)  Phillips had to push and pull more than 50 pounds in the position, but she did not 
have to physically lift the patients.  (Tr., pp. 18-19)   
Phillips lived 58 miles from Beaumont Troy and she had difficulties with the 
commute because of her neck pain.  (Tr., pp. 19-20)  Phillips testified after working long 
shifts her neck and shoulder pain would be severe and if she developed a migraine with 
vertigo or vision changes it was not safe for her to drive and she would sleep in her car 
during the day.  (Tr., pp. 20-21)  After Phillips developed friendships with her coworkers, 
she stayed with her coworkers instead of sleeping in her car.  (Tr., pp. 20-21)  
Beaumont Troy accommodated Phillips’s migraines and pain by allowing her to 
take intermittent FMLA.  (Tr., p. 21)  If she became incapacitated and could not work, 
she could call-off from work, which happened once or twice per month.  (Tr., pp. 21-22)  
Phillips reported she had to take both paid time off and time off without pay.  (Tr., p. 22)  
Phillips testified she did not believe she could consistently work five days in a row as a 
nurse because she would have to call-off and that would exhaust her paid time off and 
FMLA leave.  (Tr., p. 23)   
In the fall of 2019 Phillips started looking for a job that would be easier physically 
and closer to her home.  (Tr., p. 23)  Phillips testified she looked for an easier job 
because she was having more neck pain and more frequent migraines, which resulted 
in her having to call into work and she was concerned about being able to maintain her 
employment at Beaumont Troy.  (Tr., p. 24)  No one at Beaumont Troy told Phillips her 
job was in jeopardy.  (Tr., p. 64)  She did receive a verbal warning for attendance under 
the point system because she had clocked in late, and she was told she could not miss 
more days in the following six-month period.  (Tr., pp. 65-66)   
In December 2019, Phillips transferred to Beaumont Dearborn, which is 20 to 30 
minutes from her home.  (Tr., pp. 24, 26, 67)  Beaumont Dearborn treats women and 
children.  (Tr., p. 24)  Phillips again worked three 12-hour shifts, but her patient load 
was lower.  (Tr., pp. 28, 67)  Most of the adult female patients are postsurgical patients 
who have undergone gynecological surgery and postpartum mothers who are not 
appropriate for the mother/baby unit, due to an infant death or planned adoption.  (Tr., 
p. 26)  Most of Phillips’s patients can perform their activities of daily living independently 
and the work is lighter.  (Tr., p. 27)  Phillips assists some patients with walking after 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 12 
 
surgery, but the patients can go to the bathroom independently and do not need to be 
turned in bed.  (Tr., p. 26)   
At Beaumont Dearborn Phillips can use FMLA when her migraines interfere with 
her work and her supervisor also will accommodate her schedule if she is having a 
migraine or increased pain.  (Tr., p. 28)  Phillips has consistently worked at least 36 
hours per week for the past five years.  (Tr., p. 65)  Phillips trades shifts with coworkers 
when she is having a bad day, which has reduced the amount of FMLA she uses. 
At the time of the review-reopening hearing Phillips was earning $32.70 per hour, 
which is a great increase from the $10.00 per hour she was earning working for the 
daycare at the time of the arbitration hearing.  (Tr., pp. 29, 68-70)  The nurses in the 
Beaumont Health System received a large increase in pay across the board between 
2018 and 2019, due to a market adjustment.  (Tr., pp. 29-30)  Phillips has also received 
cost-of-living raises.  (Tr., p. 30)  In 2020 she received two Covid healthcare worker 
bonuses for having to work with Covid patients and she also had to work intermittent, 
mandatory overtime to care for Covid patients.  (Tr., pp. 30, 67-68)  Phillips worked an 
extra four to 12 hours in a workweek during the mandatory overtime.  (Tr., p. 68)   
At the time of the review-reopening hearing Phillips had accepted a transfer to 
the neonatal intensive care unit at Beaumont Dearborn.  (Tr., p. 30)  In this position 
Phillips will care for infants.  (Tr., p. 30)  Phillips’s first day of training for the position is 
May 30, 2021.  (Tr., pp. 30, 66)  Phillips testified the work will be even lighter because 
all of the patients are infants and she cannot be pulled outside of the service line to care 
for women, just to care for infants, unlike her current assignment.  (Tr., p. 31)  
Phillips testified, on cross-examination, that from November 2020 through the 
time of the review-reopening hearing she had missed two shifts at work where she used 
FMLA leave.  (Tr., p. 72)  Phillips testified she also exchanged shifts with a coworker 
because of a migraine.  (Tr., p. 72)  Phillips admitted during her deposition in January 
2021, she could recall five shifts she had missed since mid-December 2019 because of 
a migraine headache.  (Tr., p. 73)  Phillips also admitted missing work due to migraine 
headaches before she became a full-time nurse.  (Tr., pp. 73-74)   
Phillips testified after working in the nursing field she knows it would be difficult 
for her to work with dementia patients like she did in her first job because they are 
confused, and patients who are detoxing from alcohol.  (Tr., p. 32)  She believes the 
physical turning, pushing, and pulling of patients would be difficult for her to do and it 
also makes her life outside of work less enjoyable because of her increased pain.  (Tr., 
p. 32)  Phillips explained, “[i]f I can make it through three days of work, but I’m in bed for 
two days, because I need so many muscle relaxers or anything to be able to function, 
then I can’t make plans with people to do things.  I don’t want to go places and – 
because I’m worried about being in pain or I am in pain.  And so it’s – it just makes it 
harder.  It’s just exhausting.”  (Tr., pp. 32-33)   
Phillips reported she has had to change her medical treatment routine to 
maintain her employment.  (Tr., p. 33)  Phillips testified she had to switch muscle 
relaxers to ones that are a little stronger and the dosages have increased.  (Tr., p. 34)  
Phillips stated she takes Fioricet for tension-type headaches, which is not sedating, like 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 13 
 
muscle relaxers, so she takes it frequently when she is working because it is one of the 
only drugs she can take and safely work.  (Tr., p. 34)  Phillips reported she has vertigo 
and dizziness that are more profound at times.  (Tr., p. 34)  Phillips takes Meclizine for 
dizziness and she takes nausea medication because she vomits with her migraines, she 
takes Tylenol or Aleve, as needed, and she uses ice, heat, and Biofreeze.  (Tr., p. 34)  
Phillips testified she uses ice, heat, and Biofreeze more now that she is working.  (Tr., p. 
34)   
Phillips testified at the time of the arbitration hearing she was taking different 
preventative medications that were not working well and that caused a lot of side 
effects, so her treating physician switched her medication and has adjusted the dose 
and she has been getting a once-a-month injectable to prevent migraines, Botox 
injections, and occipital and trigger point injections.  (Tr., p. 35)  Phillips reported she 
tried Aimovig and she was taking Emgality at the time of the review-reopening hearing.  
(Tr., p. 35)   
Phillips relayed she has had difficulty obtaining authorization for her injections 
and medications and that the delays in treatment have impacted her symptoms.  (Tr., 
pp. 35-36)  Covid-19 also delayed her treatment, which made her symptoms worse.  
(Tr., p. 46)  Phillips testified she need regular, routine medical treatment to maintain the 
level of her symptoms.  (Tr., p. 36)  She takes some of her medications daily and if she 
misses the medications her symptoms can become very severe and some medications 
are dangerous if they are not taken as scheduled.  (Tr., p. 36)  Phillips reported she 
takes Effexor and if she does not take it as scheduled, she experiences strong 
neurological effects and withdrawal symptoms and a different type of headache that 
feels like an “electrical-type pain,” in addition to severe mood swings, increased 
depression, and a general feeling of being unwell.  (Tr., p. 37)  Phillips reported she 
takes Zonegran to prevent migraines, and that Zonegran is used to treat seizures as 
well, and even if a patient taking Zonegran does not have a seizure history, if the patient 
stops taking Zonegran suddenly, the patient could have seizures.  (Tr., p. 37)  Phillips 
testified if she gets off schedule with her nerve blocks she can get into a cycle of 
continuing migraines that is difficult to break and she misses work.  (Tr., p. 37)  Phillips 
reported New Hampshire has not been paying for all of her medications and procedures 
Dr. Cooper’s team at the University of Michigan has ordered and she has a large 
outstanding medical bill balance.  (Tr., pp. 36-37, 43-44)   
Phillips testified the Botox injections she receives are different from the one 
Botox injection she had prior to the original arbitration hearing.  (Tr., p. 38)  The one 
Botox treatment she received before the arbitration hearing was for right-sided 
torticollis, to relieve the spasms from her head tilt.  (Tr., p. 38)  Phillips now receives 30 
to 40 Botox injections every three months in her face, scalp, neck, and shoulders to 
treat her migraines.  (Tr., p. 38)  Phillips relayed the treatment is painful and causes 
bruising on her face and body, but she has noticed a decrease in the frequency of her 
migraines since she started the Botox treatment.  (Tr., p. 39)  Phillips reported she 
started the Botox because she could not tolerate higher levels of other medications and 
she had tried all of the other treatment options the University of Michigan offered.  (Tr., 
p. 40)   

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 14 
 
At the time of the arbitration hearing Phillips was having one to two migraines per 
month she could not stop with fast-acting medication.  (Tr., p. 39)  Her migraines 
increased to four to six per month when she was working, and since she started the 
new medications with Botox and injections, she is back down to one or two migraines 
per month.  (Tr., p. 39)  Phillips testified she also believes the new medication, Emgality, 
has also helped with her migraines.  (Tr., p. 39)  Phillips reported the migraines she 
experiences may last a day or two, or as long as three days.  (Tr., p. 45)  If a migraine 
lasts three days she will go to the emergency room and she receives a migraine 
cocktail, which is a combination of medications to try to break the cycle.  (Tr., pp. 45-46)   
Phillips used to receive occipital nerve blocks and trigger point injections every 
one to three months, but she started getting more migraines, so her treating medical 
provider recommended she have the injections every four to six weeks and after 
switching to that schedule her migraines have been better under control.  (Tr., p. 41)  
Phillips reported the injections address the pain she has in her neck, on the top of her 
shoulders, and at the base of her skull to reduce her migraines.  (Tr., p. 41)  Phillips 
testified she does not believe she could maintain a full-time job without her medication 
and injection regimen.  (Tr., pp. 46-47)   
Phillips has received extensive treatment as a result of her work injury.  After the 
arbitration hearing, up until the time of the review-reopening hearing, Phillips continued 
to treat with Dr. Cooper at the University of Michigan.  (JE 1, pp. 1-123)  She has 
received regular occipital nerve blocks and trigger point injections for cervicalgia and 
myofascial pain, chemodenervation or Botox injections into her face for chronic 
migraines, pharmacological treatment for her symptoms and pain, and physical therapy.  
(JE 1, pp. 1-123)  Phillips complained of continued pain, headaches, and fatigue with 
working.  (JE 1, pp. 13, 17)  Phillips relayed she had difficulty and increased symptoms 
with reading, looking down, looking up, reaching overhead, lifting, carrying, working on 
the computer, and falling asleep.  (JE 1, pp. 18, 28, 42-43)   
On May 8, 2017, Phillips sought emergency medical treatment at Troy Hospital 
after developing a migraine at work.  (JE 3, p. 143)  Phillips stated her migraines were 
typically on her right side and the migraine that night was on her left side with nausea, 
vomiting, photophobia, dizziness, and intermittent fuzzy vision, and reporting that she 
had never had a migraine that had been “so sudden or intense.”  (JE 3, pp. 143-45)  
Hospital staff examined Phillips and administered Toradol, Zofran, and Benadryl, which 
improved her headache, discharged her, and instructed her to follow up with neurology.  
(JE 3, p. 145)  
Phillips received additional chiropractic manipulations for aching and tightness 
discomfort in the back of her neck and tightness and throbbing in the right side of her 
head from New Era Chiropractic on August 15, 2016, May 12, 2017, June 29, 2017, 
January 29, 2018, February 5, 2018, March 2, 2018, December 3, 2018, December 5, 
2018, April 30, 2019, May 15, 2019, and August 13, 2019.  (JE 2)   
On February 19, 2019, Philips was rear-ended in her vehicle by another vehicle 
when she was at a complete stop.  (JE 3, p. 147; Tr., pp. 84-85)  Phillips sought 
emergency medical treatment and reported she struck the left side of her head on the 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 15 
 
window and she was complaining of a left-sided headache, bilateral neck pain, left 
shoulder pain, and tingling in her left arm.  (JE 3, p. 147)  Phillips relayed she had 
experienced chronic right-sided neck pain since a prior patient assault.  (JE 3, p. 147)  
Hospital staff diagnosed Phillips with a cervical sprain, administered Toradol and 
Flexeril, and discharged her from care.  (JE 3, p. 149)  At hearing Phillips testified the 
accident caused an increase in her headaches for a day or two and that her head and 
neck were sore.  (Tr., p. 85) 
On July 6, 2019, Phillips returned to the emergency department at Troy Hospital, 
complaining of a migraine headache that had not improved with her home medications.  
(JE 3, p. 150)  Phillips complained of associated vision changes and right-sided facial 
numbness that she had in the past and increased chronic neck pain she believed was 
secondary to the migraine.  (JE 3, p. 150)  Hospital staff examined Phillips, 
administered Benadryl, Toradol, Compazine, and IV fluids, noted her symptoms 
improved, but had not completely resolved with treatment, and discharged her from 
care.  (JE 3, p. 154)   
During a physical therapy session on January 6, 2020, Phillips reported her 
symptoms had become worse over the past three to four months.  (JE 1, p. 49)  Phillips 
relayed she had changed jobs from the emergency department at Troy to the pediatric 
department at Dearborn, and noted the week before she had tripped on a broken step 
and caught herself with her right upper extremity behind her, and reported she was 
experiencing constant pain at the base of her skull and right sided lower cervical pain.  
(JE 1, p. 49)  A week later Phillips reported she was having real issues with her pain 
and migraine headaches because the workers’ compensation carrier had not authorized 
additional injections and medication.  (JE 1, pp. 52-53)  During an appointment on 
January 24, 2020, Phillips reported her headache pain had been worse, she had 
constant pain at the base of her skull, right sided lower cervical pain, and right and left 
temporal pain.  (JE 1, p. 57)  Phillips relayed she had been miserable since workers’ 
compensation had stopped paying for some of her medications and injections, noting 
she was four to six weeks overdue for her occipital nerve blocks and once a month 
injection she gives herself.  (JE 1, p. 57)   
During a physical therapy appointment on January 29, 2020, Phillips again 
relayed she was having significant difficulty with workers’ compensation paying for her 
treatments that had helped her manage her pain and that she was “having to drop one 
of her 2 classes right now because she cannot tolerate the computer work required w/ 
increased head pain.”  (JE 1, p. 59)  Phillips requested a withdrawal letter from school 
from Wade Cooper, D.O.  (JE 1, p. 64)  Dr. Cooper issued the letter on January 30, 
2020, stating  
Sarah Phillips is under our care for chronic migraine.  She has had 
exacerbation of her head pain and is unable to get the necessary 
treatments that were prescribed for her due to unforeseen insurance 
issues.  Prior to this, her pain was manageable with the regimen 
prescribed. 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 16 
 
 
Because of this it is necessary for her to medically withdraw from 
school as her increased pain is limiting her ability to complete her school 
work. . . . 
(JE 1, p. 65)  Within two weeks, the workers’ compensation carrier authorized all 
services for Phillips until the end of the year.  (JE 1, p. 84)   
In March 2020, the Covid-19 Pandemic hit, which interfered with Phillips’s 
treatment and the University of Michigan cancelled her procedures and changed her 
medication.  (JE 1, p. 89)  Phillips resumed receiving bilateral occipital nerve blocks in 
May 2020.  (JE 1, pp. 101, 110)  
On August 1, 2020, Phillips contacted Dr. Cooper’s office and reported her work 
was requiring the nurses to wear face shields or goggles with all patient contact.   (JE 1, 
p. 120)  Phillips reported the shields and goggles have straps that go around her head 
and hurt her scalp, increasing her pain.  (JE 1, p. 120)  Phillips reported she did not 
want to miss work and requested a note to wear an alternative eye covering.  (JE 1, p. 
121)  Dr. Cooper issued a note stating Phillips “has a diagnosis of chronic migraine 
which has been refractory to multiple prevention and acute therapies.  She has 
allodynia including sensitivity to pressure on her scalp from elastic bands or eyewear,” 
and stated he strongly requested she be able to wear alternative eye protection that 
does not include pressure to her scalp when being used.  (JE 1, p. 121)   
On January 25, 2021, Michael Cullen, M.D., a neurologist conducted an 
independent medical examination of Phillips for REM and New Hampshire and issued 
his report on March 2, 2021.  (Ex. A)  Dr. Cullen examined Phillips and reviewed her 
medical records.  (Ex. A)  Dr. Cullen noted at the time of his exam Phillips remained 
symptomatic, complaining of fatigue, blurred vision with headaches, vertigo with 
headaches, nausea with vertigo, being moody/depressed, having difficulty 
concentrating, poor sleep, and facial numbness.  (Ex. A, p. 6)  Dr. Cullen documented 
as part of her headache treatment she was taking Venlafaxine 225 milligrams daily, four 
to six Fioricet per week, Naratriptan, Zonisamide, Tizanidine, Meclizine, and Naproxen, 
in combination with occipital nerve blocks, trigger point injections, and Botox therapy.  
(Ex. A, p. 6)  On exam, Dr. Cullen noted Phillips had diffuse tenderness in the right 
splenius capitis muscle group and tenderness over the right greater occipital nerve 
following a Botox/trigger point injection one week before.  (Ex. A, p. 7)   
Dr. Cullen diagnosed Phillips with a closed head injury, cervicalgia, and mixed 
headache pattern and opined she had not sustained “any additional or greater 
permanent impairment” under the AMA Guides, noting “[a]ny worsening of Ms. Phillips 
symptomatology would be attributable to alternative contributors/explanations (i.e. 
emotional/psychological, degenerative conditions, etc.).”  (Ex. A, p. 8)  Dr. Cullen further 
opined Phillips did not need any permanent restrictions noting she had been working as 
a nurse for approximately five years “without apparent incident.”  (Ex. A, p. 8)  As far as 
additional treatment is concerned, Dr. Cullen recommended Phillips avoid excessive 
Fioricet use, that Topamax in combination with “CGRP receptor therapies would seem 
appropriate,” and that interventional treatments, including nerve blocks, trigger point 
injections, and Botox therapy had not resulted in significant reduction in medicinal 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 17 
 
therapies and that he judged them as ineffective and not warranted, and recommended 
she follow up with a neurologist twice per year.  (Ex. A, p. 8)   
On January 26, 2021, Dr. Sassman conducted an independent medical 
examination for Phillips and issued her report on March 10, 2021.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Sassman 
examined Phillips and reviewed her medical records.  (Ex. 1)   
Dr. Sassman diagnosed Phillips with repeated head trauma with persistent 
headaches, migraines, and cervicalgia.  (Ex. 1, p. 29)  With respect to a change of 
condition, Dr. Sassman opined: 
[i]t is my opinion that there has been a change in Sarah’s physical 
condition since the arbitration decision occurred on 7/21/16.  This opinion 
is supported by the following facts:  At the time of the arbitration decision, 
for her headaches Ms. Phillips was taking Topamax, Effexor, Flexeril, 
Amerge PM for migraines, Zofran, and Naproxen.  Currently she is taking 
Zofran, Venlafaxine, Fioricet, Zanaflex, Amerge, Zonegran, Flexeril, and 
Meclizine.  Additionally, Aimovig was tried for the headaches.  She also 
was started on the loading dose of Emgality but could not get the future 
doses approved.  These additional medications are specifically for her 
headache symptoms and the addition of these medications represents a 
worsening of her symptoms since the time of the arbitration decision in 
7/21/16. 
 
Along with the medication changes, she has continued occipital 
nerve blocks and trigger point injections, but the frequency that these are 
needed to provide a therapeutic effect has increased over the previous 
few years.  Specifically, when she first began having these injections, she 
obtained relief for 1-3 months.  Now, although she still obtains relief, the 
relief only lasts 4-6 weeks. 
 
With the medication regimen and the injections, her current 
treatment regimen is more involved and more intense than the regimen 
she was on when I previously evaluated her in 2016, indicating a 
worsening of her symptoms. 
 
Additionally, in looking at her visits with the Headache Clinic it is 
notable that when she first began her visits there, she had 1-2 headache-
free days per month.  Now she has no headache-free days.  Her severe 
headache days in a month’s time frame have also increased over the 
previous years to approximately 10 per month.  All the above information 
represents a worsening of her symptoms since the arbitration decision of 
7/21/16. 
(Ex. 1, p. 30)  Using the AMA Guides, Dr. Sassman assigned Phillips a 19 percent 
permanent impairment rating: 
[f]or the cervical symptoms, using Section 15-2 on page 379, the DRE 
method is the appropriate method to use for assessment of the cervical 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 18 
 
spine.  Using Table 15-5 on page 392, she will be placed in a DRE 
Cervical Category II with 7% impairment of the whole person.  The upper 
level of this category is chosen because of the impact on her activities of 
daily living. 
 
For the head trauma, I followed the instructions in Section 13.2 on 
page 308 which delineates 5 steps to the process of evaluate cerebral 
impairment.  Step 1 of the process is to assess if there is impairment for 
consciousness or awareness.  Using Table 13-2 there is no impairment in 
the level of consciousness or awareness. 
 
Step 2 is to evaluate mental status and highest integrative 
functioning based on Table 13-5 and 13-6 on page 320.  There is no 
impairment for these issues. 
 
Step 3 on page 308 is identifying any difficulty with understanding 
and use of language based on Table 13-7 on page 323.  She is placed 
into a Class 1 with 0% impairment of the whole person due to no 
disturbance in comprehension and production of language symbols of 
daily living. 
 
Step 4 is evaluation of any emotional or behavioral disturbances, 
such as depression, that can modify cerebral function based on Table 13-
8 on page 325.  She is placed in a Class 1 with10% impairment of the 
whole person due to limitation of activities of daily living and daily social 
and interpersonal functioning since the head injury. 
 
Step 5 of the process of rating a head injury states that I am to 
identify the most severe cerebral impairment of those listed above and 
combine the most severe impairment with any other impairment noted in 
Table 13-1 on page 308.  Therefore, the criteria for rating impairment due 
to emotional and behavioral disturbances will be used, which is 10% 
whole person impairment.  I am then to combine this with the value 
derived from Table 13-1.  I will combine an additional 3% whole person 
impairment for the headaches.  Turning to the Combined Values Chart on 
Page 604, this is combined for a total of 13% impairment of the whole 
person. 
 
Overall, using the Combined Values Chart on page 604, 13% whole 
person impairment (for the head trauma) is combined with 7% whole 
person impairment (for the cervical spine) for a total of 19% impairment of 
the whole person. . . .  
(Ex. 1, p. 31)  Dr. Sassman recommended avoiding situations that will place Phillips at 
risk for additional head injuries, recommended restrictions of lifting, pushing, pulling, or 
carrying up to 50 pounds occasionally from floor to waist and from waist to shoulder 
height and 20 pounds rarely, with no use of vibratory or power tools.  (Ex. 1, p. 32)  In 
addition, Dr. Sassman assigned new restrictions of limiting pushing and pulling with her 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 19 
 
arms extended away from her body to an occasional basis as this aggravates her 
cervical symptoms.  (Ex. 1, p. 32)   
 
Dr. Sassman recommended Phillips continue with the current treatment plan 
recommended by the experts at the Headache Clinic at the University of Michigan for a 
combination of Botox, Emgality, occipital nerve blocks, and trigger point injections, 
noting when she evaluated her on January 26, 2021, Phillips had just started Botox and 
noted her headaches had improved with Botox in terms of frequency.  (Ex. 1, p. 32)  Dr. 
Sassman disagreed with Dr. Cullen’s opinion that additional interventional treatments 
were ineffective and not warranted, opining: 
. . . Phillips does note improvement in her symptoms when she receives 
the injections at the recommended intervals as well as maintains her 
medications regimen.  Unfortunately, she has had some issues with 
getting her medications and injections covered through the Workers’ 
Compensation insurance and was not able to obtain the injections at the 
recommended intervals as well as remain on all the recommended 
medications.  This led to an increase in her symptoms for a time.  
Recently, however, she began Botox injections which she stated has 
made her migraines less frequent.  Therefore, she does see some benefit 
in the treatment regimen prescribed by the Headache Clinic at the 
University of Michigan, and I would recommend she continue her care 
there. 
 
It should be noted that Ms. Phillips did have one Botox injection 
back in 2013, however, this was for treatment of the spasmodic torticollis 
symptoms she had at that time.  This was not for the migraine treatment it 
is required for now. 
(Ex. 1, p. 33)  Dr. Sassman opined the occipital nerve blocks, trigger point injections, 
and Botox injections continue to be necessary as a result of the October 2012 work 
injury.  (Ex. 1, p. 34)   
 
Phillips testified pushing and pulling away from her body aggravate her neck 
symptoms more than lifting patients.  (Tr., p. 52)  Phillips reported she can lift 50 pounds 
sometimes, but has often had to ask her coworkers for help with lifting because she 
would end up with too much pain.  (Tr., p. 53)  Phillips testified she could not maintain a 
position where she would have to lift heavy patients on a full-time basis.  (Tr., p. 55)  
None of Phillips’s treating physicians have imposed any permanent work restrictions.  
(Tr., p. 59)  Phillips has not provided her employer with Dr. Sassman’s restrictions.  (Tr., 
p. 59)   
 
Phillips has an outstanding balance for medical treatment she has received at the 
University of Michigan.  (Tr., p. 53)  Phillips testified the care she received through New 
Era Chiropractic and the University of Michigan has been beneficial to her.  (Tr., p. 53)  
 
 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 20 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Review-Reopening 
Iowa Code section 86.14 governs review-reopening proceedings.  When 
considering a review-reopening petition, the inquiry “shall be into whether or not the 
condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of 
compensation so awarded.”  Iowa Code § 86.14(2).  The deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner does not re-determine the condition of the employee adjudicated by the 
former award.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 391 (Iowa 2009).  The 
deputy workers’ compensation commissioner must determine “the condition of the 
employee, which is found to exist subsequent to the date of the award being reviewed.”  
Id.  (Quoting Stice v. Consol. Ind. Coal Co., 228 Iowa 1031, 1038, 291 N.W. 452, 456 
(1940)).  In a review-reopening proceeding, the deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner should not reevaluate the claimant’s level of physical impairment or 
earning capacity “if all of the facts and circumstances were known or knowable at the 
time of the original action.”  Id. at 393.  
The claimant bears the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence 
that, “subsequent to the date of the award under review, he or she has suffered an 
impairment or lessening of earning capacity proximately caused by the original injury.”  
Simonson v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 588 N.W.2d 430, 434 (Iowa 1999) (emphasis in 
original) 
Phillips alleges her symptoms have become worse since the arbitration hearing 
and she is not capable of performing all nursing jobs because of her work injury.  REM 
and New Hampshire aver Phillips has not met her burden of proof that she has 
sustained a change of condition because her symptoms are the same since the time of 
the arbitration hearing, she has not received any new permanent work restrictions, and 
her financial condition has improved after securing full-time employment as a nurse.   
In July 2016, Phillips obtained full-time employment as a nurse.  At the time of 
the hearing Phillips’s hourly wage was more than three times her hourly wage at the 
time of the arbitration hearing.   
Two expert witnesses have given opinions on whether Phillips has sustained a 
change of permanent impairment caused by the work injury, Dr. Sassman, and Dr. 
Cullen.  Dr. Sassman assigned Phillips an additional three percent permanent 
impairment and additional work restrictions which she opined were caused by the 
October 2012 work injury, and further opined Phillips needs to continue to receive the 
treatment regimen developed by the University of Michigan.  Dr. Cullen opined Phillips 
sustained no additional permanent impairment and he does not believe she needs 
additional injections recommended by Phillips’s authorized treating medical providers at 
the University of Michigan, noting, “any worsening of Ms. Phillips symptomatology would 
be attributable to alternative contributors/explanations (i.e. emotional/psychological, 
degenerative conditions, etc.”  (Ex. A, p. 8).  None of Phillips’s treating physicians have 
opined her current symptoms and need for treatment are “attributable to alternative 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 21 
 
contributors/explanations (i.e. emotional/psychological, degenerative conditions, etc.”  
(Ex. A, p. 8).  I do not find Dr. Cullen’s opinion reasonable or consistent with the other 
evidence I believe.    
When considering expert testimony, the trier of fact may accept or reject expert 
testimony, even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 
569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert 
opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the 
claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the 
examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other 
factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., 
Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).   
Phillips sustained three head injuries while working at REM, the last occurring in 
October 2012.  In October 2012, a REM resident violently assaulted Phillips, causing 
her to sustain a head injury; her injuries resulted in a permanent impairment.  Since that 
time Phillips has struggled with headaches and pain at the base of her head, memory 
issues, reading difficulties, and concentration problems.  Despite these problems, 
Phillips has sought additional education to improve her situation.  She is a remarkable 
person.  Phillips’s work injury impaired her ability to obtain training as a registered nurse 
before the arbitration hearing and has impaired her ability to complete a BSN, which is 
required for her to maintain her current employment. 
The record supports Phillips was doing well with her medical regimen in July 
2016, when Beaumont Troy hired her as a full-time nurse in the Clinical Decisions Unit.  
Many of her patients were elderly and required frequent turning, assistance with 
personal cares, assistance with toileting, and assistance with getting up and ambulating, 
requiring Phillips to push and pull more than 50 pounds.  (Tr., pp. 18-19)  Phillips’s 
commute was 58 miles. 
Phillips could no longer take muscle relaxers to combat her symptoms when 
working with patients.  When she had a severe migraine, Phillips could not drive and 
slept in her car until her symptoms were better and she could drive and also stayed with 
coworkers.  (Tr., pp. 19-21)  Phillips also used intermittent FMLA leave once or twice 
per month when she had to call off from work.  (Tr., pp. 21-22) 
While Phillips received occipital nerve block and trigger point injections before 
the arbitration hearing, the frequency of her injections has increased over time to 
combat her work-related symptoms.  As of December 14, 2017, the University of 
Michigan staff noted Phillips was experiencing on average 10 days of severe 
headaches, 18 days of moderate headaches, and one to two days of no headache 
within the last 30 days.  (JE 1, p. 10)  At the time of the arbitration hearing, Phillips was 
experiencing one to two migraines per month.  (Arbitration Decision)   
In December 2019, Philips transferred to Beaumont Dearborn, which is 20 to 30 
minutes from her home, which shortened her commute.  (Tr., pp. 24, 26, 27)  At 
Beaumont Dearborn Phillips works with adult women and children.  The position is 
lighter in nature because the patients can ambulate on their own to the bathroom and 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 22 
 
do not need to be turned in bed.  (Tr., p. 26)  Phillips has continued to complain of 
headaches and pain at the base of her skull. 
In late 2019 and early 2020, New Hampshire stopped authorizing Phillips’s care 
at the University of Michigan and her condition deteriorated, which is noted in her 
medical records.  (JE 1)  Phillips had to medically withdraw from her BSN program 
because she could not tolerate computer work with her increased pain.  Dr. Cooper 
issued a letter on January 30, 2020, requesting she be given a medical withdrawal from 
school due to an exacerbation of her head pain and inability to obtain necessary 
treatment due to unforeseen insurance issues, noting “[p]rior to this, her pain was 
manageable with the regimen prescribed.  (JE 1, p. 65)   
Phillips filed an application for alternate care.  At that time the University of 
Michigan was recommending ongoing occipital nerve block and trigger point injections, 
pharmacological treatment, chiropractic treatment, and Botox injections.  REM and New 
Hampshire agreed to a consent order on February 3, 2020, agreeing to provide the 
requested treatment. 
Phillips began receiving Botox injections in February 2020 for her migraines.  (JE 
1, p. 2)  While Phillips received one Botox injection prior to the arbitration hearing, the 
one injection she received was not for chronic migraines; rather it was for her right-sided 
torticollis, to relieve the spasms from her head tilt.  (Tr., p. 38)  Since February 2020, 
Phillips has received 30 to 40 Botox injections every three months in her face, scalp, 
neck, and shoulders to treat her migraines.  (Tr., p. 38; JE 1, pp. 1-2)  Phillips relayed 
the treatment is painful and causes bruising on her face and body, but she has noticed 
a decrease in the frequency of her migraines since she started the Botox treatment.  
(Tr., p. 39)  Phillips reported she started the Botox because she could not tolerate 
higher levels of other medications and she had tried all of the other treatment options 
the University of Michigan offered.  (Tr., p. 40)   
At the time of the review-reopening hearing, Phillips’s headaches and pain were 
again under control with additional Botox treatment and a regular treatment regimen 
through the University of Michigan.  I find Phillips has established she has sustained a 
change of physical condition, which has resulted in the need for additional treatment, 
the Botox injections, more frequent occipital and trigger point injections, and other 
medications, caused by the work injury.  I also find Phillips needs to continue with 
ongoing treatment recommended by the University of Michigan for her headaches and 
chronic pain.  Without the treatment, I do not believe she would be able to continue to 
perform her duties as a nurse.   
I did not find Dr. Sassman’s lifting restrictions at the time of the arbitration 
hearing to be Phillips’s permanent restrictions.  Phillips’s treating physicians have not 
imposed any permanent restrictions on Phillips.  Phillips has not requested any 
accommodations from her employer based on Dr. Sassman’s recent recommended 
restrictions.  I do not adopt Dr. Sassman’s restrictions as Phillips’s permanent 
restrictions. 
Given Phillips has established a change of physical condition, it is necessary to 
determine whether the change in condition warrants an award of additional 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 23 
 
compensation benefits.  “Industrial disability is determined by an evaluation of the 
employee’s earning capacity.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 
839, 852 (Iowa 2011).  In considering the employee’s earning capacity, the deputy 
commissioner evaluates several factors, including “consideration of not only the 
claimant’s functional disability, but also [his] age, education, qualifications, experience, 
and ability to engage in similar employment.”  Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Deutmeyer, 789 
N.W.2d 129, 137-38 (Iowa 2010).  The inquiry focuses on the injured employee’s “ability 
to be gainfully employed.”  Id. at 138.  
The determination of the extent of disability is a mixed issue of law and fact.  
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  Compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2).  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Id. § 85.34(2)(u).   
At the time of the review-reopening hearing Phillips was 37.  (Tr., p. 8)  Since the 
arbitration hearing Phillips has secured full-time employment as a nurse with the 
Beaumont Health System, based, in part, on her determination and grit, despite a 
significant impairment.  Phillips has successfully worked for two hospitals in the 
Beaumont Health System for the past five years.  Phillips’s hourly wage is more than 
three times higher than her hourly wage at the time of the arbitration hearing.  While she 
has struggled with the coursework for her BSN degree, I do not find Phillips’s struggles 
with learning and reading have changed since the arbitration hearing.  Based on the 
record evidence at hearing, I do not find Phillips has established she has sustained any 
additional industrial disability caused by the work injury.   
II. 
Medical Bills and Medical Care 
Phillips seeks to recover the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 6 and she requests 
Defendants be required to authorize ongoing treatment recommended by her treating 
medical providers at the University of Michigan, including injections and 
pharmacological treatment.   
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  Id.  “The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id. § 85.27(4).  If the 
employee is dissatisfied with the care, the employee should communicate the basis for 
the dissatisfaction to the employer.  Id.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on 
alternate care, the commissioner “may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Id.  The statute requires the employer to 
furnish reasonable medical care.  Id. § 85.27(4); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (noting “[t]he employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability”).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
the employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 24 
 
has denied liability for the injury, or has abandoned care.  Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).   
While the employer retains the right to choose the employee’s medical care 
under the statute, the employee is not prohibited from seeking her own care when the 
employer denies compensability for the injury or the employee “abandons the 
protections of section 85.27 or otherwise obtains his or her own medical care 
independent of the statutory scheme.”  Brewer Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 
248 (Iowa 2018) (quoting Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 204 (Iowa 2010).  In Brewer-Strong and Gwinn, the court held the employer’s duty 
to furnish reasonable medical care includes unauthorized care if the employee is able to 
prove “by a preponderance of the evidence that such care was reasonable and 
beneficial” under the totality of the circumstances.  Id. (quoting Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 
206).  The court further held “unauthorized medical care is beneficial if it provides a 
more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care 
authorized by the employer.”  Id.   
I find the medical care Phillips received that resulted in the medical bills set forth 
in Exhibit 6 reasonable and beneficial to Phillips.  REM and New Hampshire are 
responsible for the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 6 and for all causally related medical 
care, including, but not limited to the ongoing care ordered by Phillips’s treating medical 
practitioners at the University of Michigan. 
III. 
Cost of the Independent Medical Examination 
Phillips seeks to recover the $5,280.00 cost of Dr. Sassman’s independent 
medical examination.  Dr. Cullen provided an opinion in this case that Phillips had 
sustained no additional permanent impairment.  Phillips disagreed and obtained an 
independent medical examination from Dr. Sassman. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 (2012), provides, in part: 
[a]fter an injury, the employee, if requested by the employer, shall submit 
for examination at some reasonable time and place and as often as 
reasonably requested, to a physician or physicians authorized to practice 
under the laws of this state or another state, without cost to the employee; 
but if the employee requests, the employee, at the employee’s own cost, 
is entitled to have a physician or physicians of the employee’s own 
selection present to participate in the examination.  If an employee is 
required to leave work for which the employee is being paid wages to 
attend the requested examination, the employee shall be compensated at 
the employee’s regular rate for the time the employee is required to leave 
work, and the employee shall be furnished transportation to and from the 
place of examination, or the employer may elect to pay the employee the 
reasonable cost of the transportation. . . . If an evaluation of permanent 
disability has been made by a physician retained by the employer and the 
employee believes this evaluation to be too low, the employee shall, upon 
application to the commissioner and upon delivery of a copy of the 
application to the employer and its insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 25 
 
employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician 
of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred for the examination. . . . 
The Iowa Court of Appeals recently addressed this issue in Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021).  
In Kern, the defendants’ expert found there was no causation.  Kern disagreed with the 
opinion and sought an independent medical examination at the defendants’ expense.  
The Commissioner found Kern was not entitled to recover the cost of an independent 
medical examination.  The Court of Appeals reversed, finding the “opinion on lack of 
causation was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating,” which is reimbursable 
under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Dr. Cullen opined Phillips sustained no additional 
impairment.  Phillips disagreed and sought an independent medical examination with 
Dr. Sassman.  Under Kern, Phillips is entitled to recover the $5,280.00 cost of Dr. 
Sassman’s independent medical examination.   
IV. 
Costs 
Phillips seeks to recover $62.40 or $50.00 for photocopies, $75.65 for medical 
records, $288.45 for postage and service for process fees, the $103.00 filing fee, and 
the $122.85 cost of Phillips’s deposition.   
Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing before the 
commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33, provides costs may be taxed by the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner for:  (1) the attendance of a certificated shorthand reporter 
for hearings and depositions; (2) transcription costs; (3) the cost of service of the 
original notice and subpoenas; (4) witness fees and expenses; (5) the cost of doctors’ 
and practitioner’s deposition testimony; (6) the reasonable cost of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports; (7) filing fees; and (8) the cost of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
The administrative rule expressly allows for the recovery of the cost of the filing 
fee and the cost of the deposition.  Phillips did not itemize the service of process fees 
from the postage or explain what the postage was for.  The costs of postage, medical 
records, and photocopies are not recoverable under the rules.  Because Phillips did not 
itemize the service of process fees, I do not find she is entitled to the service of process 
fees.   
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Claimant shall take nothing further.   
Defendants shall reimburse Claimant five thousand two hundred eighty and 
00/100 dollars ($5,280.00) for the cost of Dr. Sassman’s independent medical 
examination. 

PHILLIPS V. REM IOWA 
Page 26 
 
Defendants are responsible for the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 6 and for all 
causally related medical care, including ongoing care for Claimant’s work-related injury, 
at the University of Michigan. 
Defendants shall reimburse Claimant one hundred three and 00/100 dollars 
($103.00) for the filing fee, and one hundred twenty-two and 85/100 dollars ($122.85) 
for Claimant’s deposition. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ____9th __ day of November, 2021. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Emily Anderson (via WCES) 
 
Dillon Besser (via WCES) 
 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following addres s: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
