Case Number: 20014345.02
Case Title:  GRUVER, DAVID V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Gruver David - 20014345.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DAVID GRUVER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
FILE NO. 20014345.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                   REVIEW-REOPENING            
LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                             DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                                 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA,    
  : 
HEAD NOTE NOS:  1402.40, 1403.20, 
 
 
  : 
 
  1701, 1804, 2501, 2701, 2905 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant David Gruver filed a petition for review-reopening, seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Lennox Industries, employer, and Indemnity Insurance 
Company, insurer, for an accepted work injury date of September 3, 2020. The case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on April 3, 2024. The case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through L.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record was held open until 
May 3, 2024, so claimant could submit an additional rebuttal exhibit. The parties 
submitted post-hearing briefs on May 23, 2024, and the case was considered fully 
submitted on that date. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-04  13:38:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
ISSUES1 
 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability/healing period benefits 
from September 19, 2022 through June 13, 2023; 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent disability, including permanent total 
disability; 
3. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
4. 
Whether defendants are entitled to credit for benefits previously paid and 
under Iowa Code section 85.38(2); and 
5. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
This is a claim for review-reopening of a prior award. Claimant’s initial arbitration 
hearing took place before the undersigned on December 2, 2021. The arbitration 
decision was filed on April 14, 2022, and found that claimant sustained a cervical spine 
injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with defendant employer. At 
that time, claimant had not reached maximum medical improvement (MMI). The 
decision also found that claimant was entitled to alternate medical care, and ordered 
defendants to “immediately authorize and timely pay for claimant’s continuing care 
related to the compensable cervical spine injury with providers of claimant’s choice, 
including but not limited to Ikigu Thuku, M.D. and Jonathon Geisinger, M.D., or other 
qualified medical providers at McFarland Clinic.” (See Arbitration Decision, pp. 22-23) 
 
The arbitration decision was affirmed in its entirety by the Commissioner on 
August 22, 2022, making it final agency action. No further appeal was taken. All findings 
of fact contained within the arbitration and appeal decisions are final and conclusive in 
this proceeding. The facts surrounding claimant’s September 3, 2020 work injury, 
treatment, and other relevant factors are detailed in the April 14, 2022 arbitration 
hearing, and will not be set forth in this decision. The relevant timeframe for 
consideration in this review-reopening is for any changes occurring since the arbitration 
hearing on December 2, 2021. 
 
In the arbitration decision, I found that claimant was not a perfect historian, but 
overall, he was a credible witness. The same is true now. Claimant’s testimony at the 
review-reopening hearing was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and his 
demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his veracity. 
Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of the review-reopening hearing, claimant was a 63-year-old person. 
(Hearing Transcript, p. 13) He testified that following the arbitration hearing, he sought 
                                                 
1 Reimbursement for claimant’s independent medical evaluation was also listed as an issue on the 
hearing report, but the parties resolved that issue after hearing. (See Claimant’s brief, p. 15) 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
medical treatment with his primary care provider, Steven Scurr, D.O. (Tr., p. 15) Medical 
records indicate he saw Dr. Scurr on March 21, 2022. (Joint Exhibit 4, p. 18) At that time 
he complained of chronic daily neck pain and radicular symptoms and weakness into 
the right arm, with numbness in his right hand. Dr. Scurr noted that claimant had an MRI 
the year prior, which showed multilevel spinal stenotic components, most prevalent at 
C4-C5. He was referred to orthopedics. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20)  
 
Claimant saw Paula Stageman, ARNP at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons 
(DMOS), on April 19, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) After examination, her diagnoses were 
cervical spondylosis, cervical radiculopathy, left ulnar neuropathy, left carpal tunnel 
syndrome, and right upper extremity numbness and tingling. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) She 
ordered an updated cervical MRI, and an EMG of the right upper extremity. 
 
The cervical MRI took place on April 29, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) The EMG took 
place on May 4, 2022. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 2) Claimant saw John Gaffey, M.D., at 
DMOS on May 20, 2022. Dr. Gaffey diagnosed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, but felt 
most of claimant’s symptoms were coming from his cervical spine. He referred claimant 
for a spine surgery consultation, and told him to return once his spine had been treated 
for treatment related to his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. 
 
Claimant saw Zachary Ries, M.D., on June 16, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 14) He 
reviewed the most recent MRI and noted moderate left neural foraminal stenosis at C2-
C3; severe left and moderate right neural foraminal stenosis at C3-C4; severe right 
neural foraminal stenosis at C4-C5; and severe left and moderate severe right neural 
foraminal stenosis at C5-C6. His impression was chronic neck pain and bilateral 
radiculopathy secondary to multilevel neural foraminal cervical stenosis. He advised 
claimant that he was not currently a surgical candidate as his A1c was too high. He told 
claimant to follow up for a surgical consult once his A1c was lower. In the meantime, he 
wanted claimant to start physical therapy and get a repeat cervical epidural steroid 
injection (ESI). 
 
Claimant testified that he had difficulties in lowering his A1c level. (Tr., p. 18) He 
continued to have symptoms and eventually returned to Dr. Scurr as he was desperate 
for treatment. (Tr., pp. 18-19) He saw Dr. Scurr on July 27, 2022, at which time he had 
not started physical therapy and was on a waiting list for the pain clinic to call him back 
about a potential ESI. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 21-22) Dr. Scurr’s note states he would see if he 
could facilitate getting claimant in for his follow-up at the pain clinic. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 23) 
Claimant testified that sometime around the first week of August, his pain got to the 
point that he could no longer perform his job, and he stopped working. (Tr., p. 20) At his 
next visit with Dr. Scurr on August 29, 2022, he requested a referral to see an 
orthopedic surgeon at University of Iowa. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 25-27) Dr. Scurr noted he was 
not working at that time. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 26)  
 
On September 14, 2022, defense counsel emailed claimant’s attorney and 
indicated that pursuant to the appeal decision, defendants would reimburse certain 
medical expenses. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, p. 1) The email also asked if claimant 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
wanted to be seen by either Dr. Thuku or Dr. Geisinger at that time. Defendants’ brief 
states that claimant’s attorney never replied to the email. (Def. Brief, p. 4) There is no 
evidence in the record contrary to that statement. However, by that time, claimant had 
already chosen to seek treatment with Dr. Scurr, as was his right pursuant to the Appeal 
decision awarding alternate medical care. 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Scurr again on September 19, 2022, at which time he was still 
off work and had an upcoming appointment at the University of Iowa. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 29-
30) The record notes that claimant presented with paperwork for short-term disability. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) Dr. Scurr stated he would “continue him on and (sic) off work status he 
simply does not have the strength to do his vocation. . .” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 31) On September 
23, 2022, Dr. Scurr authored a letter that stated his medical opinion that claimant was 
not able to complete the required tasks of his job due to neck pain and weakness of his 
arms. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 32) He opined that claimant should remain off work until he could be 
evaluated and treated by a neurosurgeon.  
 
On October 26, 2022, claimant saw Katie Sander, ARNP, at the University of 
Iowa Neurosurgery Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) She noted claimant’s complaints of chronic 
neck pain and bilateral lower arm numbness. Claimant said the numbness had been 
increasing over the last six months. His neck pain radiated into the bilateral upper 
shoulder region, and rarely into the distal arm. He reported significant numbness from 
the elbow to the fingertips, and said the first and second fingers of both hands felt 
“dead.” ARNP Sander reviewed claimant’s MRI and his EMG from 2021, and noted 
moderate spinal canal stenosis at C4-C5 and C5-C6. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) The EMG showed 
chronic C5-C6 radiculopathy. She recommended a cervical CT, after which claimant 
would return to discuss surgical options. He was also provided with a referral for 
physical therapy.  
 
Claimant returned to the neurosurgery clinic on December 8, 2022, and saw 
Hiroyuki Oya, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) Dr. Oya noted claimant had undergone one session 
of physical therapy and felt he was unable to participate. He reviewed claimant’s MRI 
and cervical CT, and stated that claimant’s neck pain was primarily mechanical in 
nature and likely secondary to diffuse osteoarthritis. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 8-9) He said there 
was no appropriate target in the cervical spine that would benefit claimant’s symptoms, 
and recommended an ESI and continued physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9)  
 
Also on December 8, 2022, claimant’s attorney wrote to defense counsel with 
notice that Dr. Scurr had referred claimant to University of Iowa for treatment, and 
asked he be informed if there would be an issue with defendants paying for that 
treatment. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 24)  
 
On December 13, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Scurr. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 33) His 
record notes that claimant had an appointment scheduled with a pain specialist, Dr. 
Thuku, for the recommended ESI, and was enrolled in physical therapy. He responded 
to some questions posed by claimant’s attorney, first stating that claimant’s symptoms 
were due to his cervical condition. He further opined that those cervical symptoms were 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
a factor in exacerbating claimant’s mood disorder. Finally, he stated that claimant 
should continue to stay off work as he was not able to perform his job duties due to 
weakness and substantial discomfort. He recommended that claimant increase his 
hydrocodone, keep his appointment with the pain specialist, and remain off work. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 35) He stated that claimant’s anxiety and depression were exacerbated by his 
chronic pain and chronic cervical spine disease, but that he was adequately treated on 
his current medication.   
 
Claimant’s attorney wrote to defense counsel again on December 14, 2022, 
noting that the neurosurgeon had referred claimant for physical therapy and pain 
management, and Dr. Scurr had reiterated the referral. (Cl. Ex. 3, p 25) He asked if 
defendants would authorize claimant’s treatment with Dr. Thuku. He also noted Dr. 
Scurr had recommended claimant remain off work, and requested temporary disability 
benefits. 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Thuku at McFarland Clinic on December 19, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
36) Dr. Thuku’s plan was to proceed with a C7-T1 ESI, and then determine what 
additional treatment was needed depending on how he reacted. Claimant testified that 
he never got the cervical ESI, but he did continue with physical therapy, which did not 
improve his condition. (Tr., p. 24) He next saw Dr. Thuku on February 8, 2023, at which 
time Dr. Thuku stated the ESI was scheduled for February 13, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 39) 
He continued with physical therapy. He reported his symptoms were worsening, and 
that he sometimes had shakes as if he had Parkinson’s. He continued to experience 
numbness, worse at night. He was only sleeping for about 3 to 4 hours per night. Dr. 
Thuku was unable to explain the exact sources of claimant’s pain, whether it was from 
spondylosis in his neck or from his work injury. However, he opined that because 
claimant’s symptoms were worsening, he could remain off work. Dr. Thuku 
recommended that claimant continue with physical therapy and get the cervical ESI, 
after which he may consider a repeat EMG if he continued to have symptoms.  
 
On February 10, 2023, claimant’s attorney wrote to defense counsel again 
requesting temporary total disability benefits, noting that Dr. Thuku had opined that 
claimant could remain off work. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) Defense counsel replied on February 
18, 2023, stating that Dr. Thuku’s opinion was unclear as to whether claimant’s 
symptoms were caused or materially aggravated by the work injury. (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
He suggested that either he or claimant’s attorney seek an opinion from Dr. Thuku 
clarifying his opinion. He ended the email by asking claimant’s attorney to let him know 
how he wanted to proceed.  
 
Claimant next saw Dr. Thuku on March 17, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 42) The note 
indicates claimant had the ESI on February 13, 2023, and it did not help. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
43) He complained of shoulder pain radiating into hand numbness. Dr. Thuku 
prescribed Gabapentin, and recommended claimant return to University of Iowa 
neurosurgery as he had not responded to conservative treatment. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 42) He 
also suggested claimant follow up with an occupational health provider to address 
questions regarding causation and whether his neck pain was a result of his work injury. 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Claimant testified that defendants did not authorize him to return to University of 
Iowa; rather, they sent him to Trevor Schmitz, M.D., at Iowa Ortho. (Tr., pp. 24-25) 
Claimant saw Dr. Schmitz on April 28, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 46) At that time, claimant 
reported pain at a level 10 out of 10. Pain was primarily located in his neck and bilateral 
upper extremities, extending into his bilateral thumb and index fingers. Dr. Schmitz 
examined claimant and reviewed his MRI. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 47-49) He noted a longstanding 
history of axial neck pain along with right greater than left arm radicular symptoms, and 
significant atrophy in the right arm with significant weakness. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 49) He noted 
claimant had tried physical therapy and injections with no improvement. Based on the 
moderate to severe foraminal stenosis in his cervical spine, Dr. Schmitz recommended 
an anterior cervical decompression and instrumented fusion at C3-C4, C4-C5, and C5-
C6. On the patient status report, Dr. Schmitz wrote “same as previous” for restrictions. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 45) However, on June 13, 2023, Dr. Schmitz responded to a letter authored 
by defense counsel. (Def. Ex. C, pp. 8-9) Dr. Schmitz opined that claimant did not 
require any restrictions leading up to the date of surgery. 
 
Claimant had surgery on August 9, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 50) Dr. Schmitz performed 
anterior cervical diskectomy and fusion, C3-C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6; anterior cervical 
spinal cord and foraminal decompression bilaterally at C3-C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6; 
placement of a titanium structural interbody device at C3-C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6; and 
anterior cervical plate fixation at C3, C4, C5, and C6. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 50-51) His pre and 
post operative diagnoses were the same: cervical disk herniation and disk degeneration 
at C3-C4, C4-C5 and C5-C6; bilateral foraminal stenosis at those levels; and neck pain 
along with bilateral arm radiculopathy including numbness, tingling, and associated 
weakness. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 50) 
 
Claimant had his first post-operative visit with Dr. Schmitz on September 1, 2023. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 53) Claimant reported his symptoms had improved, and described them as 
moderate. He complained of stiffness. He noted better hand function and reported he 
was able to close his hands better. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 55) He said while he initially thought the 
numbness and tingling in his hands had resolved, at that time he felt the tingling had 
only improved.  
 
At his next follow up on October 6, 2023, claimant reported moderate pain in his 
bilateral posterior neck, bilateral shoulders, and left scapula. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 57) He 
reported doing a little better that day, but earlier in the week he had significant neck pain 
that traveled into both shoulders. His hands were still numb, but did not hurt as much as 
before. Dr. Schmitz recommended claimant begin physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 59) 
 
On November 17, 2023, claimant reported his symptoms had worsened. (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 60) He complained of ongoing numbness in his hands, with the numbness in his 
right upper extremity extending into his shoulder. He felt physical therapy had been 
causing the issue to flare. He also complained of neck pain, especially on the right, 
when turning his head. Dr. Schmitz noted that claimant had not been undergoing dry 
needling or significant therapy, and had not gotten his Gabapentin refilled. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
62) Dr. Schmitz felt there were issues because his care information had to go through 
claimant’s attorney and the nurse case manager was not allowed in the room during 
claimant’s appointments. He felt this was causing “significant disruption and 
fragmentation of his care.” (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 62-63) Dr. Schmitz brought the case manager 
in, and discussed that he would prefer to have her in the room when discussing his 
future care so there were “no secrets and the ball is not getting dropped on anything.” 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 63) His plan was to get the Gabapentin approved, and get claimant started 
on aggressive physical therapy with dry needling. Dr. Schmitz anticipated MMI within 6 
weeks to 3 months.  
 
Claimant next saw Dr. Schmitz on December 29, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 64) At that 
time he reported his symptoms had worsened. He reported constant pain at a level 8 
out of 10 in his bilateral arms, radiating to his hands. He also said his right thumb was 
clicking, and it was difficult to even hold a cup of coffee with his right hand. The 
numbness continued to worsen and he was experiencing numbness from his hands into 
his elbows. He reported both gabapentin and Lyrica making him sick. 
 
Dr. Schmitz felt claimant’s symptoms did not make much anatomic sense, as his 
numbness and tingling were gone immediately after surgery, and had significantly 
improved at his three-week postoperative visit. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 66) He also noted 
claimant’s strength was significantly better on examination and he no longer had deltoid 
weakness. He noted that numbness and tingling take a while to get better. He stated, 
“We could order an MRI and EMG but I have significant concern going forward we are 
going to be getting into bigger and bigger operations.” He was concerned about the 
“significant life altering implications” of a larger surgery. He noted that everything he has 
done had only made him worse, meaning further interventions likely would not help. He 
placed claimant at MMI, and opined that nothing further was going to make him better. 
He ordered a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) with a follow up visit after. 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with John Kuhnlein, D.O., 
on January 17, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Kuhnlein’s report is dated February 2, 2024. 
Dr. Kuhnlein also performed an IME for claimant in 2021, which is discussed in the 
arbitration decision. Dr. Kuhnlein reviewed claimant’s medical records since his last 
IME, and provided a detailed summary. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-4) He noted claimant’s FCE 
was scheduled to take place the day after his examination. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) At the time 
of the IME, claimant complained of neck stiffness and aching. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) He had 
less pain in his neck and arm than before surgery, but still described significant hand 
numbness, which Dr. Kuhnlein noted was possibly from the previously documented 
carpal tunnel syndrome. He also complained of occipital headaches. 
 
Claimant described limited physical activity throughout the day. He said that he 
might go to the store and to visit his daughter, but these activities worsen his pain and 
he has to rest. He said he takes a lot of breaks from activity. He described problems 
with travel, writing, prolonged standing or walking (due to his lower back), material 
handling functions, feeling with his fingers, gripping/grasping, and with intimacy. His 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 8 
pain also disrupts his sleep, causing him to get up every two to three hours due to 
discomforts. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6)  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Kuhnlein noted right trapezius muscle spasm, and 
said claimant complained that trapezius muscle compression produced right arm 
numbness. He also had left trapezius pain with Spurling’s maneuver. He found several 
deficits in sensation with respect to both arms, hands, and his fingers, and pain with all 
active cervical range of motion maneuvers. He had decreased range of motion in both 
shoulders as well as pain and joint tenderness. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) Claimant had pain and 
tenderness with bilateral elbow and wrist range of motion as well. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8)  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s diagnoses were cervical disc herniation and disc degeneration C3-
C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6 with chronic neck pain and bilateral radiculopathy; bilateral 
foraminal stenosis at C3-C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6; and August 9, 2023 C3-C4, C4-C5, 
and C5-C6 anterior cervical spinal cord and foraminal decompression, cervical 
discectomy and fusion. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 8-9) He opined that claimant reached MMI as of 
December 29, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9) He felt claimant had sustained permanent 
impairment as a result of the work injury and provided an impairment rating using the 
fifth edition of the AMA Guides.  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein first stated that the Range of Motion (ROM) method for assessment 
of impairment was indicated, and provided a total impairment rating under that method 
of 21 percent of the whole person. However, he opined that this particular case points to 
one of the inconsistencies in the Guides. He noted that this case would be a minimum 
25 percent impairment using the diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) method of 
assessment. He stated that claimant had a more involved surgery, which results in a 
lesser impairment using the ROM method, which is “inherently inconsistent and would 
be unfair to Mr. Gruver, as his impairment would be higher if he had a less involved 
single level surgery performed.” (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) As such, to be fair to claimant, Dr. 
Kuhnlein used the DRE method and Table 15-5, and assigned a 25 percent whole 
person impairment rating. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
 
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Kuhnlein recommended lifting 15-pounds 
occasionally from floor to waist and waist to shoulder, and no work over the shoulder. 
He also recommended sitting, standing, or walking on an as-tolerated basis, with the 
ability to change positions for comfort. He stated claimant can occasionally crawl, work 
on ladders if he can maintain a three-point safety stance, rarely climb stairs, and that he 
should not work at or above shoulder height. He had no restrictions on gripping or 
grasping.  
 
For future medical treatment, Dr. Kuhnlein noted that claimant may develop 
adjacent segment disease above or below the three-level fusion, which may require 
medical attention in the future. He also noted claimant’s pain and numbness in his 
hands, and that he had previously been diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome. He 
suggested claimant return to Dr. Gaffey to address his carpal tunnel and see if that 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 9 
affects his hand pain and numbness. He noted that “would not be part of his particular 
claim.” 
 
Claimant had the FCE on January 26, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 72) Results 
demonstrated that claimant did not have the ability to meet the physical demand 
requirements of his job based on the employer’s job description. Specifically, it is noted 
that claimant was tested using a positional tolerance circuit to determine whether he 
could meet the job demands of operating a forklift. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 81) The report indicates 
claimant struggled to look over his shoulder sufficiently to successfully back-up a sit-
down forklift, and did not demonstrate sufficient standing activity tolerance to simulate 
operation of a stand-up forklift. Overall, claimant demonstrated the ability to function in 
the light physical demand category. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 72) Specifically, he was able to 
occasionally lift up to 15 pounds floor to waist, and floor to shoulder; 18 pounds waist to 
shoulder; carry up to 15 pounds bilaterally; push 65 pounds of force; and pull 72 pounds 
of force. He also demonstrated limited cervical range of motion for looking over his 
shoulder to operate a sit-down forklift, and inability to complete constant standing or 
balance if a stand-up forklift were required. He also demonstrated limited material 
handling to be able to change forks, perform maintenance, or load propane.  
 
In a letter dated February 1, 2024, the employer made an “offer of suitable 
employment” to temporarily accommodate claimant’s work restrictions. (Def. Ex. D, p. 
10) The letter offered claimant a temporary job as a Distribution Associate III, which 
consisted of driving a sit-down forklift for half of his shift, a stand-up forklift for the other 
half, and removing products from the conveyor lines. The letter notes that claimant’s 
supervisor had been advised of his physical lifting and positional tolerance restrictions, 
and a copy of his physical abilities assessment from his FCE was enclosed. He was 
advised that if he experienced any difficulties while performing his duties, could not work 
or needed to leave work because of difficulties, he was to report it to his supervisor 
immediately. Finally, he was given the contact information for a human resources 
person to contact if his supervisor were to ask him to exceed his restrictions in any way.  
 
On February 2, 2024, claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz for his follow up after his 
FCE. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 67) The record notes that claimant complained his neck pain was 
severe, constant, and had worsened. He also continued to have bilateral hand 
numbness and severe and frequent headaches. On physical examination, he noted 
diffusely diminished sensation of the bilateral forearms and hands. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 68) He 
reviewed claimant’s FCE, and noted it was consistent with a light demand category. (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 69) He advised claimant that he would make his restrictions permanent, and 
see him back in seven months. On the patient status report, he writes claimant’s 
restrictions were “per FCE – light demand category permanent.” (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 70) 
 
On the same date, the nurse case manager provided an update indicating that 
claimant is unable to return to work at his current job duties. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 89) She 
indicated that other work or jobs would need to be explored. 
 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 10 
Claimant’s attorney wrote to defense counsel on February 3, 2024, and advised 
that claimant declined the offer of modified work, as the light duty position did not 
comply with his permanent restrictions. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) He stated that the FCE noted 
claimant’s limited cervical range of motion, and inability to complete constant standing 
or balance if a stand-up forklift was used. Claimant’s attorney stated that because the 
modified light-duty work offered did not comply with claimant’s permanent restrictions, it 
was not a suitable offer of work. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 29) 
 
Claimant testified that after the FCE, he was asked to report to work, and did so. 
(Tr., p. 39) However, after he met with the foreman and manager, and they realized he 
had restrictions, they apologized and sent him home. Shortly thereafter he received the 
offer of suitable employment from the employer. Claimant described the job offered as 
worse than his original job. (Tr., p. 40) He testified that based on his experience working 
at the Lennox warehouse before the injury, he knew that he would not be able to return 
to work in the sit-down/stand-up forklift operator position that was offered. (Tr., p. 41) he 
said that his inability to fully move his neck, his inability to sit or stand in once place for 
long, and the vibrations he would experience would prevent him from performing his job 
duties. He elaborated that when operating a forklift he is required to drive in reverse the 
whole time, and there is constant turning of the neck to look behind him. He also did not 
believe he would be capable of sitting or standing for four hours at a time. (Tr., p. 42) 
Claimant testified that he did not believe the job he was offered was within the 
restrictions assigned to him by Dr. Schmitz as a result of the FCE. He testified that after 
the February 3, 2024 letter was sent declining the position, he had not heard anything 
from the employer. (Tr., p. 45) 
 
On February 20, 2024, Dr. Schmitz provided an impairment rating using the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 71) Using 
table 15-5 on page 392, Dr. Schmitz placed claimant at a DRE Cervical Category IV, 
and provided a permanent impairment rating of 25 percent of the whole person.  
 
On February 23, 2024, claimant attended an IME with Joseph Chen, M.D. (Def. 
Ex. F, p. 12) Dr. Chen’s report is dated March 1, 2024. Dr. Chen reviewed medical 
records and provided a detailed summary. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 12-19) He noted that 
claimant complained of continued neck pain, and now headaches. (Def. Ex. F, p.19) 
Claimant reported headaches and neck pain every day, and that the headaches come 
on in the mornings after he had been awake for more than an hour. He also reported 
weakness in his hands, and frequently dropping things. He stated that before surgery, 
his neck pain and burning arm pain were a level 9 out of 10. After surgery, his pain 
improved to an 8 out of 10. He noted rarely leaving his home, and said he could tolerate 
about 20 minutes at the grocery store. (Def. Ex. F, p. 20) 
 
Dr. Chen performed a physical examination, and took range of motion 
measurements. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 20-21) He had claimant complete several health status 
measures as well, and calculated his responses. (Def. Ex. F, p. 22) His interpretation of 
claimant’s responses indicated high self-reports of pain severity and interference. He 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 11 
noted claimant’s Neck Disability Index was 76 percent, and said that was “highly 
unusual” and even higher than it was prior to surgery.  
 
Dr. Chen’s diagnosis was chronic mechanical and myofascial neck pain. He 
noted claimant was found to have right cervical radiculopathy with degenerative cervical 
spondylosis, followed by surgery. His current complaints were constant daily headache, 
myofascial neck pain, and bilateral upper extremity neuropathic pain. Dr. Chen noted 
that claimant reported an “extensive and an escalating pattern of increasing symptoms,” 
which was inconsistent with arising from a focal work injury in 2020. (Def. Ex. F, p. 23) 
Rather, Dr. Chen opined his symptoms were consistent with the development of a 
chronic pain syndrome that has arisen from multiple personal and unknown or idiopathic 
etiologies unrelated to his work injury. He noted claimant continued to take the opioid 
medications prescribed by his primary care physician, and that his long history of poorly 
controlled diabetes was likely causing his persistent upper extremity neuropathic 
symptoms. He felt the “unusual pattern” of claimant’s increasing self-reported disability, 
despite a successful surgical fusion, meant that claimant was exaggerating his 
symptoms.  
 
With respect to claimant’s bilateral upper extremity neuropathic pain and 
paresthesia, Dr. Chen opined those symptoms were due to progression of his poorly 
controlled diabetes and diabetic neuropathy that can involve the median and ulnar 
nerves. He opined that claimant does not have a diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome or 
compression of the median nerve at the wrist. Finally, he opined that claimant’s bilateral 
upper extremity neuropathic pain was not caused, aggravated, accelerated, or lit up by 
the work injury, nor was it a sequela of the surgical treatment for his work injury.  
 
Dr. Chen agreed that claimant reached MMI on December 29, 2023. He provided 
an impairment rating, using the fifth edition of the Guides, noting that claimant has had 
right cervical radiculopathy most consistent with DRE Cervical Category III. (Def. Ex. F, 
pp. 23-24) He assigned a 15 percent impairment of the whole person. (Def. Ex. F, p. 24) 
He again opined that claimant’s ongoing neuropathic symptoms are a result of the 
natural progression of claimant’s poorly controlled diabetes, and not consistent with 
persistent radiculopathy that would allow rating in DRE Cervical Category IV. Finally, 
regarding restrictions, Dr. Chen recommended claimant avoid overhead work activities 
due to his three-level cervical spine fusion, which was necessary as a sequela of 
claimant’s work-related injury from September 2020. He made no mention of the FCE 
results in making his recommendation. 
 
The parties each submitted a vocational opinion with respect to claimant’s 
employability. Claimant saw Phil Davis, M.S., at his attorney’s request on February 18, 
2024. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 16) Mr. Davis reviewed claimant’s medical and employment records, 
as well as the Arbitration and Appeal decisions in this case. He also interviewed 
claimant personally to obtain additional information. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 17) After summarizing 
claimant’s educational, vocational, and medical history, Mr. Davis provided a vocational 
analysis. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 17-20) He noted that claimant had been determined eligible to 
receive social security disability benefits as of August 5, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 20) He also 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 12 
noted that claimant’s permanent restrictions were based on a valid FCE. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
21) When considering claimant’s permanent physical restrictions, he opined that 
claimant is incapable of returning to any of his past employment. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22) He 
noted that greater than 89 percent of all occupations within the US Labor Market and 
Economy require the full use and range of motion of an individual’s upper extremities in 
the performance of work tasks, regardless of the amount of weight to be lifted. 
Therefore, he further opined that claimant had lost access to greater than 90 percent of 
all occupations identified in the general labor market and economy. Of the remaining 10 
percent, he stated it is unlikely that claimant possesses the required education or 
training to perform within those occupations. Finally, he noted that claimant had been 
employed by Lennox since October 1983, and was making $23.70 per hour. Given that 
he is unable to return to his past employment, he opined that claimant is incapable of 
finding alternate employment that would provide an hourly rate of pay commensurate to 
his past employment.  
 
At defendants’ request, Lana Sellner, M.S., provided an employability analysis, 
dated March 29, 2024. (Def. Ex. L, p. 37) Claimant testified that he has never spoken 
with Ms. Sellner. (Tr., p. 73) Her report indicates she reviewed Mr. Davis’s report, 
claimant’s deposition, the FCE report, and claimant’s answers to interrogatories. Ms. 
Sellner disagreed with Mr. Davis that claimant is entirely precluded from the labor 
market. (Def. Ex. L, p. 38) She noted there are positions within claimant’s restrictions in 
the light work category for which he has the requisite skill set. She identified three 
specific jobs within claimant’s restrictions and skill set: front desk clerk at the Best 
Western Plus Hotel in Grinnell; delivery driver for Jimmy John’s in Marshalltown; and 
gate guard at Fleet Farm in Ankeny. (Def. Ex. L, p. 39) Ms. Sellner noted that claimant 
obtained transferrable skills in his past employment, including critical thinking, 
troubleshooting, complex problem solving, and quality control analysis. (Def. Ex. L, p. 
38) She noted that positions would need to be viewed selectively as duties can vary 
amongst employers, and some positions may require computer skills beyond claimant’s 
level. (Def. Ex. L, p. 39) However, she also noted that some employers would provide 
on-the-job training, and some would not require significant use of a computer. She 
concluded, based on her experience in conducting market research and assisting 
clients in job placement, that the labor market supports claimant’s imposed restrictions 
and skillset, and he remains employable. 
 
Claimant testified that he did not believe he would be capable of performing any 
of the three jobs Ms. Sellner identified. (Tr., pp. 73-74) He said he could not work the 
front desk of a hotel because he does not know how to run a computer, and he would 
not be able to stand. (Tr., p. 74) He could not be a delivery driver because he is not able 
to constantly drive. Finally, he stated he would not be able to drive from Marshalltown, 
where he lives, to Ankeny for the job at Fleet Farm. However, he admitted he had not 
called any of the listed employers to ask about the job requirements for those jobs. (Tr., 
pp. 74-75) 
 
Mr. Davis prepared an addendum to his original report, which is dated April 28, 
2024. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23a) He had reviewed Ms. Sellner’s report, and noted that they were 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 13 
in agreement that the majority of claimant’s past employment would fall within the 
Department of Labor’s definition of unskilled/manual employment activities, and that it 
would fall into the medium to heavy physical demand level. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23b) He 
reiterated that based on claimant’s restrictions, he is physically incapable of performing 
the essential physical requirements of any of his past employment activities. 
 
Turning to the three job leads Ms. Sellner provided, Mr. Davis noted that one of 
the leads was listed strictly as a part-time position, and none of the leads identified the 
required job tasks or physical demands necessary to be successful with the employers. 
He also noted that it was unknown whether claimant would be able to obtain any 
necessary computer skills, but at the time, he lacks basic computer skills. He noted Ms. 
Sellner’s statement that positions need to be viewed selectively, as duties can vary and 
some may require computer skills that claimant is lacking, and noted the same is true 
regarding the physical demands required by various jobs. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23c) Therefore, 
to opine that claimant is capable of performing any of the jobs listed, or any other job, 
without a clear job description to provide the specific functions and physical demands 
required, was pure speculation on the part of Ms. Sellner. He also noted that claimant 
was found eligible to receive social security disability benefits, which takes into 
consideration claimant’s past employment activities, transferable skills, physical 
restrictions, residual capabilities, age, and educational level. 
 
Mr. Davis concluded that nothing in Ms. Sellner’s report resulted in him changing 
his original opinion. He reiterated that claimant is incapable of returning to his past 
employment; has lost access to more than 90 percent of the general labor market due 
to his restrictions; and would likely be unqualified for the remaining 10 percent.  
 
Mr. Davis met with claimant personally and reviewed more information regarding 
his medical treatment than Ms. Sellner, who never met with claimant. I find Mr. Davis’s 
opinions to be more convincing. While there is always the possibility that a job exists for 
which claimant has the physical capacity and skillset, a finding that he could perform 
some work despite his physical and educational limitations does not foreclose a finding 
of permanent total disability. 
 
Defendants argue that claimant’s restrictions and limitations are not entirely 
caused by the work injury. Rather, defendants state that the numbness and tingling in 
claimant’s bilateral arms is not work-related, and that some of his work restrictions are 
because of those symptoms. Defendants argue that Dr. Chen’s restrictions are correct, 
because he only considered claimant’s work-related cervical condition and not 
claimant’s other, personal conditions. (Def. Brief, p. 22) However, a number of 
physicians diagnosed claimant with cervical radiculopathy related to his cervical spine 
condition, including Dr. Stageman, Dr. Gaffey, Dr. Reis, Dr. Thuku, Dr. Schmitz, and Dr. 
Kuhnlein. (See Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-4; 8) Dr. Gaffey, the only doctor who has actually 
examined claimant related to the carpal tunnel syndrome, thought most of claimant’s 
symptoms were coming from his cervical spine. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) Dr. Kuhnlein thought it 
was possible claimant’s hand numbness was from the carpal tunnel syndrome, but 
made no such statement about claimant’s arms. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) Finally, Dr. Chen 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 14 
opined that claimant does not have carpal tunnel syndrome, and that claimant’s bilateral 
upper extremity neuropathic pain is a result of claimant’s diabetes. (Def. Ex. F, p. 23) 
Dr. Chen is the only physician to express this opinion, and I do not find it entitled to the 
same weight as other treating physicians’ opinions.  
 
Overall, I find little evidentiary support for defendants’ claim that claimant’s 
permanent restrictions are mainly unrelated to the work injury. Dr. Schmitz, who treated 
claimant for the work injury, adopted the restrictions set forth in the FCE. Those 
restrictions have precluded claimant from performing his past jobs, and between 90 and 
100 percent of the general labor market. As such, I find that claimant has proven he is 
permanently and totally disabled. Because claimant is permanently and totally disabled, 
the issue of healing period benefits is moot, as explained further below. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is 
based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it 
need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa 
App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  
The parties stipulated that if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent 
disability, the disability is an industrial disability. (See Hearing Report, p. 2) Industrial 
disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 
899 (1935) as follows: “It is therefore plain that the Legislature intended the term 
‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning capacity and not a mere 
‘functional disability’ to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and 
mental ability of a normal [person].” 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 15 
given to the injured employee’s age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer’s offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). The commissioner may also 
consider claimant’s medical condition prior to the injury, immediately after the injury, and 
presently in rendering an evaluation of industrial disability. IPB, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 
N.W.2d 621, 632-633 (Iowa 2000) (citing McSpadden, 288 N.W.2d at 192). 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness. Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee’s experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
The focus for evaluating total disability is on the person’s ability to earn a living.  
Diederich, 258 N.W. at 902. The question is whether the person is capable of 
performing a sufficient quantity and quality of work that an employer in a well-
established branch of the labor market would employ the person on a continuing basis 
and pay the person sufficient wages to permit the person to be self-supporting.  Tobin-
Nichols v. Stacyville Community Nursing Home, File No. 1222209 (Appeal December 
2003). A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however. See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). Industrial disability is determined by the effect the injury has on the 
employee’s earning capacity. Bearce v. FMC Corp., 465 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1991); 
Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 123 (Iowa App. 2003). 
Another important factor in the consideration of permanent and total disability 
cases is the employer’s ability to retain the injured worker with an offer of suitable work.  
The refusal or inability of the employer to return a claimant to work in any capacity is, by 
itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability. Clinton v. All-American Homes, File 
No. 5032603 (App. April 17, 2013); Western v. Putco Inc., File Nos. 5005190,5005191 
(App. July 29, 2005); Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, File No. 951206 (App. January 20, 
1995); Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 876894 (App. January 22, 1993); 
see also Larson, Workers’ Compensation Law, Section 57.61, pp. 10-164.90-95; 
Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark 385, 609 S.W.2d 102 (1980); Army & Air Force 
Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F.Supp. 865 (W.D. La 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas 
Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950). An employer knows the demands 
that are placed on its workforce. Its determination that the worker is too disabled for it to 
employ is entitled to considerable weight. If the employer in whose employ the disability 
occurred is unwilling or unable to accommodate the disability, there is no reason to 
expect some other employer to have more incentive to do so. 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 16 
I have considered claimant’s age, education, employment history, inability to 
return to the prior jobs he has held, his ability to retrain, his motivation, the situs and 
severity of his injuries, his impairment and restrictions, and all other industrial disability 
factors identified by the Iowa Supreme Court. I found Mr. Davis’s opinions more 
convincing than Ms. Sellner’s with respect to claimant’s employability. I found little 
evidentiary support for defendants’ claim that claimant’s permanent restrictions are 
mainly unrelated to the work injury. Dr. Schmitz, who treated claimant for the work 
injury, adopted the restrictions set forth in the FCE. I found those restrictions have 
precluded claimant from performing his past jobs, and between 90 and 100 percent of 
the general labor market.  
Having considered all of the evidence in the record, the greater weight of 
evidence in this case supports a finding that claimant is permanently and totally 
disabled as a result of his September 3, 2020 injury. Realistically, there are not jobs 
within the community that claimant can perform and for which he can realistically 
compete in his current condition. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 
808, 815 (Iowa 1994). Accordingly, I conclude that claimant proved he is permanently 
and totally disabled.  
Permanent total disability compensation is payable during the period of the 
employee’s disability. As such, permanent total disability benefits generally commence 
on the date of injury. See Sandhu v. Nordstrom, Inc., File No. 5046628 (App. January 
24, 2019). In this case, however, claimant did return to work after the date of injury, 
which was September 3, 2020. It is not reasonable or logical to award permanent total 
disability benefits while claimant continued to work and earn wages with the employer. 
Miles v. City of Des Moines, File Nos. 5048896, 5048899 (Arb. September 30, 2020, 
aff’d on Appeal to Commissioner, March 1, 2021).  
Claimant had alleged entitlement to healing period benefits from September 19, 
2022 through June 13, 2022. As noted above, this issue is moot because I found 
claimant to be permanently and totally disabled. However, the same analysis can be 
applied to determine when permanent total disability benefits should commence, as it 
relates to when claimant was last able to work. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an employer does not owe temporary 
disability benefits when an employee is taken off work by an unauthorized provider. Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 209 (Iowa 2010). It seems 
likely a similar analysis would apply to an award of permanent total disability benefits. In 
this instance, claimant had been awarded alternate medical care by the appeal 
decision, filed August 22, 2022. That decision ordered defendants to “immediately 
authorize and timely pay for claimant’s continuing care related to the compensable 
cervical spine injury with providers of claimant’s choice, including but not limited to Ikigu 
Thuku, M.D. and Jonathon Geisinger, M.D., or other qualified medical providers at 
McFarland Clinic.” (Appeal Dec., p. 3) (emphasis added). 
“The employer’s right to control medical care attaches under [Iowa Code section 
85.27] when the employer acknowledges compensability following notice and furnishes 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 17 
care to the employee, and it remains with the employer under the statute until the 
employer denies the injury is work-related, withdraws authorization of care, or until the 
commissioner orders alternative care.” Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 207. The 
commissioner ordered alternative care on August 22, 2022, which included treatment 
with providers of claimant’s choice. As such, Dr. Scurr became an authorized treating 
physician under the appeal decision.  
Claimant was taken off work by Dr. Scurr on September 19, 2022, and was not 
able to return to work at any point following that date. As such, I find permanent total 
disability benefits should commence on September 19, 2022. 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to payment of certain 
medical expenses. As explained above, Dr. Scurr became an authorized treating 
physician pursuant to the appeal decision issued on August 22, 2022. As such, 
defendants are obligated to pay for the treatment he provided to claimant related to the 
work injury, as well as treatment provided by medical providers to whom he referred 
claimant. The medical expenses itemized in claimant’s exhibit 5 correspond to treatment 
claimant received related to his work injury both during the period of defendants’ denial 
of the claim, and after alternate care was awarded. (Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 33-40)  
Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for medical bills unless claimant shows 
that they were paid from his or her own funds. See Caylor v. Employers Mutual 
Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). Otherwise, claimant is entitled only 
to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments directly to the 
provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). Where medical payments 
are made from a plan to which the employer did not contribute, the claimant is entitled 
to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 
(Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the commissioner did not err in ordering direct 
payment to the claimant for past medical expenses paid through insurance coverage 
obtained by the claimant independent of any employer contribution.”) See also: Carl A. 
Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 
15-0323. 
Because the injury is compensable, defendants are responsible for the medical 
expenses contained in claimant’s exhibit 5. Defendants shall reimburse claimant for his 
out-of-pocket expenses, and are responsible for any remaining balances with the 
providers or liens submitted on behalf of claimant’s health insurance provider. 
The next issue to determine is whether defendants are entitled to credit for 
benefits previously paid and under Iowa Code section 85.38(2). The purpose of section 
85.38(2) is to avoid duplication of payments by an employer to an employee. Midwest 
Ambulance Serv. v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867 (Iowa 2008). Defendant’s burden to 
prove entitlement to a credit under section 85.38(2) was affirmed in SKW 
Biosystems/Degussa Health and Nutrition v. Wolf, No. 5-973/05-1214 (Iowa Ct. App. 
June 28, 2006) (unpublished 723 N.W. 448) (table). In that case, the court held that 
SKW did not present the short or long-term disability policies and failed to present 
sufficient evidence to show that it was entitled to a credit. See also Albertsen v. Benco 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 18 
Manufacturing, File No. 5010764 (App., July 27, 2007); Damiano v. Universal Gym, File 
No. 1071309 (App., January 17, 2008); Miller v. Maintainer Corp., File No. 5020192 
(App., December 2, 2009). 
In order to prove entitlement to a credit, defendants must prove the following: 
1)  That benefits were received under a group plan; 
2) Contribution to that plan was made by the employer; 
3) The benefits should not have been paid if workers’ compensation 
benefits were received; and 
4) The amounts to be credited or deducted from the payments made 
or owed under chapter 85. Greenlee v. Cedar Falls Community 
Schools, File No. 934910 (App., December 27, 1993); McKernan v. 
Morningside College, File No. 955069 (App., February 22, 1993).   
Claimant received short-term disability payments from August 12, 2022 through 
February 2, 2023. (Def. Ex. G, pp. 28-29) Claimant admits that the employer is self-
insured for short-term disability, and concedes that defendants are entitled to a credit for 
the net amount of short-term disability benefits paid. Therefore, defendants are entitled 
to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) in the amount of $7,640.62, for short-term 
disability benefits paid. (Def. Ex. G, p. 29) 
Claimant was paid long-term disability befits from February 2, 2023 through 
November 1, 2023, for a total of $17,586.44. (Def. Ex. H, p. 30) However, there is no 
evidence in the record to prove the long-term disability benefits were received under a 
group plan, that the employer contributed to that plan, or that the benefits should not 
have been paid if workers’ compensation benefits were received. Because the record 
lacks this evidence, defendants have failed to prove entitlement to a credit under Iowa 
Code section 85.38(2) with respect to the long-term disability benefits paid. Miller v. 
Maintainer, File No. 5020192 (App., December 2, 2009). 
The final issue regarding credits is the amount of weekly compensation 
defendants paid prior to hearing. I find defendants are entitled to credit for all indemnity 
benefits claimant has been paid since September 19, 2022. (See Def. Ex. I, p. 31) 
With respect to costs, claimant seeks reimbursement for the filing fee in the 
amount of $103.00; for the vocational report of Phil Davis in the amount of $1,300.00; 
and Mr. Davis’s addendum report in the amount of $500.00. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 41-45) 
2Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 10A.328. 
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. As claimant was 
                                                 
2 Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME bill is also included in Exhibit 6, but as noted above, that issue was resolved by the 
parties following hearing. 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 19 
successful in his claim, I use my discretion and award costs in the total amount of 
$1,903.00. 
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits, commencing 
September 19, 2022, at the stipulated rate of seven hundred forty-seven and 71/100 
dollars ($747.71), and continuing during the period of permanent total disability. 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) in the 
amount of seven thousand six hundred forty and 62/100 dollars ($7,640.62), for short-
term disability benefits paid. 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all indemnity benefits claimant has 
been paid since September 19, 2022. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. Ag Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (Appeal April 
2018). 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s medical expenses as outlined above. 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of one thousand 
nine hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($1,903.00). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ____4th ___ day of December, 2024. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James Ballard (via WCES) 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 

GRUVER V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 20 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday 
