Case Number: 21001097.01
Case Title:  CORAGIC, HATA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Coragic Hata-21001097.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
HATA CORAGIC, 
 
 
 
: 
         FILE NO. 21001097.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
 
Claimant, 
 
 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
V. 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
 
: 
HEAD NOTES: 1100, 1402.30, 1801, 
 
Defendant. 
 
 
 
: 
                    1803, 2502, 3000, 4000 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Hata Coragic filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., self-insured employer, for a 
stipulated work injury date of September 23, 2020. The case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on March 3, 2025. The case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via Zoom, with all participants appearing remotely. The hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 15, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 14, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through K.  
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. Karmela Lofthus provided interpretation 
services. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
March 3, 2025. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on April 10, 2025, and the 
case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Which parts of the body sustained injury arising out of and in the course of 
claimant’s employment on September 23, 2020; 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits; 
3. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent partial disability, if any; 
4. 
The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any; 
5. 
The proper rate of compensation; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Sep-24  14:16:39     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 2 
6. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; 
7. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
8. 
Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits; and 
9. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 46-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
13) She was born in Bosnia, where she lived until she was 18 years old. While living in 
Bosnia, she attended school through the eighth grade. (Tr., p. 14) Her parents were not 
able to afford to send her to high school.  
 
Claimant had to leave Bosnia due to war. (Tr., p. 13) She was first in a refugee 
camp in Croatia for about four years. (Tr., pp. 14-15) She then came to the United 
States in 1998. (Tr., p. 15) While in the refugee camp, she did not have any additional 
schooling or any employment. (Tr., pp. 15-16) 
 
After arriving in the U.S. and completing the required paperwork, claimant’s first 
job was at Sam’s Club in Ft. Wayne, Indiana. (Tr., p. 16) She worked as a stocker, and 
did not stay there for long due to her lack of English. (Tr., pp. 16-17) Claimant had 
relatives in Waterloo, Iowa, who told her there were jobs open at IBP, and many 
Bosnians worked there so they thought it might be easier for her. (Tr., p. 17) Claimant 
moved to Waterloo, and lived with relatives until she was able to start working at IBP. 1 
 
Claimant recalls undergoing a physical examination prior to starting work at 
Tyson. (Tr., p. 18) She did not have any health issues with any part of her body when 
she started working there. She also started taking some English classes when she first 
came to the U.S., but she found it too difficult, and was working a night shift at the time. 
(Tr., p. 19) She does not have any other education.  
 
When claimant first started working at Tyson, she worked the wizard knife, which 
involved separating the bone from the loin. (Tr., pp. 19-20) After about six months in 
that position, she was moved to packaging. (Tr., p. 21) In that position, she was packing 
boneless loins. She described it as grabbing a piece of loin that would come down a 
line, and putting it into a mold, while grabbing a bag and stretching it over the loin. Then 
the loin would travel down the line to be vacuum sealed. Claimant said this was a fast-
                                                 
1 IBP eventually became Tyson. (Tr., p. 17) 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 3 
paced job, and she had to keep her head down to look down at the meat to be sure 
there were no imperfections. (Tr., p. 22) 
 
Claimant also worked in packaging packing the loins into boxes. (Tr., pp. 22-23) 
She testified there were two separate positions; bagging the loins and packing the loins 
into boxes. (Tr., p. 23) She did both positions depending on where she was needed. 
She thought she was in the packaging positions for about eight years. 
 
Around November of 2008, claimant returned to Bosnia for about six months. 
(Tr., p. 24) During that time, she was not employed. When she returned, she reapplied 
and was rehired at Tyson, and worked bagging ribs. She described that job as equally 
demanding, as the product comes down the line fast, and problems will occur if the 
worker is not keeping up. (Tr., pp. 24-25) She was in that position for about one year. 
(Tr., p. 24)  
 
Claimant’s next position at Tyson was as a supply clerk. (Tr., pp. 25-26) Her job 
consisted of working in storage and issuing supplies to the workers so they could do 
their jobs. (Tr., p. 26) She was also responsible for receiving and storing the supplies. 
She testified that the boxes of supplies would be brought to the hallway on forklifts, and 
she would have to unload the boxes from pallets and stack them on shelves in the 
storage warehouse. Claimant started working as a supply clerk in approximately 2008, 
and continued to work in that position at the time of hearing. (Tr., pp. 26-27)  
 
Claimant testified that since she has lived and worked in the U.S. for so long, she 
has learned some English, and is able to communicate with most of her coworkers and 
supervisors in English as needed. (Tr., p. 27) She does still require an interpreter for 
conversations with human resources or doctors, or when faced with something new or 
unusual. (Tr., pp. 27-28) For every day, common tasks, such as going to the grocery 
store, she is able to communicate in English. (Tr., pp. 28-29) 
 
Claimant sustained a stipulated work injury on September 23, 2020. (Tr., p. 29) 
On that day, she was working at the window in the supply warehouse, and was also 
needed to bring the supplies into the warehouse. She testified she was kind of in a rush 
to get the supplies onto the shelves, and grabbed a box off of a pallet. She was holding 
the box and climbing a ladder, as the box needed to be placed quite high. (Tr., p. 30) 
She said when she reached the step on the ladder that would allow her to place the box 
on the shelf, she twisted while pushing the box with force onto the shelf. In that motion, 
she felt something snap or pop in her neck, and then felt numbness throughout her 
body. She got down from the ladder and got another box, which seemed heavier, and 
as she grabbed that box, she felt excruciating pain in her neck, and tingling in the right 
side of her body and right arm and shoulder. (Tr., pp. 30-31)  
 
Claimant reported the injury to her supervisor, who took her to the on-site nurses’ 
station. (Tr., p. 32) They gave her some ice and a pill, and told her to check back in the  
next day. (Tr., p. 33) She completed her shift that day, with pain. The next morning, she 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 4 
was in a lot of pain, and went to the nurses’ station again. She said it was about two 
weeks later when she saw the company doctor.  
 
On September 28, 2020, claimant completed a medical form for Tyson. (Joint 
Exhibit 1, p. 3) The form is written in Bosnian, but there is a pain diagram on which 
claimant indicated pain in her neck and right shoulder. Claimant then saw Robert 
Gordon, M.D., on September 29, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) He noted she had been 
employed at Tyson for about 22 years. Claimant presented with a Bosnian interpreter, 
and complained of cervical pain with radiation of pain down her right upper extremity. 
She reported the incident with the ladder and box, consistent with her testimony at 
hearing. On physical examination, Dr. Gordon noted limited range of motion in the neck, 
but full rage of motion and strength about each of the joints of the bilateral upper 
extremities. After examination, Dr. Gordon ordered a cervical MRI, and prescribed a 
course of prednisone. He allowed claimant to return to work with no restrictions, but 
discussed using caution with lifting any boxes. The handwritten Tyson “occupational 
injury/illness medical treatment & work status summary” form (hereinafter “work status 
summary”) completed by Dr. Gordon and his nurse on that date states that claimant’s 
complaints included neck pain, right arm, and head pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) It also lists Dr. 
Gordon’s diagnosis as “cervical pain with right arm pain.”  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Gordon on October 6, 2020, and reported ongoing 
cervical pain with radiation into her right scapular region, along with numbness and 
tingling down her right upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 12) The prednisone had not helped. 
Dr. Gordon reviewed the MRI, which revealed mild posterior disc bulge with right 
paracentral small disc protrusion and annular tear at C5-C6, which caused a mild 
anterior indentation of the right side of the thecal sac without significant spinal canal 
stenosis or neuroforaminal narrowing. He also noted a very small syrinx at the level of 
C6-C7. On physical examination, he noted claimant had limited left and right rotation 
and flexion and extension at the cervical spine. Dr. Gordon recommended she complete 
the course of prednisone, and then start Mobic and Flexeril, and also recommended a 
neurosurgical consultation. He allowed her to continue with her full work duties. The 
work status summary completed on that date lists neck pain and right upper extremity 
pain as claimant’s complaints, and the diagnosis is right cervical radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 13) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Gordon on October 13, 2020, with continued complaints 
of severe neck pain that radiated down her right upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 16) She 
also complained that her pain radiated to the thoracic region at times. Dr. Gordon 
recommended she begin physical therapy three times per week. The work status 
summary lists claimant’s complaints as right neck, shoulder, head, back pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, 
p. 18) The diagnosis states cervical pain with right upper extremity pain.  
 
At her next visit on October 20, 2020, she reported her neck pain and radiation 
into her right upper extremity was the same, and the pain radiating to her lower thoracic 
region continued. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 22) She was concerned about her thoracic region, and 
while she did not have any popping sensation or traumatic event in that area, she 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 5 
wanted a thoracic MRI. Dr. Gordon noted her concerns, and ordered an MRI of the 
thoracic spine. He also discontinued physical therapy, as it had not been helpful. The 
work status summary indicates complaints of right neck, shoulder, head, and back pain, 
and the diagnosis states cervical pain with right upper extremity pain; thoracic pain. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 24) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Gordon on October 27, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 27) He noted 
the thoracic MRI was normal. Claimant continued to complain of pain in her neck, 
radiating down her right upper extremity and into her thoracic region. She was to 
continue her medications, and it was noted she had a neurosurgical consultation 
scheduled. The work status summary again lists neck, shoulder, head, and back pain as 
claimant’s complaints, and cervical pain with right upper extremity pain as the diagnosis. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 29)  
 
Claimant saw neurosurgeon Chad Abernathey, M.D., on November 2, 2020. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 51) She reported neck and right arm pain, and pain, numbness, and tingling 
along the right arm, forearm, and hand, with weakness on flexion of the arm, wrist, and 
fingers. Dr. Abernathey noted that conservative management had not been helpful. He 
reviewed the cervical MRI, and noted a right C5-C6 disc extrusion with osteophyte 
formation and stenosis. After discussion with Dr. Abernathey, claimant chose to pursue 
a pain clinic evaluation and epidural steroid injection (ESI) as an initial approach, 
declining surgery at that time.  
 
Claimant saw Frank Hawkins, M.D., at Unity Point Pain Medicine on November 
16, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 55) At that time, she reported that she was starting to have 
symptoms on the left side as well, but not as intense as the right. After physical 
examination, Dr. Hawkins’ impressions were degenerative cervical disc disease with 
right C5-C6 radiculopathy; cervicalgia; and myofascial neck and shoulder pain. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 56) He discussed her options as being 1) live with it; 2) consider a cervical 
injection; or 3) consider surgery. Claimant chose to have the injection, which was then 
performed the same day. 
  
Claimant returned to Dr. Gordon on December 1, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 31) She 
reported that the cervical ESI did not provide any significant benefit. She complained of 
pain in her neck with radiation down into her hand, including her thumb, index, and long 
digits. Dr. Gordon recommended claimant return to Dr. Abernathey. The work status 
summary lists complaints of right upper extremity, neck, and back pain, with right upper 
extremity pain as the diagnosis. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 33)  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Abernathey on January 4, 2021, at which time she reported her 
symptoms were intolerable, and requested the recommended surgery. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 53) 
Surgery took place on January 21, 2021, and consisted of C5-C6 anterior cervical 
discectomy, osteophytectomy, and instrumented allograft fusion, performed under 
microscopic control. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 52)  
 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 6 
On January 25, 2021, claimant contacted Dr. Abernathey’s office reporting post-
operative pain. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 53) Physical therapy was ordered. Claimant started 
physical therapy on January 27, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 60) She saw Dr. Abernathey for 
follow-up on February 5, 2021, at which time he demonstrated “excellent” relief of her 
pre-operative symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 53) She reported intermittent neck pain, and Dr. 
Abernathy recommended over the counter anti-inflammatories. He noted that he offered 
her physical therapy, but she declined. This appears to be an error in the record as 
claimant was attending physical therapy at that time. (See Jt. Ex. 5, p. 72) At her 
physical therapy appointment on February 8, 2021, she reported increased pain levels, 
reduced cervical range of motion, and reduced grip strength. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 73) On 
February 10, 2021, she reported continued neck and shoulder discomfort, but she was 
experiencing moments with less pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 75) Her complaints of neck and 
shoulder discomfort were repeated in each physical therapy record. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 75-
107) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Abernathey on March 12, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 54) His 
notes indicate claimant continued to demonstrate excellent relief of her pre-operative 
pain, and she was “quite pleased” with her surgical result. He noted her new cervical 
spine films demonstrated excellent healing of the fusion graft and instrumentation. He 
gave claimant permission to return to her usual activities, and advised her to contact 
him with any new neurologic symptoms. He also gave her permission to continue 
physical therapy until she returned to full duty work on March 29, 2021.  
 
Claimant continued with physical therapy, but by March 24, 2021, she was 
reporting only 40 percent improvement. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 107-124) On March 26, 2021, her 
case manager contacted Dr. Abernathey’s office requesting an order to continue 
physical therapy and return to work with no restrictions on April 12, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
54) The request was approved, and claimant remained in physical therapy until being 
discharged on April 9, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 125-143)  
 
On April 20, 2021, claimant saw Vinko Bogdanic, M.D., who is her family doctor. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 187; Tr., p. 45) She was seen for insomnia and a general health 
examination, but noted ongoing neck pain since her surgery, especially by the end of 
the day. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 187) Dr. Bogdanic prescribed some medications for muscle 
spasms, and recommended she do neck exercises. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 188)  
 
On June 3, 2021, claimant submitted a request to Tyson for additional treatment. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 5, p. 64) The form lists her symptoms as tingles in the neck and 
upper back, pressure and pain in the  back of the head, and cramping/difficulty 
swallowing. The form also states that symptoms never went away, and that they were 
becoming unbearable to deal with at times. Claimant returned to Dr. Abernathey on 
June 14, 2021, at which time she noted difficulty tipping her head back to eat or drink 
due to limited range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 54) She declined any aggressive treatment 
in that regard, as she did not feel her symptoms were bad enough to warrant it. 
However, she did want to have a pain clinic evaluation with an ESI, which Dr. 
Abernathey arranged. However, on July 8, 2021, she saw Dr. Bogdanic again, and 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 7 
reported she was hesitant about getting the injection. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 189) He 
recommended she go through with it as recommended. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 190) 
 
On July 26, 2021, claimant saw Fred Dery, M.D., at Steindler Orthopedic. (Jt. Ex. 
7, p. 208) On the pain diagram she completed, claimant again indicated pain in her neck 
and right shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 206) Dr. Dery’s record notes that she was “essentially 
referred over here by her surgeon for an epidural and further management.” (Jt. Ex. 7, 
p. 209) He noted her symptoms of axial neck pain, predominantly right-sided, without 
any obvious radicular pain down the right arm but with diffuse right arm weakness. She 
also noted it was worse turning her head side to side or looking up and down, and 
worse with any kind of heavy lifting.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Dery noted claimant had significantly limited 
extension, flexion, and bilateral rotation of the cervical spine, with severe pain in 
extension especially. She also had diffuse tenderness to palpation in the right cervical 
paraspinals, levator scapula, and trapezius. Cervical x-rays did not show any evidence 
of hardware failure or other concerning abnormality. Dr. Dery started new medications, 
restarted physical therapy, and ordered a cervical MRI. His diagnosis was 
postlaminectomy syndrome; radiculopathy; myalgia, and other spondylosis with 
radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 210) His impression was multifactorial right axial neck pain 
after C5-C6 ACDF, likely related to underlying myofascial pain and facet irritation. He 
noted it was possible, especially given her diffuse right upper extremity weakness, that 
she had reherniated a disc in her neck. He allowed claimant to continue working with no 
restrictions, and asked her to follow up upon her return from Bosnia in a month to six 
weeks. 
 
On September 10, 2021, claimant returned to Dr. Abernathey for an impairment 
rating. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 54) At that time she had just returned from her vacation in Bosnia. 
She reported working without difficulty since her return, and noted good relief of her 
intermittent neck pain with Voltaren cream. Based on her right C6 radiculopathy 
secondary to C5-C6 disc degeneration with osteophyte formation and stenosis, along 
with the subsequent surgical intervention, Dr. Abernathey assigned an 11 percent 
impairment rating to the body as a whole.  
 
Claimant had a cervical MRI on October 6, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 239) She returned 
to Dr. Dery on October 11, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 212) On that date, her pain diagram 
indicated pain in the neck and right shoulder, down the right arm, and somewhat into 
the left shoulder as well. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 211) Dr. Dery’s notes indicate claimant 
complained of neck pain radiating from the neck down the right upper arm through the 
shoulder joint into the elbow but not below the elbow. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 212) She described it 
as an aching-type sensation in the neck through the right shoulder and upper arm. She 
said it was worse with any activity, especially using the right arm, turning her head side 
to side, or looking up and down.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Dery noted claimant had severe pain with 
impingement testing of her right shoulder, and pain and weakness with supraspinatus 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 8 
testing but not with infraspinatus testing. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 213) He reviewed the recent 
cervical MRI, and noted the fusion at C5-C6, but saw no evidence of recurrent disc 
herniation or other compressive lesion. Dr. Dery’s diagnoses included post-laminectomy 
syndrome, myalgia, and pain in right shoulder. His impression was neck pain and right 
upper extremity pain and weakness after C5-C6 ACDF. He noted she probably had 
either a labral tear or supraspinatus tear in the right shoulder. 
 
Dr. Dery recommended an EMG of the right upper extremity to rule out 
neurologic injury. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 214) He also recommended an MRI arthrogram of the 
right shoulder, a trial of physical therapy, and additional medication to help with sleep 
and myofascial pain. Dr. Dery opined that claimant was not at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI), and he could not determine an impairment rating as he had not 
completed a full workup for the initial work injury. He noted he would need to rule out 
underlying shoulder pathology and neurologic injury, and then likely need a functional 
capacity evaluation (FCE) to determine permanent restrictions. He noted claimant’s 
case manager was present at the appointment and an employer report was created and 
provided to claimant. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 213-214) 
 
Claimant returned to physical therapy on October 14, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 144) 
She reported that her symptoms down her right arm had not changed since the injury. 
She reported constant pain radiating from the cervical spine down the right upper 
extremity to the right elbow. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 146) Notes indicate she was to continue with 
therapy three times per week for three weeks. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 147) 
 
Claimant had a fluoroscopic arthrogram and MRI of the right shoulder on October 
21, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 240-242) Due to reaching a plateau in progress, she was 
discharged from physical therapy on October 27, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 159) She had an 
EMG/NCV of the right upper extremity on November 4, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 247-248) 
She then returned to Dr. Dery on November 15, 2021, for follow-up. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 215) 
Her pain diagram again showed pain in the neck and right shoulder and arm, with some 
extending into the left upper back area. She told Dr. Dery that she had not been to 
physical therapy in a while, and was still having quite a bit of pain with moving her 
shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 217) She had not had any relief of shoulder pain, and not much 
relief of neck pain with the medications.  
 
Dr. Dery reviewed the results from the testing he ordered. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 218) He 
noted the EMG was normal, and the MRI arthrogram showed a right chronic labral tear. 
His impression was cervical axial neck pain status post ACDF, and right shoulder pain 
with newly found labral tear. He stated that these were “work related injuries.” She was 
to begin physical therapy specifically for the shoulder, and Dr. Dery recommended a 
right intra-articular shoulder injection with steroid.  
 
Claimant returned to physical therapy on November 15, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 160) 
She had the right shoulder injection on November 18, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 219) She 
continued with physical therapy for the shoulder, and by December 6, 2021, she was 
showing improved biomechanics with lifting and activity tolerance. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 177) 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 9 
She continued to have pain, however. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 179) She returned to Dr. Dery on 
December 15, 2021, and reported that her neck pain was adequately controlled with 
medication, and she did not feel she needed any further neck treatment. (Jt. Ex. 7, p.  
220) Her biggest concern was her right trapezius and shoulder joint. She reported a 
noticeable but incomplete improvement in right shoulder pain after the injection. She 
said it was about 30 percent better, but she felt she was able to function more and 
probably actually overdid it at work and aggravated it after the improvement. At the time 
of the appointment, she was back to where she started. She reported “quite severe” 
right trapezius pain, especially when using the right arm and moving the right shoulder 
joint. The pain vaguely radiated down the upper arm to the elbow. Dr. Dery stated she 
had no “true” radicular pain. The left shoulder was reportedly unaffected, and she 
continued to work with no restrictions. 
 
Dr. Dery’s impression was neck pain status post-surgery, which was adequately 
controlled with a moderate dose of Cymbalta. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 221) Right trapezius and 
glenohumeral pain likely related to underlying SLAP tear and functional derangement at 
the glenohumeral joint on the right. He noted that the chronic SLAP tear was consistent 
with claimant’s previous mechanism of injury. He recommended a surgical consultation 
for the shoulder, and continued physical therapy. He opined that claimant had reached 
MMI for her neck pain. 
 
Claimant continued with physical therapy until the end of December. (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 180-186) She saw Mark Mysnyk, M.D., on December 28, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 222) 
Dr. Mysnyk reviewed claimant’s prior medical records and had claimant clarify some 
portions. Claimant advised that after the initial injury, the pain was primarily in her neck, 
but radiated down her arm and she had tingling. Dr. Mysnyk noted that all of the outside 
records he reviewed only related to the neck and not her shoulder. After surgery, 
claimant said that she was able to turn her head better but still had significant pain at 
the base of her neck. She said Dr. Abernathey advised it could take six months to up to 
two years to resolve. In reviewing Dr. Dery’s records, Dr. Mysnyk noted there were no 
shoulder-specific tests documented, but he recorded “diffuse tenderness to palpation in 
the right cervical paraspinals, levator scapula, and trapezius.”  
 
Dr. Mysnyk reviewed the EMG/NCV results and the shoulder MRI report, and 
noted biceps pulley pathology and chronic SLAP lesion. He noted Dr. Dery recorded 
about 30 percent benefit from the right shoulder cortisone injection, but continued 
severe right trapezius pain especially when using the right arm moving the shoulder 
joint. Claimant told Dr. Mysnyk at the time of his examination that her primary pain was 
located in the right trapezius region, with radiation down to the elbow, and including the 
deltoid area. She could not tell if the pain in the deltoid region was connected to the 
neck pain, but said the neck pain was always more severe. She said lifting overhead 
made the pain worse. She also said physical therapy had helped her movement, but not 
the pain. 
 
Dr. Mysnyk’s impression was neck and right upper extremity pain of unknown 
etiology. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 224) He noted the MRI report indicated a frayed labrum, which 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 10 
was read as a “chronic SLAP lesion.” He said that may or may not be contributing to her 
symptoms. He opined that her neck was likely her primary issue, and anything done to 
the shoulder would probably not help the pain at the base of her neck. He offered her a 
different injection than the one Dr. Dery did, and performed a subacromial injection that 
day. He noted it seemed to be easier for her to elevate her arm after the injection. He 
said she could discontinue physical therapy, and allowed her to continue working with 
no restrictions. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Mysnyk on January 26, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 225) He 
noted claimant had good results with the injection, meaning her shoulder pain was likely 
due to subacromial bursitis/impingement syndrome, at least in part. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 227) 
He said her improvement could also be due to the fact she had been off work for three 
weeks. In any event, she was allowed to continue to work with no restrictions and told to 
follow up in six weeks. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Mysnyk on March 11, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 228) She said 
the subacromial injection definitely helped, and she no longer had the pain down to her 
elbow as she had before. However, she still had pain when lifting heavy items away 
from her body. They discussed options, including a repeat injection if the radiating pain 
returned. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 230) They also discussed surgery, and Dr. Mysnyk advised that 
surgery would not be a guarantee, and there was nothing on the MRI that indicated 
surgery needed to be done. She said since she only had significant pain when lifting 
something heavy, she was satisfied with her shoulder the way it was. As such, Dr. 
Mysnyk released her to continue working full duty, and advised he would see her back 
as needed.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Bogdanic on April 13, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 191) Records indicate 
she continued to have right-sided neck pain, but advised Dr.  Bogdanic workers’ 
compensation was no longer considering it to be a work-related injury. He referred her 
back to neurology and pain medicine. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 191) 
 
Claimant saw Ivo Bekavac, M.D., Ph.D., on April 22, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 251) 
His record notes that he previously treated her for occipital neuralgia. He reviewed her 
history since the work injury, including her neck surgery and shoulder injections. After 
physical examination, his impression was possible right rotator cuff syndrome; neck 
pain, musculoskeletal in etiology, but could not exclude the possibility of intermittent 
cervical sensory radiculopathy, although there was no abnormality on the MRI to explain 
it. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 252) He ordered an MRI of the neck and soft tissue with and without 
contrast, an EMG of the right upper extremity, and told claimant to follow up with her 
prior doctor for right shoulder pain.  
 
Claimant had an MRI of the face and neck on April 28, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 243-
244) The EMG with Dr. Bekavac took place on May 3, 2022, and showed median 
neuropathy consistent with mild carpal tunnel syndrome, and mild ulnar neuropathy. (Jt. 
Ex. 10, p. 254) There was no EMG evidence for cervical motor radiculopathy, 
polyneuropathy, or myopathy. Dr. Bekavac also reviewed the MRI, and noted it showed 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 11 
evidence of the previous fusion but was otherwise normal. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 253) He 
recommended she start wearing a wrist splint and elbow pad, and follow up with her 
prior doctor for her ongoing shoulder pain.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Bogdanic on May 5, 2022, for an annual physical exam. (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 194) There is no mention in his record of shoulder pain. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 194-197) 
 
On May 20, 2022, claimant submitted a request for additional treatment to Tyson. 
(Cl. Ex. 5, p. 65) She listed her symptoms as right shoulder pain that radiates down to 
the right elbow. She stated the symptoms had never gone away since the initial injury, 
but had increased in the last two to three weeks. She noted she would like to try another 
injection because it gave her some relief previously. Claimant saw Tyson’s on-site 
physician, Dr. Gordon, on June 7, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 35) He reviewed her medical care 
for her cervical spine and right upper extremity since he last saw her. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 35-
36) He noted that when he first evaluated claimant after the work incident, she did not 
have issues primarily with her right glenohumeral region. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 36) He stated she 
had full range of motion and full strength about the shoulder when he previously treated 
her. 
 
After physical examination, Dr. Gordon noted claimant had pain along with 
tingling and numbness down her right upper extremity from the right trapezial region. He 
noted the EMG was negative. He stated that he was not sure what happened since his 
last evaluation, when she had excellent range of motion and strength in her shoulder, as 
there was no intervening incident reported. He recommended reevaluation with Dr. 
Mysnyk for her shoulder, and wrote Dr. Mysnyk a brief note dated June 22, 2022, 
asking him to evaluate her right shoulder for consideration of a corticosteroid injection. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 37)  
 
Dr. Mysnyk authored a letter to Laura Cruce, dated June 23, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 
231) It is unclear from the records who Laura Cruce is, but Dr. Mysnyk indicated he was 
responding regarding claimant. He noted that claimant’s primary complaint had been 
her neck, but she had some associated shoulder issues as well. He reported the 
subacromial injection he provided helped her, and when he last saw her, her shoulder 
discomfort was tolerable. He opined she was at maximum medical improvement (MMI) 
as of his last appointment, March 11, 2022, for her right shoulder only, not her cervical 
or trapezial pain. He did not assign any permanent impairment for her right shoulder. He 
opined that if she had a recurrence of her prior shoulder pain, she would benefit from 
another subacromial injection. He did not assign any permanent restrictions. 
 
Claimant had an appointment with Dr. Mysnyk on August 5, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 
232) She complained of pain that radiated from the right side of her neck to the 
posterior aspect of her shoulder to the lateral aspect of her shoulder and down to her 
elbow. On physical examination of the right shoulder, Dr. Mysnyk noted pain and 
weakness on several movements. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 233) Claimant advised Dr. Mysnyk that 
her occupational health doctor told her there was nothing wrong with her shoulder, and 
he explained that he did not have those records and did not know what was said. (Jt. 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 12 
Ex. 7, p. 234) He reviewed her MRI with her and explained that since the subacromial 
injection helped, that meant some of her pain was likely coming from bursitis. He 
explained that a bursa injection would not be expected to help a labral tear unless there 
was another condition like a rotator cuff tear. He explained the complexity of her 
condition and that there was likely more than one component of her pain.  
 
Dr. Mysnyk provided a repeat subacromial injection, and allowed claimant to 
return to work with no restrictions. He opined that the MRI findings regarding the frayed 
tendon and SLAP tear were likely incidental findings not causing any of her current 
symptoms. He further opined that the pain in her neck and trapezius could be directly or 
indirectly related to her neck, and noted that Dr. Abernathey apparently felt it was 
muscular related, related to her back, and was just going to take time.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Mysnyk on November 11, 2022, and reported that the 
most recent injection helped the portion of the pain that was in her lateral deltoid region 
down to her elbow. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 235) However, the pain from her posterior scapula 
radiating up to her neck and trapezius region was not helped at all. She described that 
pain as the most significant pain she had. Dr. Msynyk’s impression was right sided 
neck, trapezius, and lateral arm pain. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 237) He explained that a component 
of the pain – specifically the pain that radiates from the proximal lateral aspect of the 
shoulder down to the elbow – was likely due to subacromial bursitis, given the good 
response to the subacromial injections. However, the more significant pain – the pain in 
the posterior aspect of her shoulder to her neck and trapezius area – is not related to 
the subacromial bursa, and is not something he has been treating. He noted that she 
stated she has had that pain since the beginning, and advised that further workup of 
that pain should be at the discretion of her workers’ compensation carrier. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Gordon on November 29, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 38) They 
discussed claimant’s comment to Dr. Mysnyk that Dr. Gordon had said there was 
nothing wrong with her shoulder. Dr. Gordon indicated that was not accurate, and he 
would not have sent her to a shoulder specialist if he did not think there was a potential 
issue with her shoulder. Moving on, claimant explained her symptoms to Dr. Gordon in 
the same way she described them to Dr. Mysnyk; ongoing pain in the right side of her 
cervical/trapezial region, while the pain radiating from her shoulder to her elbow had 
improved with the injection. Dr. Gordon noted that claimant did not report pain in the 
right shoulder glenohumeral or acromioclavicular joint regions. 
 
After physical examination, Dr. Gordon’s impression was pain in the right 
cervicotrapezial region/right scapular region. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 39) He opined that her 
symptomology was a function/residual of her cervical condition for which she underwent 
surgery. He placed her at MMI, and released her to full duty work. He also 
recommended she continue her home exercise program for maintenance, which she 
said she had been performing.  
 
On January 1, 2023, claimant reported to the emergency room due to neck pain 
that was worse than her usual baseline. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 265) She was given medications 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 13 
and told to follow up with her primary care physician for pain management. (Jt. Ex. 11, 
p. 267) On January 3, 2023, she submitted a request for additional treatment to Tyson. 
(Cl. Ex. 5, p. 66) She listed her symptoms as pain from her neck to her shoulder. She 
again stated that her symptoms had not stopped, and were getting worse and waking 
her up at night.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Gordon on January 17, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 41) She reported 
pain in the cervical/trapezial region, with no pain in the glenohumeral or AC joint. She 
reported her recent emergency room visit, and noted her pain had been present since 
the work injury, but became worse without any particular incident, prompting her to go to 
the ER. After physical examination, Dr. Gordon recommended an updated cervical MRI, 
as well as a right trapezial MRI. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 42)  
 
Claimant had the cervical MRI and right shoulder MRI on January 30, 2023. (Jt. 
Ex. 10, pp. 257-260) She returned to Dr. Gordon on February 7, 2023, who noted 
minimal changes in the cervical spine aside from the fusion. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 45) Dr. Gordon 
noted he had not ordered a right shoulder MRI, but that it did show most of the scapula, 
which was normal, as was the portion of the trapezius shown. However, claimant’s 
symptoms were more medial than what was included in the MRI. As such, Dr. Gordon 
re-ordered the right trapezial MRI. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 46) The shoulder MRI also showed a 
partial-thickness bursal surface tear in the distalmost supraspinatus tendon, as well as 
the previously noted SLAP tear. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 260) Dr. Gordon did not mention these 
MRI findings in his report. 
 
Claimant saw her personal physician, Dr. Bogdanic, on February 14, 2023. (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 202) He reviewed the cervical MRI, and did not see any correlation between 
her trapezius pain and the cervical MRI findings. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 203) He recommended 
she contact neurology after the trapezial MRI was completed. 
 
The re-ordered MRI of the trapezius area took place on February 21, 2023. (Jt. 
Ex. 10, pp. 261-262) Claimant returned to Dr. Gordon on March 7, 2023, (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
47) He noted no osseous or soft tissue abnormality in the right posterior upper back 
area. They discussed potential permanent restrictions given her ongoing symptoms, but 
she declined restrictions. Dr. Gordon released her from care at MMI, and recommended 
she use over-the-counter pain relievers. 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Bekavac on March 9, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 263) He personally 
reviewed the recent MRI films and reports, and discussed them with claimant. He noted 
the right shoulder MRI showed evidence of a partial thickness supraspinatus tear, as 
well as a superior labrum tear. After physical examination, his impression was right 
rotator cuff syndrome; neck pain musculoskeletal in nature, but no evidence of cervical 
motor radiculopathy or myelopathy; asymptomatic hydromyelia; and right carpal tunnel 
syndrome, improved. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 264) Dr. Bekavac referred claimant to an orthopedic 
surgeon for a second opinion. 
 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 14 
Claimant saw Rafael Serrano, M.D., at Unity Point Orthopedics on March 22, 
2023. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 268) Her chief complaint was right shoulder pain that began two 
years prior after an injury. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 269) She described the work incident and 
indicated she had excruciating right shoulder and neck pain after. She said her neck 
pain had improved with the fusion surgery, but her shoulder symptoms had not 
improved. She described sharp pain on the later aspect of her right shoulder, and said it 
was made worse by weightbearing and overhead activities. She denied numbness and 
tingling to the right upper extremity. 
 
On physical examination, claimant had limited range of motion on the affected 
right shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 270) She had tenderness to palpation over the rotator cuff, 
and no tenderness to palpation over the AC joint. Dr. Serrano reviewed the MRI and 
noted a partial-thickness supraspinatus tear, and a SLAP tear with biceps tendinitis. The 
subscapularis appeared intact. Dr. Serrano’s impression was right shoulder pain as a 
result of a traumatic rotator cuff tear. He discussed with claimant that fifty percent of 
rotator cuff tears get larger over time, causing a worsening of baseline symptoms. He 
discussed surgery with claimant, and she wanted to think about it. (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 270-
271) 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Farid Manshadi, 
M.D., on April 28, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 291) He reviewed the medical records and 
discussed claimant’s condition at the time of his IME. (Jt. Ex. 13, pp. 291-293) She 
continued to complain of constant pain in the right upper trapezius area, radiating to the 
right shoulder and elbow. (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 293) On physical examination, she had 
tenderness to palpation over the right upper trapezius and right levator scapula. (Jt. Ex. 
13, p. 294) Her neck range of motion was limited, and right shoulder range of motion 
was limited. Dr. Manshadi reviewed medical records, including all available MRI reports 
for both her cervical spine and right shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 13, pp. 291-293) He opined that 
claimant had a rotator cuff tear with pain and reduced range of motion, and he opined 
that it was related to the work injury of September 23, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 295) He 
noted that the neck surgery helped with claimant’s neck pain, but it did not take care of 
all her symptomology, as she also sustained a right shoulder injury. He recommended 
further evaluation and treatment for her rotator cuff tear, and noted that surgery could 
not be ruled out. 
 
Dr. Gordon authored an undated letter in response to a letter to him dated June 
9, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 49) He noted that he had reviewed his file and Dr. Mansahdi’s IME 
report. His diagnosis at the time of his last evaluation was pain of the right 
cervicotrapezial region/right scapular region. He noted she did not have pain or other 
findings consistent with a symptomatic primary right shoulder glenohumeral region 
disorder, such as a rotator cuff tear or tendonitis; subacromial bursitis, or labral tear. 
Rather, her pain was distinctly to the cervical and trapezial regions. He noted that the 
MRI of the right scapula region did not demonstrate any abnormalities. 
 
With respect to causation, Dr. Gordon stated he was not certain of the 
mechanistic cause or pathoanatomical basis for claimant’s cervicotrapezial/scapular 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 15 
region symptomology. He said it is possible that her symptomology is residual from her 
spine condition for which she underwent C5-C6 discectomy and fusion. With respect to 
the rotator cuff tear, however, Dr. Gordon stated that is was not plausible to conclude 
that claimant incurred, aggravated, or accelerated a right shoulder disorder (rotator cuff 
injury/labral injury) from the reported workplace injury on September 23, 2020, given her 
reported mechanism of injury or her reported symptom and clinical examination 
findings. He noted that she did not have any symptoms or exam findings consistent with 
a primary right shoulder disorder on his initial evaluation, or at any time prior to her 
cervical surgery. It was not until after surgery and subsequent treatment with pain 
management and Dr. Mysnyk that she seemed to have a primary issue with her right 
shoulder.  
 
Dr. Gordon opined that Dr. Manshadi’s conclusion that claimant’s rotator cuff tear 
was the result of her original injury was not consistent with the medical records, as she 
did not have any symptoms or exam findings consistent with that diagnosis immediately 
after the injury. In addition, he opined that the reported mechanism of injury did not 
support incurring, aggravating, or accelerating a right shoulder disorder. He noted that 
he was not in a position to provide an impairment rating and had not done so regarding 
claimant. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 50) Finally, he noted that he had discussed permanent 
restrictions with claimant, which she declined.  
 
I find Dr. Manshadi’s opinion to be more reliable than that of Dr. Gordon. Dr. 
Manshadi clearly reviewed the findings of each MRI, while Dr. Gordon seems to have 
ignored the supraspinatus tear found on the January 20, 2023 right shoulder MRI. While 
the earlier shoulder MRI was not read as showing a supraspinatus tear, Dr. Manshadi 
opined it was related to the work injury. Dr. Mansahdi’s opinion is further bolstered by 
Dr. Serrano’s explanation that fifty percent of rotator cuff tears get larger over time, 
causing a worsening of baseline symptoms. This is precisely what appears to have 
happened with claimant.  
 
Additionally, Dr. Gordon’s statement that claimant did not have symptoms or 
exam findings consistent with a rotator cuff tear at his last visit with her on March 7, 
2023, is inaccurate. Claimant complained of right upper extremity and/or right shoulder 
pain at nearly every visit prior to her cervical spine surgery, and her right shoulder 
complaints became more pronounced after her cervical symptoms began to resolve. At 
her visit with Dr. Dery as early as October 11, 2021, he noted severe pain with 
impingement testing and pain and weakness with supraspinatus testing but not 
infraspinatus testing. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 213) Additionally, the January 20, 2023 MRI showed 
a supraspinatus tear, which is part of the rotator cuff. Finally, the fact that three 
physicians - Dr. Bekavac, Dr. Serrano, and Dr. Manshadi - all diagnosed claimant with a 
rotator cuff problem within weeks of Dr. Gordon’s March 7, 2023 examination further 
diminishes his credibility. When looking at the medical records as a whole, I find that 
claimant has proven her right shoulder injury arose out of and in the course of her 
employment. 
 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 16 
Defendant employer denied additional medical treatment for claimant’s right 
shoulder after she was released from Dr. Mysnyk’s care. (See Cl. Ex. 10, p. 88) As 
such, claimant continued to see Dr. Serrano on her own. She saw Dr. Serrano on 
December 7, 2023, complaining of worsening right shoulder pain, at time radiating down 
the arm. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 272) She also reported trapezial pain with numbness and tingling 
to the right upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 272-273) Dr. Serrano ordered a cervical MRI 
and EMG. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 273) 
 
Claimant returned on January 25, 2024 to review the results of her MRI and 
EMG. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 275) She reported worsening right shoulder pain. Dr. Serrano noted 
the EMG showed no concern for cervical radiculopathy, and the cervical MRI was not 
concerning. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 277) The MRI of the right shoulder showed a partial-thickness 
supraspinatus tear, a SLAP tear with biceps tendinitis, and a possible upper border tear 
of the subscapularis. The remainder of the rotator cuff was intact, and the AC and 
glenohumeral joints were also largely intact. 
 
Dr. Serrano’s impression was right shoulder pain secondary to rotator cuff tear 
and SLAP tear with biceps tendinitis that started after a work injury three years prior. He 
discussed treatment options, and claimant agreed to have surgery. 
 
Claimant’s right shoulder surgery took place on April 1, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 300) 
Surgery consisted of right shoulder arthroscopy with rotator cuff repair, intra-articular 
biceps tenodesis, and extensive debridement. Dr. Serrano’s post-operative diagnoses 
included right shoulder supraspinatus tear, subacromial impingement, and SLAP tear 
with biceps tendinitis.  
 
Claimant had a post-operative follow-up with Dr. Serrano on April 8, 2024. (Jt. 
Ex. 12, p. 280) She was doing well, and set to begin physical therapy that day. Dr. 
Serrano ordered claimant to remain off work until her next appointment. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 
282) At her next appointment on May 13, 2024, she had no major concerns. (Jt. Ex. 12, 
p. 283) However, she had very limited range of motion, so Dr. Serrano ordered an MRI 
to rule out any new intra-articular pathology. After the MRI, claimant returned to Dr. 
Serrano on May 20, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 285) He noted the MRI showed no concerns 
for re-tear. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 286) Dr. Serrano explained that claimant was developing 
capsulitis of the shoulder, which was causing her very limited and painful range of 
motion. He recommended that she continue physical therapy to improve motion and her 
apprehension. There was no further surgical intervention based on the MRI. He 
suggested they might consider a cortisone injection and/or manipulation under 
anesthesia if additional therapy did not improve her condition. 
 
Claimant continued with regular physical therapy sessions, slowly showing signs 
of improvement. (Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 303-350) She returned to Dr. Serrano on July 1, 2024, 
and reported being very happy as her symptoms had significantly improved. (Jt. Ex. 12, 
p. 288) She felt she was making progress with physical therapy, and reported sleeping 
better and her pain was well controlled. Dr. Serrano noted she had been compliant with 
post-operative protocol. Her range of motion and pain continued to improve each week 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 17 
in physical therapy, so no cortisone injection was needed at that time. Dr. Serrano 
wanted her to start working on strengthening, and return for follow-up in two months. 
 
Claimant continued with regular physical therapy, again showing steady 
improvement. (Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 351-368) She returned to Dr. Serrano on September 5, 
2024, reporting that she had not been to physical therapy for a while due to insurance 
only approving 30 sessions. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 290) She was continuing her home exercise 
program, however. Dr. Serrano noted that her capsulitis had significantly improved, but 
she still lacked some range of motion. He referred her for additional physical therapy, 
even though she was only approved for 30 sessions per year. They also discussed 
return to work, and claimant advised she felt strong enough to return. She told Dr. 
Serrano she does not do any overhead work, and does not lift more than 20-pounds. As 
such, he allowed her to return to work full duty. 
 
Claimant had two more physical therapy sessions, but it appears she was not 
able to get additional sessions approved. (Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 369-377) She saw Dr. Serrano 
on November 4, 2024, at which time she reported she had been able to go back to full 
duty work. (Def. Ex. K, p. 47) Her only complaint at that time was tenderness over the 
biceps groove. She was to continue her home exercises working on strength and range 
of motion, and return in three months.  
 
Claimant had an IME with Brian Crites, M.D., on November 21, 2024. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 2, p. 11) Dr. Crites reviewed claimant’s medical records and provided a 
summary. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 12-18) At the time of the IME, claimant reported her symptoms 
included ongoing lower achy pain in her neck, and occasional numbness, tingling, and 
headaches. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18) She reported that her shoulder was significantly better 
since surgery, although she still had an achy pain in the shoulder, made worse with 
activity. 
 
Dr. Crites performed a physical examination and measured claimant’s range of 
motion with a handheld goniometer. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 19-20) He then addressed questions 
posed by claimant’s attorney. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 21-24) First, he provided the following 
diagnoses attributable to claimant’s September 23, 2020 work injury: 
 
Cervical Spine 
 
a. Herniated C5-C6 disc 
b. Cervical radiculopathy 
 
Right Shoulder 
 
a. Partial thickness supraspinatus/rotator cuff tear 
b. Impingement syndrome 
c. SLAP tear 
d. Biceps tendinopathy 
 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 18 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 21) He opined that all of these diagnoses were causally related to 
claimant’s employment, specifically the work injury on September 23, 2020. He opined 
that the work injury was the direct causal factor in the herniated disc in her neck, and 
the rotator cuff tear, SLAP tear, impingement, and biceps tendinopathy. He noted his 
opinion agreed with Dr. Manshadi, and that there was no evidence in the records he 
reviewed that claimant had any prior issues or problems with her neck or shoulder. 
 
 
Dr. Crites noted that Dr. Serrano did not specifically state claimant’s shoulder 
condition was the result of her work injury. However, he did opine that her shoulder pain 
was the result of a traumatic rotator cuff tear. Dr. Crites noted that the only trauma 
claimant had was her work injury on September 23, 2020, and concomitant neck and 
shoulder conditions can be difficult to diagnose because isolated neck conditions can 
cause shoulder pain and vice versa. He explained that when a patient has problems 
with both the neck and shoulder it can be difficult to determine which symptoms are 
attributable to the neck and which are attributable to the shoulder. In this case claimant 
had significant pathology in her neck and shoulder and had symptoms in both. Dr. 
Crites opined that the symptoms were consistent and her physical examinations were 
consistent with pathology in both body parts. He again noted no prior history of shoulder 
or neck issues, and that all of her symptoms began after the work injury.  
 
With respect to Dr. Mysnyk’s opinions, Dr. Crites disagreed that there was 
nothing on the MRI that indicated surgery. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22) He stated that some people 
can live with a labral tear, biceps tendinopathy, and a partial-thickness rotator cuff tear, 
and some cannot. He opined that if a patient has continued symptoms despite 
exhaustive conservative care, then surgery is definitely indicated. He noted that Dr. 
Mysnyk admitted that a component of claimant’s symptoms were from her shoulder 
(subacromial bursitis), so he clearly thought the shoulder was a pain-generator. Dr. 
Crites stated that subacromial bursitis can be secondary to intra-articular pathology 
such as a labral tear or partial rotator cuff tear. Additionally, pathology of the 
glenohumeral joint can cause or lead to periscapular muscle pain, which claimant had. 
He agreed with Dr. Mysnyk that the pathology on claimant’s shoulder MRI could be 
incidental findings, but only when found in an asymptomatic patient. Claimant was 
symptomatic from the shoulder, and Dr. Mysnyk admitted some of her pain was coming 
from the shoulder. Finally, her symptoms improved after Dr. Serrano’s surgery, which is 
also evidence that the MRI findings were not simply incidental.  
 
With respect to MMI, Dr. Crites agreed with Dr. Dery that claimant reached MMI 
for her cervical spine on December 15, 2021. He opined that she reached MMI for her 
shoulder on October 1, 2024, which is six months post-surgery, and a typical recovery 
period for the surgery she underwent.  
 
Dr. Crites provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation 
of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. For her neck injury, he placed her in DRE 
Cervical Category IV, and assigned 25 percent of the whole body. He was unable to 
explain how Dr. Abernathey arrived at his 11 percent rating, as that value was not an 
option in any DRE Cervical Category.  

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 19 
 
Dr. Crites assigned an additional 2 percent impairment of the right arm for the 
biceps tenodesis performed by Dr. Serrano. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23) He explained that the 
AMA Guides recommend evaluators use clinical judgment in assigning impairment in 
situations where ratings are not provided, such as for biceps tendon pathology. He 
opined that in his clinical judgment, a biceps tenodesis represents a small impairment, 
which the AMA Guides defines as 1 to 3 percent. In addition, he noted that the Guides 
allow for strength to be used to assign impairment if a tendon has been ruptured or 
undergone surgery, and claimant had surgical reattachment of her biceps tendon, with 
loss of supination strength. Dr. Crites explained that the impairment is applied to the 
arm and not the shoulder based on factual anatomy, as the biceps is a major structure 
of the arm, and carries out supination, which is a motion of the elbow joint, not the 
shoulder joint. He noted that 2 percent of the arm is equivalent to 1 percent of the whole 
body. 
 
For the right shoulder, Dr. Crites assigned 12 percent upper extremity impairment 
based on his range of motion measurements. This rating is equivalent to 7 percent of 
the whole body. Dr. Crites combined the three ratings for a total impairment of 31 
percent of the whole body as a result of the work injury. 
 
With respect to permanent restrictions, Dr. Crites suggested for her cervical 
spine that she avoid repetitive head turning and repetitive overhead work. For her 
shoulder, he recommended no lifting over 50-pounds, no repetitive overhead work, and 
no lifting over 20-pounds above shoulder height. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 23-24) Finally, he opined 
that all of the treatment claimant received, including surgery with Dr. Serrano, was 
medically indicated, reasonable, and appropriate for her diagnosed conditions, and he 
did not have any further treatment recommendations for her cervical spine or right 
shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 24) 
 
Claimant testified that at the time of hearing, the strength had not fully returned to 
her right arm, but she no longer has the issue of losing her grip on things. (Tr., p. 48) 
She continues to work the same job at Tyson, although she now finds lifting the boxes 
to be difficult. (Tr., pp. 49-50) She intends to continue working there until she is eligible 
for retirement. (Tr., p. 50) She does not believe she would be able to do her prior 
positions working with a wizard knife or boxing and bagging meat, due to the pain and 
struggles she has with her neck and shoulder.  
 
I found that claimant met her burden to prove that her right shoulder injury arose 
out of and in the course of her employment. Dr. Crites provided the only rating related to 
claimant’s shoulder. Furthermore, as discussed in detail below, his cervical spine rating 
is more detailed and well-explained than that provided by Dr. Abernathey, who did not  
specify whether he was using the fifth edition of the AMA Guides in calculating his 
rating, or explain his basis in assigning 11 percent. As such, I adopt Dr. Crites’ rating in 
full, and award claimant 31 percent of the whole body, which is equal to 155 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits. 
 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 20 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). A 
possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. Blue Bird 
Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce Motor 
Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 21 
In this case, defendant has denied that claimant’s work-related injury extends to 
her right shoulder and/or arm. Defendant bases the denial on several factors. First, 
defendant argues that claimant’s first documented allegation of shoulder pain did not 
come until October 11, 2021, over a year after the injury. However, this argument is 
incorrect. The first form claimant completed, on September 28, 2020, includes a pain 
diagram in which claimant clearly indicated pain in her neck and right shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 3) Dr. Gordon documented claimant’s complaints of cervical pain with radiation of 
pain down her right upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) Additionally, the handwritten “work 
status summary” completed by Dr. Gordon and the facility nurse states that claimant 
complained of neck, right arm, and head pain, and the diagnosis was cervical pain with 
right arm pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) After that initial visit, as outlined above, there is mention 
of right upper extremity, and/or right arm, and/or right shoulder pain in every single one 
of Dr. Gordon’s treatment records and on every work status summary authored between 
the date of injury and claimant’s cervical surgery. (See Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1-33) 
Additionally, at her first visit with Dr. Abernathey, claimant reported neck and 
right arm pain, and pain, numbness, and tingling along the right arm, forearm, and hand, 
with weakness on flexion of the arm, wrist, and fingers. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 51) When she saw 
Dr. Hawkins for an injection on November 16, 2020, his impression included myofascial 
neck and shoulder pain. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 56) 
After claimant’s cervical surgery on January 21, 2021, her complaints of right 
shoulder/right upper extremity pain continued. Beginning on February 10, 2021, she 
began reporting neck and shoulder discomfort at physical therapy, and those complaints 
were repeated in every record. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 75-107) She was eventually referred to Dr. 
Dery for pain management, and again indicated pain in her neck and right shoulder 
when completing the pain diagram at her first visit on July 26, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 206) 
Dr. Dery noted her right upper extremity weakness as well, and was concerned she had 
reherniated a disc in her neck. When the MRI came back normal, however, Dr. Dery 
began to focus more on her right shoulder. This took place on October 11, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 
7, pp. 211-213) On that date, Dr. Dery noted claimant had severe pain with 
impingement testing of her right shoulder, and pain and weakness with supraspinatus 
testing but not with infraspinatus testing. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 213) While defendant argues this 
date was the “first documented allegation of pain in her shoulder,” claimant had clearly 
been complaining of pain in her right shoulder and right upper extremity since her first 
treatment with Dr. Gordon. However, it was not until after she had almost completely 
recovered from her cervical surgery that her treating physicians started to focus more 
on her right shoulder complaints. 
This is supported by Dr. Crites’ report as well. Dr. Crites noted that concomitant 
neck and shoulder conditions can be difficult to diagnose because isolated neck 
conditions can cause shoulder pain and vice versa. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 21) He explained that 
when a patient has problems with both the neck and shoulder it can be difficult to 
determine which symptoms are attributable to the neck and which are attributable to the 
shoulder. In this case claimant had significant pathology in her neck and shoulder and 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 22 
had symptoms in both. Dr. Crites opined that the symptoms were consistent and her 
physical examinations were consistent with pathology in both body parts. 
Defendant further argues that claimant’s shoulder condition was determined to 
be a traumatic injury two- and one-half years after the date of injury, and after 
progressive worsening on imaging. However, the medical records reflect that only the 
rotator cuff tear was read as a traumatic injury. The SLAP lesion, a separate injury, and 
not part of the rotator cuff, was read as chronic. This makes sense with both the 
mechanism of injury and the progression of claimant’s symptoms, as explained by Dr. 
Serrano. The first MRI of the right shoulder in October 2021 showed a chronic labral 
tear (also referred to as SLAP lesion or SLAP tear). (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 218) Dr. Dery stated 
claimant’s right shoulder pain with the newly found labral tear was a work-related injury, 
and recommended an injection, which was compensated under workers’ compensation. 
At subsequent visits, Dr. Dery noted that her pain was not “true” radicular pain, and was 
likely related to the underlying SLAP tear and functional derangement at the 
glenohumeral joint on the right. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 221) He specifically opined that the chronic 
SLAP tear was consisted with claimant’s previous mechanism of injury, and referred her 
to Dr. Mysnyk. 
When Dr. Mysnyk reviewed the results of the shoulder MRI, he noted biceps 
pulley pathology in addition to the chronic SLAP lesion. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 222) He thought 
the chronic SLAP lesion may or may not be contributing to her issues, but opined that 
her neck was likely her primary issue. However, after claimant had good results 
following a subacromial injection, he opined that her shoulder pain was likely due to 
subacromial bursitis/impingement syndrome, at least in part. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 227) At that 
time, he did not see anything surgical on the MRI, and claimant was satisfied with her 
shoulder the way it was, so he released her from care to return as needed. 
Unfortunately, claimant’s symptoms worsened, so she requested additional 
treatment in May of 2022. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 65) This was the point at which Dr. Gordon 
noted that initially, claimant did not have issues “primarily” with her right glenohumeral 
region, and had full range of motion and strength about the shoulder. While this is 
partially true, it does not take into consideration that she did have complaints of pain in 
her right shoulder and arm, as well as her right trapezial area, and had since treated 
with Dr. Dery and Dr. Mysnyk specifically for her right shoulder.  
Around the same time, Dr. Mysnyk provided an opinion regarding claimant’s neck 
and associated shoulder issues. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 231) He opined she was at MMI for her 
right shoulder only, not her cervical or trapezial pain, and he did not assign any 
permanent impairment for her shoulder. He saw her again a couple of months later for 
another subacromial injection, and again explained that if the subacromial injection 
helped, the pain was likely coming from bursitis as opposed to the labral tear. Dr. 
Mysnyk separated claimant’s pain into two components: the pain from the proximal 
lateral shoulder radiating down to the elbow, which was likely due to subacromial 
bursitis, and the more significant pain in the posterior aspect of her shoulder to her neck 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 23 
and trapezius area. He recommended further workup of that pain at the discretion of her 
workers’ compensation carrier. 
Claimant continued to have pain in her cervical and trapezial region, and after 
additional MRIs showed no abnormalities in her neck or upper back, Dr. Gordon again 
released her from care at MMI. Claimant then began treating on her own and saw Dr. 
Bekavac, who felt she had right rotator cuff syndrome, as well as musculoskeletal neck 
pain. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 264) She was then referred to Dr. Serrano, who reviewed her prior 
MRI of the right shoulder and noted a partial-thickness tear of the supraspinatus (part of 
the rotator cuff), in addition to the SLAP tear and biceps tendinitis. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 270)  
Claimant then had an IME with Dr. Manshadi, whose causation opinion I adopted 
over that of Dr. Gordon. When viewing the medical records as a whole, I find that 
claimant has met her burden to prove that her right shoulder injury arose out of and in 
the course of her employment.  
Because I found the shoulder injury to be compensable, claimant is entitled to 
temporary disability and/or healing period benefits with respect to the time she missed 
from work related to treatment of her injury. The parties stipulated that claimant was off 
work from April 1, 2024 to September 24, 2024, related to her shoulder surgery. This is 
consistent with the medical records in evidence. As such, I find that claimant is entitled 
to healing period benefits from April 1, 2024 to September 24, 2024. The parties 
stipulated that defendant would be entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) 
for short-term disability paid during this period of time, in the amount of $5,902.80. (See 
Hearing Report, p. 3) 
Claimant is also entitled to medical benefits related to the right upper extremity 
injury, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement 
for medical bills unless claimant shows that they were paid from her own funds. See 
Caylor v. Employers Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). 
Otherwise, claimant is entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendant to 
make such payments directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 
(Iowa 1988). Where medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did 
not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service 
v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the 
commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical 
expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of 
any employer contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323. 
There is no argument that the medical treatment claimant received was not 
reasonable or beneficial. As such, defendant is responsible for all causally related 
medical expenses, including those submitted in claimant’s exhibit 3. Defendant shall 
reimburse claimant directly for her out-of-pocket expenses, and make any outstanding 
payments to the providers.  

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 24 
The next issue to determine is the extent of claimant’s permanent partial 
disability (PPD) as a result of the work injuries, as well as the commencement date for 
payment of PPD benefits. First, it is noted that claimant returned to work at Tyson in the 
same position she held prior to her injury, making the same or more as she did prior to 
the injury. (Tr., pp. 49-51) As such, while she sustained an injury to the body as a whole 
with the cervical spine injury, she is only entitled to functional impairment under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(v). 
Defendant argues that PPD should be limited to Dr. Abernathey’s 11 percent 
rating related to claimant’s cervical spine, with benefits commencing on September 10, 
2021. With respect to the denied shoulder, defendant argues that should it be deemed 
compensable, Dr. Serrano had not placed claimant at MMI at the time of the hearing, 
making an award of PPD for the shoulder premature. Further, defendant criticized Dr. 
Crites’ impairment rating for including a separate rating for the arm based on the biceps 
tenodesis.  
Claimant seeks an award of 31 percent of the body as a whole, based on Dr. 
Crites’ combined impairment rating. Claimant argues that Dr. Abernathey’s impairment 
rating for the cervical spine is unreliable, as he did not specify whether he was using the 
AMA Guides, fifth edition, or explain what section of the Guides he was using in 
reaching his conclusion. Claimant further argues that Dr. Crites provided a more 
detailed and well-explained rating for the cervical spine, and is the only doctor who 
provided a rating for the upper extremity.  
I found Dr. Crites’ rating to be the most reliable and accurate measure of 
claimant’s combined permanent partial disability. With respect to the cervical spine, Dr. 
Crites specified that he was using Table 15-5 on page 392 of the fifth edition of the 
Guides to place claimant in DRE Cervical Category IV, and provided a 25 percent whole 
body impairment rating. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22) Dr. Abernathey did not provide any such 
detail, or even specifically state that he was using the AMA Guides fifth edition to 
calculate the rating. As defendant points out, Dr. Abernathey’s rating corresponds to the 
range of motion method for impairment ratings under the AMA Guides, fifth edition. 
However, pursuant to the Guides, the DRE (diagnosis-related estimate) method is the 
principal methodology used to evaluate an individual who had had a distinct injury to the 
spine. (See AMA Guides, p. 379) The Guides provide several situations in which the 
range of motion method is used, but none of those situations specifically apply in this 
case. (See Guides, pp. 379-380) Furthermore, Dr. Abernathey did not provide any 
written support for using the range of motion method, or even specify that he did so. 
Finally, the Guides state that in the small number of cases in which the range of motion 
and DRE methods can both be used, the higher rating should be awarded. (Guides p. 
380) Based on these factors, even assuming Dr. Abernathey was using the fifth edition 
of the Guides, his rating does not comply with the preferred method for rating a spinal 
injury. As such, Dr. Crites’ rating for the cervical spine injury is accepted. 
With respect to the right upper extremity, Dr. Crites is the only physician who 
provided an impairment rating. Defendant argues that Dr. Serrano had not officially 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 25 
placed claimant at MMI at the time of hearing, and as such, permanent disability is 
premature. Defendant also argues that Dr. Crites’ inclusion of 2 percent of the upper 
extremity related to the biceps tenodesis is inappropriate under Iowa law. 
MMI refers to stabilization of the workers’ condition or a finding that the condition 
is not likely to abate in the future despite medical treatment. Dunlap v. Action 
Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 557 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012) Stabilization of the employee’s 
condition is the event that allows a physician to make the determination that a particular 
medical condition is permanent. Id. at 556 (quoting Bell Bros. Heating and Air 
Conditioning. v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010). 
The Iowa Supreme Court clarified the issue of maximum medical improvement, 
or medically indicated significant improvement, in Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 
N.W.2d 389, 391-392 (Iowa 1993). The Court held: 
[T]he stability of condition referred to in Larson’s treatise is a stability in industrial 
disability. Consequently, an anticipated improvement in continuing pain or 
depression, if medically indicated, may extend the length of the healing period if 
a substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result. If, however, 
it is not likely that further treatment of continuing pain, however soothing to the 
claimant, will decrease the extent of permanent industrial disability, then 
continued pain management should not prolong the healing period.  
Dr. Crites opined that claimant reached MMI for the shoulder on October 1, 2024, 
which is six months after her surgery and a typical recovery period for the type of 
surgery she had. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22) Dr. Crites’ opinion in this regard is reasonable. By 
October 1, 2024, claimant had exhausted nearly all of her approved physical therapy 
sessions. She had been released to return to work with no restrictions, and had 
successfully returned. While Dr. Serrano thought some additional physical therapy 
would be beneficial, claimant was not approved for more sessions, and continued with 
her home exercise program instead. There is nothing in Dr. Serrano’s records to 
indicate claimant’s condition will substantially change, or that any additional treatment 
will decrease the extent of permanent disability. As such, I find claimant reached MMI 
for the right upper extremity injury on October 1, 2024.  
With respect to Dr. Crites’ impairment rating, defendant argues that claimant’s 
injury to the right upper extremity is limited to the shoulder, pursuant to agency 
precedent. Specifically, defendant cites to Ruff v. Senior Housing Health Care, Inc., File 
No. 1655383.01 (Arb., Oct. 19, 2022) and Derifield v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File 
No. 21701314.01 (Arb., June 12, 2023). Those cases rely on the Iowa Supreme Court’s 
decision in Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662 (Iowa 2022), to hold that 
the long head of the biceps tendon originates in the shoulder, and as such, a repair to 
that area is proximal to and intertwined with the glenohumeral joint, making it a shoulder 
injury rather than an arm injury.  
In Chavez, the court determined that the claimant did not have a separate 
permanent impairment to her arm simply because a biceps tenotomy was performed in 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 26 
conjunction with claimant’s overall shoulder surgery. Id. at 671. Since that time, several 
agency decisions have similarly found that having a biceps tenodesis or tenotomy does 
not, alone, establish that a claimant has sustained permanent impairment to the arm in 
addition to the shoulder. (See Ruff, Derifield; See also is Lanier v. Vermeer 
Manufacturing Co., File No. 5066811.01 (Arb. May 27, 2021); Horne v. United 
Technologies Corp., File No. 21005075.01 (Arb. Feb. 3, 2023)). 
However, in this case, Dr. Crites explained the basis for the additional 
impairment rating to the arm. Dr. Crites justified the additional 2 percent using section 
16.7d on page 507 of the Guides, which states that if a tendon has been ruptured or 
undergone surgery, then strength can be used to assign impairment. In this case, 
claimant had surgical reattachment of her biceps tendon. Dr. Crites noted that Table 16-
35 on page 510 of the Guides assigns a 1 to 4 percent impairment for loss of supination 
strength, which supports Dr. Crites’ assignment of 2 percent impairment. He justified the 
assignment of this impairment to the arm as opposed to the shoulder based on the 
factual anatomy of the biceps muscle and the mechanics of supination, which is mainly 
carried out by the biceps muscle and is a motion of the elbow joint, not the shoulder 
joint. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23) He further noted that the Guides places the figure for measuring 
supination under elbow motion impairment.  
Based on Dr. Crites’ explanation, I find the impairment from the biceps tenodesis 
procedure extends to claimant’s arm, due to the loss of supination strength, which is a 
function of the arm at the elbow joint. (See Eichmeyer v. Nordstrom, File No. 
21700779.01 (App., Oct. 4, 2023); distinguishing from Chavez based on specific, 
credible evidence of permanent impairment to arm in addition to permanent impairment 
to shoulder from biceps tendon injury affecting supination strength). As such, I accept 
Dr. Crites’ 2 percent upper extremity rating. 
Dr. Crites is the only doctor who provided an impairment rating for claimant’s 
shoulder as well. There is no argument that his 12 percent upper extremity rating based 
on lost range of motion is not valid under the AMA Guides, and as such it is accepted as 
accurate and reliable. 
Dr. Crites properly converted his upper extremity impairment ratings to the body 
as a whole, and used the combined values chart on page 604 of the Guides to assign a 
total combined impairment rating of 31 percent of the whole body. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23) 
Under Iowa law, when there is injury to some scheduled member and also to parts of 
the body not included in the schedule, the resulting disability is compensated on the 
basis of an unscheduled injury. Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676, 
685 (Iowa 2024) (citing Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 16 (Iowa 1993)). 
Unscheduled injuries are compensated on the basis of 500 weeks, pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v). As such, claimant is entitled to 155 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits. 
The next issue to determine is the appropriate weekly benefit rate. The parties’ 
dispute regarding the rate stems from claimant’s inclusion of the “we care” bonus in her 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 27 
rate calculation. Defendant argues the bonus should be considered an irregular bonus 
under Iowa Code section 85.61(3), and thus excluded from the rate calculation. 
Claimant disagrees. 
It is claimant’s burden to prove that a bonus should be included in the calculation 
of the average weekly wage. See Olson v. Christensen Farms, File No. 5039510 (Arb. 
Feb. 19, 2014). Irregular bonuses are not included in “gross earnings” for purposes of 
calculating the workers' compensation rate. Whether a bonus is “regular” is determined 
on a case-by-case basis and is dependent upon a variety of factors. These factors 
include how often the bonus is received, how consistently it has been paid to the 
employee over the course of his or her employment, whether it is subject to a condition 
precedent, whether it is voluntarily paid, and whether it had vested at the time of the 
injury. See Noel v. Rolscreen Co., 475 N.W.2d 666 (Iowa 1991) The Iowa Supreme 
Court has suggested that these factors are neither an exclusive nor exhaustive list. 
Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 264-65 (Iowa 2012) 
The “we care” bonus was provided to employees by Tyson during certain weeks 
during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. (Tr., pp. 55-56) Claimant testified that she 
did not recall receiving any type of bonuses before the pandemic, and that the “we care” 
bonus had since ended. The bonus was also paid in varying amounts, and at times, was 
not paid at all. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 50-63) Based on claimant’s testimony, the bonus was 
temporary and tied to a specific event – the pandemic. The payments varied and were 
not an ongoing part of claimant’s compensation history over the course of her 
employment, as she had never received any such bonus prior to the pandemic. The 
“temporary and situational” nature of the “we care” bonuses distinguishes them from a 
regular bonus. See Peska v. Graphic Packaging International, File No. 23009765.01 
(Arb. March 10, 2025). I find the “we care” bonuses were irregular, and should not be 
included in the rate calculation. As such, I find defendant’s rate calculation of $521.57, 
based on gross earnings of $768.00, is correct. 
With respect to the commencement date for PPD benefits, Dr. Abernathey first 
placed claimant at MMI for the neck injury on September 10, 2021. I find that date is 
appropriate for the initial commencement of PPD benefits. However, claimant was later 
taken off work for shoulder surgery, which entitled her to additional healing period 
benefits while she was assigned restrictions that prevented her from working. That 
being said, she was still entitled to receive the ongoing PPD benefits related to the neck 
injury during that time. The various categories of workers’ compensation benefits have 
distinct purposes and compensate for different categories of losses. See Evenson v. 
Winnebago Industries, Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 373 (Iowa 2016). Therefore, despite 
overlapping PPD benefits during claimant’s second healing period related to the 
shoulder surgery, there is “no risk of duplication or overpayment of benefits.” Id. at 374. 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits. 
Claimant contends that defendant did not have a reasonable basis for denial of her 
shoulder claim. Defendant disagrees, arguing the shoulder claim was denied based on 
reasonable reliance on the opinions of treating providers. 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 28 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this subchapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
In Pettengill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, 875 N.W.2d 740, 747 (Iowa Ct 
App. 2015), the Iowa Court of Appeals held that Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) “creates 
a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in showing it had a ‘reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse’ for the termination of benefits.” The Pettengill Court 
explained that timeline: 
First, the employer's excuse for the termination must have been preceded 
by an investigation. Id.; § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the 
investigation were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” relied on by 
the employer in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.”  Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3) 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 29 
“Defendant has the burden to show compliance with this statutory provision in 
order to avoid the mandatory assessment of a penalty.” Id. at 745. To carry defendant’s 
burden of proof: 
 
The law requires proof of a prompt investigation and that factual basis be 
provided to the injured worker at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. Herein, defendant must show a timely investigation 
. . . and that there was a timely communication to claimant of the reasons 
for the denial. 
 
Id.  “In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse under 
paragraph ‘b,’ an excuse shall satisfy the three criteria listed in paragraph ‘c.’”  Id. at 
747. 
There is no dispute that there was a denial of benefits related to the alleged 
shoulder injury. As such, it is defendant’s burden to demonstrate the denial was 
reasonable. Defendant investigated claimant’s shoulder condition through multiple 
appointments with Dr. Dery, Dr. Mysnyk, and Dr. Gordon. Eventually, Dr. Mysnyk 
concluded claimant’s problems were most likely stemming from her neck. Dr. Gordon 
then opined that there was no condition in claimant’s shoulder that was causally related 
to the work injury. While I found Dr. Gordon’s opinion to be incorrect, defendant was 
entitled to rely on it at the time of the denial.  
Additionally, the fact that Dr. Manshadi opined claimant’s shoulder condition was 
related to the work injury does not automatically make the denial unreasonable. When 
multiple physicians disagree regarding the diagnosis and cause of the alleged condition, 
it is said to be fairly debatable. If a claim is fairly debatable, a reasonable basis exists 
for the denial of the claim. 
In this case, defendant preceded the denial with a reasonable investigation, and 
actually relied upon the opinions of the treating medical providers in making a decision. 
The denial and basis for the denial was contemporaneously conveyed to the claimant. I 
find that defendant complied with Iowa Code section 10A.315(4). As such, claimant is 
not entitled to an award of penalty benefits. 
The next issue to determine involves payment of claimant’s IME with Dr. Crites. 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 30 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen 
physician’s opinion that there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). 
It is well accepted Iowa law that a claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for 
one IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, Inc., 763 
N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009). Defendant argues that it paid for claimant’s evaluation 
with Dr. Manshadi on May 8, 2023, and as such has no obligation to pay for any further 
evaluations under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Dr. Manshadi did not provide an impairment rating in his 2023 report. Claimant 
argues that he did not perform an IME based on the meaning of the phrase “to perform 
an impairment rating,” as explained by the Iowa Supreme Court. See MidAmerican 
Construction v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024). In Sandlin, the Court noted that 
section 85.39, “is devoted to the examination of an injured worker for the purpose of 
ascertaining ‘the extent and character of the injury’ for purposes of paying benefits in 
the event of a disability resulting from the injury.” Id. at 847-848; citing Des Moines Area 
Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 2015). The court also spent 
time discussing the meaning of the phrase “to perform an impairment rating” in the last 
sentence of section 85.39(2). The court explained the steps articulated by the AMA 
Guides for a physician to perform an employee’s impairment rating. The court 
concluded that section 85.39 required an examination to perform an impairment rating 
that includes the steps required under the AMA Guides. Id. at 849-850. 
Considering the requirements set forth by the court in Sandlin, I do not that find 
Dr. Manshadi “performed an impairment rating” within the meaning of Iowa Code 
section 85.39. He did not provide an impairment rating for claimant’s cervical spine or 
upper extremity. Rather, he reviewed some of the medical records, performed a 
physical examination, and gave an opinion related to diagnosis and causation of 
claimant’s right shoulder condition. While claimant may have chosen Dr. Manshadi, his 
report does not meet the standard of section 85.39, and did not provide claimant with a 
means for contesting the impairment rating of the employer’s chosen physician. To hold 
that Dr. Manshadi’s report meets the standard set forth in section 85.39 would 
essentially deny claimant her right to obtain an impairment rating from a physician of her 
own choice.  

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 31 
Dr. Crites’ report meets the requirements to satisfy section 85.39. Defendant had 
previously received an impairment rating for claimant’s cervical condition from Dr. 
Abernathey on September 10, 2021; an opinion of no impairment related to the shoulder 
bursitis from Dr. Mysnyk on March 3, 2022; and an opinion from Dr. Gordon that the 
shoulder condition was not causally related to the work injury on June 8, 2023. Again, 
an opinion of no causation is tantamount to a zero percent rating. Kern, 966 N.W.2d at 
326. As such, claimant was entitled to a subsequent examination by a physician of her 
own choosing. Therefore, I find defendant must reimburse claimant for the full cost of 
Dr. Crites’ IME, in the amount of $4,910.00. (Cl. Ex. 14, p. 97) Section 85.39 also 
requires defendant to pay for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for the examination. As such, defendant shall also reimburse claimant for her mileage 
related to Dr. Crites’ IME in the amount of $184.85. (Cl. Ex. 14, pp. 95, 98) 
The final issue for consideration is assessment of costs. Under Iowa 
Administrative Rule 876-4.33, costs are taxed at the discretion of the commissioner. 
Claimant has submitted as costs the filing fee in the amount of $128.75. (Cl. Ex. 14, p. 
96) As claimant was generally successful in her claim, I use my discretion to award 
costs. Defendant shall reimburse claimant for $128.75 in costs. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
All benefits shall be paid at the rate of five hundred twenty-one and 57/100 
dollars ($521.57). 
 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant healing period benefits from April 1, 2024 to 
September 24, 2024. 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant one hundred fifty-five (155) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits, commencing September 10, 2021. 
 
 
Defendant shall be entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) for 
short-term disability benefits paid, as stipulated by the parties. 
 
 
Defendant shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid, as stipulated by the parties. 
 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.  
 
Defendant is responsible for all causally related medical expenses, as outlined 
above. 

CORAGIC V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 32 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Crites’ IME under Iowa Code section 
85.39, in the amount of four thousand nine hundred ten and 00/100 ($4,910.00). 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s mileage related to Dr. Crites’ IME under 
Iowa Code section 85.39, in the amount of one hundred eighty-four and 85/100 
($184.85). 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs, in the amount of one hundred 
twenty-eight and 75/100 ($128.75). 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this __24th _ day of September, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jordan Talsma  
(via WCES) 
Adnan Mahmutagic  (via WCES) 
Lara Plaisance  
(via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
