Case Number: 5064468
Case Title:  COALE, JACQUES V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Coale Jacques-5064468D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JACQUES P. COALE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5064468 
BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION, 
  : 
INC.,  
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE USA INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :            Head Note Nos.: 1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Defendants. 
  :            1802, 1803, 2501, 2502 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Jacques P. Coale, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Barr-Nunn 
Transportation, as the employer and Ace USA Insurance, as the insurance carrier.  This 
case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on July 20, 2020.  As a 
result of the ongoing pandemic in the State of Iowa and an order from the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case was tried via video conferencing, 
using CourtCall. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing reports, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 7, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through L.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at trial.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.   
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-18  15:52:09     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 2 
 
 
September 1, 2020.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on 
that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
claimant’s employment at Barr-Nunn on February 28, 2018. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of temporary disability benefits from 
March 7, 2018 through February 1, 2019. 
3. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the alleged 
February 28, 2018 work injury. 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability, if any. 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to payment, reimbursement, or satisfaction of 
past medical expenses contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 5. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation charges contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 4. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Jacques Coale worked as an over-the-road truck driver for Barr-Nunn 
Transportation and asserts he sustained an injury as a result of his work activities on 
February 28, 2018.  Mr. Coale lives in Concord, Michigan and is 53 years of age.   
Mr. Coale suffers from pre-existing high blood pressure and neuropathy in his 
feet as a result of a pre-existing condition.  Mr. Coale is a large gentleman, weighing 
approximately 455 pounds at his maximum weight over the past 10 years.  Claimant 
was attempting to alleviate some of his weight issues and was seeking to qualify for a 
bariatric procedure prior his alleged injury date in February 2018.  Mr. Coale had lost 
approximately 150 pounds prior to the injury date demonstrating his efforts to qualify for 
the bariatric procedure.  At the time of hearing, Mr. Coale weighed approximately 370 
pounds. 
In addition to the above conditions, Mr. Coale also experienced injuries, swelling, 
and infections in his lower extremities before the alleged date of injury.  In 2015, 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 3 
 
 
claimant sustained an injury to his left great toe.  This injury resulted in swelling and 
pain in his left great toe for approximately two months.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A, 
deposition transcript, pages 23-24)  Mr. Coale also sustained a right foot fracture prior 
to his alleged injury with Barr-Nunn.  This fracture resulted in an infection developing 
and claimant required over three weeks of IV antibiotics and continued oral antibiotics 
after the IV antibiotics course was completed.  (Defendants’ Ex. L, p. 10)  Claimant also 
required treatment with an orthopaedic surgeon for his right foot fracture.  (Defendants’ 
Ex. H)  Fortunately, the antibiotic treatments were successful in managing the spread of 
any infection. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Coale again had a battle with his MRSA infection in 2017.  At 
this time, he again experienced left leg swelling and pain.  (Tr., pp. 21, 58-59)  Claimant 
developed a left thigh ulcer, which was draining and swelling in the left leg.  (Tr., pp. 58-
59)  Claimant was diagnosed with cellulitis and was again prescribed antibiotics.  
Fortunately, the antibiotic treatment was again successful in curtailing the infection.  
Claimant acknowledged during his testimony that he knew he would always be a carrier 
of MRSA and that, even when he did not have outward signs of infection, he would 
always be a dormant carrier that would make him susceptible to further infections.  (Tr., 
pp. 89-90)  Claimant also acknowledged that he was an active smoker through the 
alleged date of injury in February 2018. 
On February 28, 2018, Mr. Coale was driving a truck for Barr-Nunn.  He drove 
that day from Illinois to Minnesota.  Claimant had been assigned out driving over the 
road for approximately one week prior to the alleged injury.  Claimant testified that he 
was very sedentary during this period.  During this time, claimant slept in the sleeper of 
his cab, drove up to 11 hours per day, and only stood or walked while entering a 
restaurant or when dropping off or picking up a delivery load. 
After his driving shift on February 28, 2018, Mr. Coale went to his sleeper.  He 
took off his shoes and noticed that the sock on his left foot was soaked.  He removed 
his sock and noticed that his left foot was swollen and that his toes on the left foot were 
blistered.  Mr. Coale went to the emergency room in Owatonna, Minnesota that evening 
to have his left foot evaluated. 
For some reason, claimant denied being a smoker when he reported to the 
emergency room on February 28, 2018.  The emergency room personnel identified 
swelling in claimant’s second and third toes with drainage.  As a result of their 
evaluation and consultation with a burn center specialist, the emergency room physician 
removed the blisters on claimant’s left foot, applied ointment, recommended claimant 
keep the foot dry and report for evaluation with his personal physician in 3-5 days.  The 
emergency room physician also prescribed an antibiotic medication for claimant to take 
until returning to his personal physician.  (Joint Ex. 1) 
Mr. Coale left the emergency room and continued on his route.  Mr. Coale 
testified that he was required to accept all routes offered by Barr-Nunn.  He testified that 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 4 
 
 
he requested to be routed home but that Barr-Nunn continued to assign him new routes 
that did not return him immediately to his home.  As a result, Mr. Coale remained on the 
road until March 7, 2018. 
During the week claimant remained on the road, he did not stop by a pharmacy 
and fill his antibiotic prescription.  He did not stop at any urgent care facilities or 
hospitals to seek further care.  Defendants point out that claimant likely drove past 
numerous medical facilities and pharmacies during this 8-day period.  Unfortunately, 
without antibiotics, claimant’s foot condition did not improve and developed a MRSA 
infection before he reached home. 
When Mr. Coale returned home, he reported to his personal physician’s office for 
an evaluation.  Upon inspecting his injury, Mr. Coale’s personal medical provider sent 
him to the emergency room via ambulance.  The emergency room physician diagnosed 
claimant with necrotic toes on his left foot with his toenails falling off and open wounds 
on the left foot.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 1) 
Unfortunately, claimant’s infection caused significant difficulties for claimant’s left 
foot.  He was hospitalized for 8 days receiving IV antibiotics.  Claimant developed 
gangrene in all five toes on his left foot.  The treatment was unsuccessful in reversing 
damage to the second and third toes on claimant’s left foot.  Instead, claimant submitted 
to an amputation of the second toe and an arthroplasty with bone biopsy of the third toe 
on his left foot as well as part of his big toe on the left foot.  Mr. Coale remained off work 
from the day he was admitted to the hospital on March 7, 2018 through January 21, 
2019.  I find that claimant was medically incapable of returning to substantially similar 
work during this period of time and that he continued to seek medical treatment during 
this period as well.   
Mr. Coale testified he was released to return to work on January 21, 2019.  I find 
that claimant was medically capable of performing substantially similar employment as 
of January 21, 2019, though he did not achieve maximum medical improvement until 
after that date.  Review of the relevant medical records demonstrates that claimant was 
released to return to work and that care, other than completion of a course of antibiotics 
was essentially completed by January 29, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 14)  I find that claimant 
achieved maximum medical improvement following this injury on January 29, 2019.  
In early February 2019, Mr. Coale was able to secure alternate employment and 
returned to work as a truck driver for Swede Express.  In his new employment, claimant 
continues to drive a truck but is able to return home every other day.  He remained 
employed as a driver for Swede Express at the time of the arbitration hearing.  
The initial dispute between the parties is whether claimant’s employment at 
Barr-Nunn caused or materially aggravated claimant’s left foot condition on February 
28, 2018 and his subsequent need for amputations of toes on his left foot.  Several 
medical providers have offered opinions on the cause of Mr. Coale’s left foot condition. 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 5 
 
 
Lauren Cartwright, PA-C, offered an explanation of the cause of claimant’s left 
foot condition in a note dated May 31, 2018.  Specifically, Physician Assistant 
Cartwright noted, “Patient developed this condition while employed as a truck driver.  
He has history of dependent edema of bilateral feet which is exacerbated by prolonged 
sitting.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 21)  No further analysis or explanation of causation was offered 
by Physician Assistant Cartwright. 
Claimant’s treating podiatrist, Jonathon Rayman, DPM, diagnosed claimant with 
non-pressure chronic ulcers with the fat layer exposed.  However, Dr. Rayman also 
diagnosed claimant with acute osteomyelitis and Buerger’s disease.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 27)  
In a November 9, 2018 note, Dr. Rayman noted claimant injury to the second toe due to 
osteomyelitis was “suspected due to Burgers [sic] disease.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 90)  
Claimant’s counsel asked Dr. Rayman to offer an opinion about the cause of claimant’s 
left foot condition.  In a report signed July 24, 2018 and on claimant counsel’s 
letterhead, Dr. Rayman agreed, “Mr. Coale’s work activity in late February/early March 
of 2018 of driving for long periods of time was a substantial contributing factor to his left 
foot condition and the progression of the left foot condition to the point where [Dr. 
Rayman] needed to perform surgery and amputation.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 2) 
Mr. Coale’s treating infectious disease specialist, Mujahed Abbas, M.D., also 
weighed in on the cause of his left foot condition.  Dr. Abbas’s assessment was that 
claimant sustained, “Chronic wounds complicated by skin and soft tissue infection 
involving the left foot most likely related to trauma may be related to this patient [sic] 
occupation and lack of aeration or ventilation of his feet plus overweight.”  (Joint Ex. 4, 
p. 18) 
Claimant also obtained an independent medical evaluation, performed by Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., on April 19, 2019.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3)  Dr. Bansal opined, “Mr. Coale 
developed friction blisters across his left toes from driving for long hours with a wet 
sock.  Unfortunately[,] the blisters became infected with MRSA, leading to a skin and 
bone infection and starting a cascade of events that led to two surgeries, resulting in 
partial amputations of his first and second toes.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 10) 
Defendants challenge the opinions of Dr. Bansal, asserting that the history 
provided to and understood by Dr. Bansal is inaccurate.  Specifically, defendants 
contend that claimant told Dr. Bansal that he “had been driving all day” on February 28, 
2018.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 8)  In fact, claimant’s logs demonstrate that he drove only 
minimal hours in the weeks preceding February 28, 2018.  Defendants point out and 
argue that claimant drove only 4 hours and 32 minutes on February 27, 2018 and that 
his longest driving stint without a break was only 2 hours and six minutes on that date.  
(Defendants’ Ex. D) 
Defendants cast claimant in a light in which he was providing inaccurate 
information to his treating providers and Dr. Bansal.  Therefore, defendants challenge 
the accuracy of Dr. Bansal’s assumptions and understanding of the underlying facts of 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 6 
 
 
this case.  I do not agree with the defendants’ contentions.  Although it does not appear 
that Dr. Bansal knew the specific times and amounts claimant drove, he was clearly 
aware that Mr. Coale was an over-the-road truck driver.   
Defendants also obtained an independent medical opinion.  David T. Berg, D.O. 
performed a records review at defendants’ request on September 8, 2018.  Dr. Berg 
explained: 
Bruerger’s [sic] Disease or Thromboangiitis Obliterans is a segmental, 
inflammatory disease that affects the small to medium arteries and veins 
of the distal extremities.  The disease produces inflammatory occlusive 
thrombus (blood clots) of the small veins and arteries of the distal 
extremities.  In this case Mr. Coale’s feet.  Patients are young 40-45 year 
old, male smokers (91%) who present with distal extremity ischemia, 
ischemic digital ulcers and/or gangrene infections.  All which are present 
in this case.  There is a strong association with the use of tobacco 
products and smoking cessation, which is imperative to prevent 
amputations and progression of the disease. 
(Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 3)  Dr. Berg further opined, “Mr. Coale has classic Bruerger’s [sic] 
disease and I suspect this was the etiology of his right foot infection in 2015.  He has all 
of the risk factors and symptoms of this disease.”  (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 3)  However, 
Dr. Berg explained, “There is no correlation with Mr. Coale’s occupation, the 
development of his disease, or the progression of such, which would result in 
amputation of his left 2nd and 3rd toes or his chronic osteomyelitis.”  (Defendants’ Ex. E, 
p. 3)  He also opined, “there is no correlation with Buerger’s [sic] disease and 
immobility.”  (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 3) 
Claimant challenges the credibility and basis for Dr. Berg’s opinions, pointing out 
that his report details only reviewing medical records from ten dates of service.  
Claimant contends that Dr. Berg clearly does not have a complete understanding of 
claimant’s injuries or his medical history.  Accordingly, claimant contends that Dr. Berg’s 
opinions should not be given significant weight or deemed credible.   
I partially agree with claimant’s challenges.  Dr. Berg never physically evaluated 
claimant.  His records review and understanding of the facts of the case appear limited.  
To the extent that defendants challenged the facts outlined and detailed in the medical 
records of treating physicians, those are the same facts to which Dr. Berg was privy.   
Following this injury, claimant again developed difficulties in his left foot and 
lower extremities in late 2019.  In fact, he again developed pain in his toes and calves.  
Another treating physician, Joseph V. Cotroneo, M.D. evaluated Mr. Coale on 
December 27, 2019.  In his office note, Dr. Cotroneo noted claimant’s symptoms and 
indicated that claimant’s distal foot symptoms were consistent with Buerger’s Disease.  
However, he also noted other symptoms in claimant’s legs, indicating, “This is not 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 7 
 
 
consistent with straightforward Buerger’s disease but he could be developing also some 
more proximal peripheral arterial disease.”  (Defendants’ Ex. L)  Dr. Cotroneo’s 
assessment gives me less confidence that claimant’s difficulties and problems all arise 
from and are attributable to an underlying Buerger’s disease, as asserted and opined by 
Dr. Berg. 
Ultimately, when I compare all of the medical professionals’ opinions on 
causation, I ultimately find the opinions of Dr. Abbas to be most credible and convincing.  
Dr. Abbas is a treating infectious disease expert.  He evaluated claimant personally and 
for purposes of treating claimant’s infected left foot and toes.  He is clearly aware of the 
condition and has expertise in understanding the cause or MRSA infections and 
outbreaks.  Dr. Abbas was not hired by either party to provide an opinion.  To the extent 
that Dr. Bansal’s opinions or the opinions of Physician Assistant Cartwright are 
consistent with or support the opinions of Dr. Abbas, they are also accepted. 
Similarly, Dr. Rayman opined that claimant’s work activities aggravated his left 
foot condition leading to the difficulties experienced on and after February 28, 2018.  I 
find Dr. Rayman’s opinions to also be credible and convincing. 
Therefore, I find that claimant proved that his injuries “may be related to [his] 
occupation and lack of aeration or ventilation of his feet plus overweight.”  (Joint Ex. 4, 
p. 18)  While acknowledging that claimant had pre-existing conditions, including MRSA, 
that significantly enhanced his chances of developing this condition, I ultimately find that 
claimant’s driving duties materially aggravated his underlying condition and resulted in 
the blistering, MRSA infection, and subsequent surgical amputations and procedures 
required to treat those conditions.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 2) 
In their post-hearing brief, defendants argue that claimant’s failure to fill and take 
his antibiotic prescription, as directed by the emergency room physician, is a 
superseding and intervening event or cause of his subsequent development of MRSA 
and further difficulties.  Realistically, the emergency room physician told claimant on 
February 28, 2018 of the urgency of his need for antibiotics and follow-up care.  
Claimant failed to follow these medical recommendations and did not properly attend to 
his own health in failing to fill his prescription and in failing to obtain prompt follow-up 
care. 
Mr. Coale, at least partially, blames Barr-Nunn for his failure to obtain his 
antibiotic prescription or follow-up care.  Claimant asserts that he was forced to take 
additional loads by the company and was not promptly routed home for further care.  
While I believe Barr-Nunn continued to provide claimant additional routes to perform, I 
am not convinced that the majority of the fault lies with the employer.  Mr. Coale could 
have stopped driving to fill his prescription at various points in his route.  Mr. Coale 
could have stopped at an urgent care center or an emergency room during his route, as 
his condition worsened.   

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 8 
 
 
Mr. Coale’s effort to push fault, or blame, onto the employer is not appropriate in 
this case.  I do not accept claimant’s characterization and implication that Barr-Nunn 
was a heartless employer that pushed its employee to continue working in spite of 
serious adverse health consequences to Mr. Coale.  Instead, I find that Mr. Coale 
overlooked or declined several opportunities to obtain his prescription antibiotic or to 
seek additional medical care.   
The delay in obtaining the antibiotics or further medical care certainly may have 
led to a worsening of claimant’s condition, including development of gangrene and 
subsequent amputations of toes on his left foot.  However, the only physician that 
directly links the delay in treatment to the amputations and other necessary treatment is 
Dr. Berg.  Ultimately, I did not accept Dr. Berg’s opinions as the most credible in this 
record.  Therefore, even if defendants’ mitigation or superseding cause argument is 
considered, I find that defendants did not prove that the failure to obtain the antibiotic or 
further care more quickly necessarily and directly caused the subsequent medical 
treatment.  On this record, it is not possible to definitively determine whether claimant 
would have avoided further medical complications by the timely filling and taking of his 
antibiotic medication.   
Only Dr. Bansal offered an opinion about the extent of claimant’s permanent 
functional disability.  Specifically, Dr. Bansal opined that claimant sustained permanent 
functional impairment equivalent to 15 percent of the left foot.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 10)  
Review of Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating demonstrates that he awards permanent 
impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition.  Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating also reveals that he awarded impairment 
for amputation and loss of range of motion of various toes in the left foot.  Although Dr. 
Bansal converts his impairment rating to the left leg, it is apparent that the permanent 
impairment he assigns is limited to the left foot.  Therefore, I find claimant proved he 
sustained permanent functional impairment as a result of the February 28, 2018 work 
injury equivalent to 15 percent of the left foot. 
Mr. Coale also introduced past medical expenses at Claimant’s Exhibit 5.  
Defendants stipulated that the medical providers would testify that the treatment and 
fees for these medical expenses were reasonable.  Defendants offered no contrary 
evidence on that issue.  (Hearing Report)  However, defendants challenged whether the 
medical expenses were related to the alleged injury. 
Defendants offered no specific challenge to any of the medical expenses 
contained in Claimants’ Exhibit 5, other than to challenge whether the injury arose out of 
or in the course of claimant’s employment and to assert that the additional medical 
expenses were the result of a failure to mitigate damages.  In fact, the issue of medical 
expenses is not even raised or argued in defendants’ post-hearing brief.   
Review of Claimant’s Exhibit 5 demonstrates charges from Eaton Regional 
Medical Center, Foremost Podiatry, Capitol Infectious Disease Associates, McLaren 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 9 
 
 
Greater Lansing, and an ambulance charge.  Each of these corresponds with testimony 
or medical records in evidence. I find these charges are all related to claimant’s work 
injury.  Claimant’s Exhibit 5 also includes hospital charges from Hayes Green Beach 
Memorial Hospital, which correspond with the date of claimant’s left foot surgery.  I 
conclude those are also related to the work injury. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 5 includes charges from Michigan Post-Acute Medical, 
Michigan State University, and Affina Health.  These are from date ranges surrounding 
treatment of claimant’s left foot injury.  I suspect these may be related to treatment of 
claimant’s left foot injury.  However, I cannot specifically attribute these charges to the 
work injury based on the evidentiary record.  Claimant has not proven these charges 
are causally related to his work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 10 
 
 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
I found that claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that he 
sustained an injury as a result of or at least a material aggravation of his underlying 
condition as a result of his work activities on February 28, 2018.  Specifically, I accepted 
the medical opinions of Dr. Abbas and Dr. Rayman as most credible and convincing.  
Having found claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained an 
injury that arose out of and in the course of his employment, I conclude claimant has 
proven a compensable injury.   
However, in their post-hearing brief, defendants raise a potential defense 
asserting that claimant failed to mitigate his damages by failing to obtain and take the 
antibiotics prescribed to him on February 28, 2018.  Claimant asserts that the employer 
is at least partially to blame for this delay because it continued to provide claimant new 
loads to deliver and he was unable to get home to be seen by his personal medical 
provider.  However, the factual argument asserted by the parties may not even be 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 11 
 
 
relevant because defendants did not assert any affirmative defenses in the hearing 
report.  Affirmative defenses must be pled and proven by the defendants.  De Long v. 
Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 N.W.91 (1940).  Failure to mitigate damages 
has been held by the Iowa appellate courts and this agency as an affirmative defense.  
R.E.T. Corp. v. Frank Paxton Co., Inc., 329 N.W.2d 416, 422 (Iowa 1983) (“The defense 
of mitigation (or avoidable consequences) must be both pled and proven by the 
asserting party.”); Grittmann v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 1198868 
(Arbitration May 2001). 
As noted, defendants did not assert an affirmative defense in the hearing report.  
Accordingly, I conclude that defendants failed to assert a mitigation of damages defense 
and that there is no defense pending that would reduce or eliminate claimant’s claim or 
damages.  However, to the extent that a reviewing authority may disagree with my legal 
analysis or conclusion that defendants must assert mitigation of damages as an 
affirmative defense, I continue with the analysis of the potential defense. 
Defendants contend that claimant’s failure to fill and take antibiotics during the 
week after his work injury is the cause, or an intervening and superseding cause, of his 
subsequent toe amputations.  Although defendants’ argument is plausible, I did not find 
Dr. Berg’s medical opinions to be the most credible or convincing in the record.  Dr. 
Berg offered the only opinion that connected the progression of claimant’s foot condition 
and eventual amputation of his toes to his failure to fill his prescription or obtain prompt 
follow-up evaluation.  Even if the affirmative defense is considered, I conclude that 
defendants failed to prove the defense by a preponderance of the evidence. 
Having found that claimant proved he sustained an injury arising out of and in the 
course of his employment and that defendants failed to properly assert the affirmative 
defense they now assert, I conclude claimant has proven a compensable work injury.  I 
turn to the claims for weekly and medical benefits. 
Mr. Coale seeks an award of temporary disability, or healing period, benefits from 
March 7, 2018 through February 1, 2019.  (Hearing Report)  Defendants stipulate that 
claimant was off work during this period of time but dispute whether claimant is entitled 
to either temporary disability, or healing period, benefits during the claimed period. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 12 
 
 
Having found that claimant was off work, was not medically capable of 
performing substantially similar work and had not yet achieved maximum medical 
improvement between March 7, 2018 and January 21, 2019, I conclude claimant 
established by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to healing period 
benefits for this period.  Iowa Code section 85.34(1).  However, Mr. Coale also testified 
that he was released to return to work on January 21, 2019.   
January 21, 2019 represents the earliest date when any of the three factors 
outlined in Iowa Code section 85.34(1) was met.  Evenson v. Winnebago Industries, 
Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2016).  Having found claimant was capable of performing 
substantially similar employment as of January 21, 2019, I conclude his entitlement to 
healing period benefits terminates on that date.  Therefore, I conclude claimant failed to 
prove entitlement to healing period benefits between January 22, 2018 and February 1, 
2019.  Iowa Code section 85.34(1). 
Claimant also asserts a claim for permanent disability benefits.  Having accepted 
Dr. Bansal’s unrebutted permanent impairment rating of 9 percent of the left leg, I 
conclude claimant has proven he sustained permanent disability as a result of the work 
injury and that he is entitlement to permanent disability benefits.   
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss of loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) (2017) or for loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) (2017).  The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an 
injured worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method.  Functional 
disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  
Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 
576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
Determination of the functional loss resulting from a scheduled member disability 
“shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American [M]edical [A]ssociation, as adopted by the 
workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.”  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(x) (2017).  However, lay testimony and agency expertise are not 
appropriate considerations for determination of the functional impairment.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(x). 
In this case, Dr. Bansal was the only physician offering a permanent functional 
impairment rating.  Dr. Bansal’s impairment ratings were limited to injuries and 
conditions in the toes of claimant’s left foot.  None of the assigned impairment extended 
beyond claimant’s left foot.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant has proven permanent 
disability only to the left foot and that this injury should be compensated as a scheduled 
member injury to the left foot pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(o). 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 13 
 
 
I accepted Dr. Bansal’s unrebutted permanent impairment rating as accurate.  
Having accepted that impairment rating as accurate, I conclude Mr. Coale proved he 
sustained a 15 percent permanent functional impairment of the left leg as a result of the 
February 28, 2018 work injury.   
Injuries to the foot are compensated based upon a 150-week schedule.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(o) (2017).  Scheduled member permanent disability benefits are 
payable proportional to the functional loss multiplied by the maximum number of weeks 
applicable for the specified injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  In this instance, 15 
percent of 150 weeks totals 22.5 weeks.  Therefore, I conclude claimant has proven 
entitlement to 22.5 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(o), (w). 
The parties also dispute the proper commencement date for permanent partial 
disability benefits.   
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by 
use of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, published by the 
American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner 
by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  I found that Mr. Coale achieved maximum medical 
improvement by January 29, 2019.  Accordingly, I conclude permanent partial disability 
should begin on January 29, 2019. 
Mr. Coale also seeks award of past medical expenses contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 5.  Defendants challenge the medical expenses as not casually related to the 
work injury.  The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' 
compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 
injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975). 
Having found that the medical charges from Eaton Regional Medical Center, 
Foremost Podiatry, Capitol Infectious Disease Associates, McLaren Greater Lansing, 
Medistar Ambulance, and Hayes Green Beach Memorial Hospital are all causally 
related to the work injury, I conclude claimant has proven entitlement to reimbursement 
or payment of any and all of those charges.  The remainder of the medical expenses 
contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 are not substantiated in this record and, therefore, not 
awarded. 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 14 
 
 
Finally, claimant seeks award of the expense associated with his independent 
medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Claimant’s Exhibit 4 contains 
Dr. Bansal’s invoice for his evaluation.  Iowa Code section 85.39(2) provides: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall . . . be reimbursed by the employer the 
reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee’s own choice. 
However: 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which 
the employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under 
this chapter . . . .  An employer is not liable for the cost of such an 
examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined is 
determined not to be a compensable injury. 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
In this instance, the injury for which Dr. Bansal evaluated claimant has been 
determined to be compensable.  However, claimant has not established that an 
evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician retained by the 
employer.  Defendants obtained a records review from Dr. Berg.  However, Dr. Berg did 
not perform an evaluation of claimant.  Moreover, Dr. Berg did not offer a permanent 
impairment rating relative to claimant’s permanent disability.  Therefore, I conclude that 
claimant failed to establish the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  I conclude 
claimant has not established entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s evaluation 
fees pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits from March 7, 2018 
through January 21, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay claimant twenty-two point five (22.5) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on January 29, 2019. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated weekly rate of eight hundred 
eight and 96/100 dollars ($808.96) per week. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump 
sum together with interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 

COALE V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 15 
 
 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File No. 
5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall pay medical providers, reimburse claimant, or reimburse a 
third-party payor for all medical expenses awarded in the body of this decision. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this        18th       day of November, 2020. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nicholas Pothitakis (via WCES) 
Chris Sheldrup (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
