Case Number: 22007222.01
Case Title:  GUTIERREZ, PHILLIP V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Gutierrez Phillip-22007222.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PHILLIP GUTIERREZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
    File No. 22007222.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    Head Notes: 3201, 3202 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Phillip Gutierrez, filed a petition for arbitration against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa. The hearing occurred before the undersigned on September 28, 
2023. This case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. In the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. All of those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 6, and Defendant’s Exhibits AA through FF. Claimant testified on his own 
behalf. No other witnesses were called to testify. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on September 28, 2023. The case was considered 
fully submitted upon submission of post-hearing briefs on October 20, 2023. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether claimant has established a compensable claim against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa (SIF), including whether claimant has established a 
qualifying first injury to the left arm and/or right leg; 
 
2. Whether claimant has established a qualifying second injury to the left leg; 
 
3. The commencement date of SIF benefits, if any are awarded; 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-03  09:06:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
4. The extent of claimant's entitlement, if any, to benefits from the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa; and 
 
5. The extent of defendant SIF’s entitlement to a credit under Iowa Code section 
85.64. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Phillip Gutierrez, claimant, was 47 years old at the time of the evidentiary 
hearing. (Hearing Transcript, page 12) He did not graduate high school; however, he 
passed the General Education Development (GED) exams. (Hr. Tr., pp. 13-14)  
Claimant’s employment history largely consists of physically demanding manual labor 
positions. (Hr. Tr., pp. 14-16)  In 2000, Gutierrez joined the Union Ironworkers and 
became a journeyman specializing in rebar work. (Hr. Tr., p. 14)  He would go on to 
spend the next 22 years handling rebar work throughout the country. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19) 
 
On July 30, 2000, Gutierrez injured his left arm while trying to change a tire. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 24) According to Gutierrez, the vehicle came off the car jack and landed on his 
left arm. (Id.) Mark McKenzie, M.D. performed an open reduction and internal fixation of 
the left distal third ulnar fracture on August 7, 2000. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 3) 
 
As part of his case against the Fund, Gutierrez obtained an independent medical 
examination report from Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Exhibit 1) Dr. Bansal conducted a medical 
records review and physical examination of Gutierrez. The examination took place on 
May 22, 2023. (Ex. 1, p. 1) Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal assigned two percent left upper extremity 
impairment for claimant’s reduced flexion and pronation. (Ex. 1, p. 24) 
 
It is important to note that Dr. Bansal’s understanding of the July 30, 2000, injury 
may be inaccurate. In the alternative, it is possible his understanding is correct and he 
simply made a scrivener’s error in his analysis. While he correctly summarizes the 
pertinent medical records for the July 30, 2000, injury, his analysis of claimant’s injury 
details a much different mechanism of injury. (Ex. 1, pp. 2, 21) The record provides, 
“The injury resulted from a traumatic event involving a baseball bat impact, leading to a 
nightstick fracture to his ulna.” (Ex. 1, p. 21)  Given the summary of medical records 
consistently references an injury from changing a tire, I find Dr. Bansal’s mention of a 
baseball bat is most likely a scrivener’s error. 
 
In any event, Gutierrez continues to experience some problems with his left arm.  
He reports discomfort and pain, particularly during colder weather. His range of motion 
is also slightly restricted. (Hr. Tr., pp. 25-26) 
 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
I find claimant has carried his burden of proving permanent disability to the left 
upper extremity as a result of the July 30, 2000, injury. I further find claimant carried his 
burden of proving he sustained a first qualifying injury on July 30, 2000. 
 
 
On or about November 18, 2021, Gutierrez sustained a work-related injury to his 
right knee. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  An MRI, dated January 19, 2022, revealed a medial 
meniscus complex tear. (JE 3, pp. 24-25)  After exhausting all conservative treatment 
measures, including physical therapy and corticosteroid injections, Christopher Kim, 
M.D. and Gutierrez discussed the possibility of surgical intervention. (Id.) After learning 
of the risks, benefits, and expected outcomes, Gutierrez opted to proceed with a right 
knee arthroscopy with medial meniscus debridement. (Id.) Dr. Kim ultimately performed 
surgery on June 16, 2022. (JE 3, pp. 35-37)  Seven weeks later, Dr. Kim released 
claimant with instructions to return on an as-needed basis. (JE 3, p. 42) Dr. Bansal 
assigned two percent right lower extremity impairment as a result of the meniscectomy 
procedure. (Ex. 1, p. 24) 
 
Gutierrez continues to experience issues with his right knee. The knee will 
occasionally give out and he reported difficulty with kneeling, squatting, and using stairs. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 27-31; Ex. 1, p. 21) 
 
I find claimant has carried his burden of proving permanent disability to the right 
lower extremity as a result of the November 18, 2021 injury. I further find claimant 
carried his burden of proving he sustained a second injury, which qualifies as a first 
qualifying injury, on November 18, 2021. 
 
On April 15, 2022, Gutierrez sustained a left knee injury while working for 
Midwest Rebar Services on a jobsite in Altoona, Iowa. (JE 3, pp. 30-31; Hr. Tr., p. 47-
48)  A co-worker summoned Gutierrez to quickly correct some rebar work for an 
inspector. (Hr. Tr., pp. 47-48)  While jogging over to his co-worker, Gutierrez stepped up 
onto a ledge and felt a “pop” in his left knee. (Id.)  An MRI dated May 4, 2022, revealed 
a complex tear of the medial meniscus. (JE 2, p. 20-21)  
 
 
Stephen Ash, M.D. performed an orthopedic evaluation of Gutierrez’s left knee 
on July 7, 2022. (JE 4, pp. 43-45) Dr. Ash diagnosed left medial meniscal tear and 
degenerative arthritis. (JE 4, p. 45) He felt it reasonable to consider an arthroscopy of 
the left knee and a partial meniscectomy. (Id.) In response to questions from the 
defendant insurer, Dr. Ash causally related Gutierrez’s left knee complaints and need 
for surgery to the April 15, 2022, work injury. (Id.) 
 
 
Dr. Ash performed the left knee arthroscopy, partial medial meniscectomy, and 
medial femoral chondroplasty on August 1, 2022. (JE 4, pp. 46-47) Following surgery, 
Gutierrez participated in several weeks of physical therapy before Dr. Ash placed him at 
maximum medical improvement on September 29, 2022. (JE 4, p. 54)   
 
 
A few weeks later, Gutierrez returned to Dr. Ash and reported worsening left 
knee pain. (JE 4, p. 56) Dr. Ash assured claimant that his examination was consistent 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
with stable ligaments and stressed the importance of quad strengthening to combat “the 
phenomenon of pseudo wobbling[.]” (JE 4, p. 57) Following the examination, Dr. Ash 
opined that Gutierrez’s maximum medical improvement status had not changed. (Id.)  
He then noted that a functional capacity evaluation could be considered to help the 
defendant employer decide on claimant’s work status. (Id.) 
 
 
Initially, Gutierrez was unable to complete a functional capacity evaluation. On 
the date of his original appointment, he did not feel as though he could get out of bed 
due to his knee pain. Subsequently, his hypertension prevented him from completing 
the evaluation. (See JE 4, p. 60) 
 
 
An updated MRI, dated February 9, 2023, showed chondral changes in the 
medial compartment on the medial femoral condyle consistent with the operative 
findings. (See JE 4, p. 64) Dr. Ash did not believe that there was any new tearing in the 
medial meniscus. (Id.) He also did not believe that a repeat arthroscopy to remove more 
of the medial meniscus would have a high probability of reducing claimant’s symptoms. 
(JE 4, p. 65) 
 
 
Gutierrez eventually completed a functional capacity evaluation on February 17, 
2023. (JE 5, pp. 68-81) Kyle Bailey, OTD, concluded that Gutierrez provided consistent 
effort during the evaluation. (JE 5, p. 68) Gutierrez demonstrated the ability to function 
in the “Light Physical Demand Category". (Id.) He demonstrated the ability to 
occasionally lift up to zero pounds floor-to-waist and 12 pounds waist-to-shoulder. (Id.) 
Gutierrez attempted to complete a six-minute walking test; however, he was only able to 
complete 4 minutes and 45 seconds before needing to sit down. (Id.) 
 
 
In a letter dated April 27, 2023, Dr. Ash assigned two percent left lower extremity 
impairment as a result of the partial medial meniscectomy. (JE 4, p. 67) Dr. Ash also 
reviewed the FCE report and opined that Gutierrez could work at the limits set by the 
functional capacity evaluation. (Id.)   
 
 
As mentioned, Gutierrez sought an independent medical evaluation with Dr. 
Bansal in May 2023. (Ex. 1, p. 1-24) Dr. Bansal opined that Gutierrez sustained a 
medial meniscal tear as a result of his work accident on April 15, 2022. (Ex. 1, p. 23)  
He explained that a sudden “pop” is a symptom that is often recounted by patients who 
have experienced a meniscal tear. (Id.)  Like Dr. Ash, Dr. Bansal assigned two percent 
left lower extremity impairment and agreed with the restrictions recommended by the 
February 17, 2023 functional capacity evaluation. (Ex. 1, pp. 23-24)   
 
 
Today, Gutierrez experiences constant, sharp, and stabbing pain in the left knee. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28)  He testified that his left knee will, at times, give out and cause him 
to fall. (Id.)  He reports similar issues with his right knee; however, the pain is not as bad 
in the right knee. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  He utilizes compression sleeves on both knees and a 
brace on the left knee. (Hr. Tr., p. 31) 
 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
Gutierrez asserts that he was terminated from Midwest Rebar without 
explanation on the date of his injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 40-42) He has not worked in any 
capacity since April 15, 2022. (Hr. Tr., p. 33) He applied to work in a retail position at 
Adventureland, a local theme park; however, he had not heard anything regarding his 
application at the time of the evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 34) He also applied for an 
unspecified position with Amazon. (Hr. Tr., pp. 34-35)  He would like to return to work in 
some capacity and intends to keep applying for work; however, at the time of the 
evidentiary hearing he had only applied at Adventureland and Amazon. (Hr. Tr., pp. 35, 
45) He remains a member in good standing with the union. (Hr. Tr., p. 42) 
 
 
Gutierrez, Midwest Rebar Services, LLC, and The Charter Oak Fire Insurance 
Company settled their claim for the April 15, 2022, left knee injury for the equivalent of 
2.27 percent left lower extremity impairment. The parties settled the case on an 
agreement for settlement basis. The agreement was approved by this agency on 
October 17, 2023.  
 
In the matter at hand, claimant is seeking benefits under the Second Injury 
Compensation Act. Gutierrez alleges that he sustained first qualifying injuries for 
purposes of the Second Injury Fund on July 30, 2000, and November 18, 2021. In 
support of his claim, Gutierrez introduced contemporaneous medical records 
documenting the injuries. Gutierrez also requested that Dr. Bansal examine his left arm 
and right knee as part of his independent medical examination. He further asked Dr. 
Bansal to assess permanent impairment for both injuries. As mentioned, Dr. Bansal 
assigned two percent left upper extremity impairment for claimant’s reduced flexion and 
pronation, and two percent right lower extremity impairment as a result of the 
meniscectomy procedure performed on June 16, 2022. (Ex. 1, p. 24) 
 
The defendant largely focuses on the alleged second qualifying injury and does 
not make any arguments specific to the alleged first qualifying injuries in its post-hearing 
brief.   
 
Regardless, Dr. Bansal’s opinions pertaining to the left arm and right leg are not 
rebutted in the evidentiary record. I accept Dr. Bansal’s permanent impairment ratings 
and find that Gutierrez has proven two percent permanent impairment of the left upper 
extremity as a result of the July 30, 2000 injury, and two percent permanent impairment 
of the right lower extremity as a result of the November 18, 2021 injury. I further find 
Gutierrez carried his burden of proving a first qualifying injury.   
 
Claimant asserts the April 15, 2022 work injury resulted in a loss of use of his left 
leg and qualifies as a second loss. The Fund asserts claimant provided insufficient 
evidence to establish the alleged injury arose out of and in the course of his 
employment. Defendant’s argument relies on a finding that Gutierrez is not credible. 
 
Defendant asserts that Gutierrez has shown through his testimony, his reporting 
to various medical professionals, and his criminal history that he is not credible. First, 
defendant asserts Gutierrez’s reporting of how the November 18, 2021 right knee injury 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
occurred has been inconsistent. On November 28, 2021, Gutierrez presented to Allison 
Brown, ARNP with complaints of right knee pain. The record provides, 
 
Patient states that 4-5 months ago he was working for Reger Rebar 
Companies while working patient initially reports that he fell through some 
rebar while carrying rebar and his body went forward and his knee fell 
through. 
 
(JE 3, p. 22)  Ms. Brown subsequently relayed to Gutierrez that because he was 
reporting a work injury, his personal health insurance might not cover the cost of his 
treatment. In response, Gutierrez stated that he wanted to be seen by a provider that 
same day and he did not want to report the injury as a workers’ compensation claim.  
Defendant paints this exchange as an example of Gutierrez changing his story for his 
own benefit. While defendant’s argument is an accurate description of what transpired 
at the November 28, 2021 appointment, I do not find this exchange detracts from 
claimant’s overall credibility to a significant extent. 
 
 
Gutierrez’s priority was to receive medical treatment as soon as possible. When 
he was told that his private insurance carrier might decline to pay for said treatment, 
Gutierrez made a decision based on urgency and his overall well-being rather than 
malicious intent. It is not uncommon for individuals in stressful situations to make 
decisions that do not align with strict ethical standards. This is particularly true when the 
individual may not know the full implications of their actions. While Gutierrez’s actions 
may raise questions about his judgment in this specific instance, they do not necessarily 
undermine his overall credibility or propensity for truthfulness. 
 
 
On February 3, 2022, Gutierrez described chronic right knee pain that had 
worsened over the past six months to Dr. Kim. (JE 3, p. 26) He attributed the same to 
his work as an ironworker. (Id.) He denied any injuries or inciting events. (Id.) Similarly, 
Gutierrez told his physical therapist that his right knee injury was “more of a wear and 
tear type thing.” (JE 3, p. 40)  Then, at his IME with Dr. Bansal, Gutierrez reported that 
his right knee injury occurred “partially from falling through rebar in the summer of 2021 
and from wear and tear from his profession.” (Ex. 1, p. 21) Again, I do not find 
Gutierrez’s reporting detracts from his overall credibility.   
 
Similarly, defendant asserts Gutierrez’s reporting of how the April 15, 2022 left 
knee injury occurred has been inconsistent. More specifically, defendant asserts 
Gutierrez has been inconsistent when reporting whom he was working with when the 
injury occurred and exactly when the “pop” occurred, i.e. whether he was approaching 
the ledge, on the ledge, or just past the ledge. (Defendant’s Brief, p. 17) The evidentiary 
record contains several instances in which Gutierrez was asked to describe how the 
injury occurred. Some explanations provide more detail than others. For example, on 
his initial in-take form, Gutierrez noted that he was working with an individual named 
Julio, who called him over to help with a project.1  Notably, the in-take form did not 
                                                 
1 According to the in-take form, the co-worker’s name was “Hulio.” However, the in-take form contains 
several typos and the undersigned assumed “Hulio” was one of them. 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
provide Gutierrez with much space to write his description of the injury. (See JE 2, p. 5)  
On July 7, 2022, Gutierrez told Dr. Ash that his supervisor called him over to help with 
the project. (JE 4, p. 43) The medical record does not provide the name of the 
supervisor. At hearing, Gutierrez testified that his foreman called him over to quickly fix 
something to appease an inspector. (Hr. Tr., pp. 20-21) This alleged inconsistency does 
not consider the possibility that Julio, the supervisor, and the foreman could all be the 
same individual. In any event, I do not find this credibility argument convincing. 
 
Defendant also calls the undersigned’s attention to evidence that suggests 
Gutierrez did not report the alleged work injury until after he was terminated. The 
implication made by defendant is purely speculative and will not be entertained.  
 
Lastly, defendant highlights Gutierrez’s testimony regarding his criminal history. 
Gutierrez has pled guilty to several counts of driving under the influence and related 
charges in both Iowa and Nebraska. While it does not appear as though Gutierrez has 
been charged with crimes of dishonesty, he was not forthcoming or truthful about his 
criminal history at hearing. Gutierrez’s omissions certainly diminish his credibility. 
 
Defendant asserts that because of the above mentioned credibility concerns, 
claimant’s testimony and his statements to medical providers should be rejected. 
Moreover, defendant asserts that because the only evidence in the record as to how the 
alleged injury occurred comes from claimant’s own testimony, he cannot prove any of 
the qualifying injuries occurred. I decline defendant’s invitation to summarily reject 
claimant's testimony based on a handful of inconsistent statements and his past bad 
acts. While Gutierrez’s omissions are concerning, there is little to no evidence of deceit 
in the matter at hand. In general, claimant's complaints were consistent throughout the 
medical records. With respect to his testimony regarding his work injury and ongoing 
symptoms, I find Gutierrez to be generally credible. 
 
Both expert physicians agree that Gutierrez sustained two percent left lower 
extremity impairment as a result of the April 15, 2022 work injury. They further agreed 
with the restrictions recommended by the February 17, 2023 functional capacity 
evaluation. The reports of Dr. Ash and Dr. Bansal are not rebutted in the evidentiary 
record. I accept their opinions and find Gutierrez carried his burden of proving he 
sustained permanent disability to the left lower extremity as a result of the April 15, 
2022, injury. I also find that Gutierrez has proven that these injuries have produced a 
combined loss of future earning capacity. 
 
Having found claimant carried his burden of proving both first and second 
qualifying injuries, I must now determine claimant's loss of earning capacity. 
 
Gutierrez has significant restrictions as a result of his combined injuries. The 
restrictions were determined by a valid functional capacity evaluation and adopted by 
Dr. Ash and Dr. Bansal. These restrictions prevent Gutierrez from returning to the rebar 
work he has done for the past 22 years. 
 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
Defendant challenges Gutierrez’s motivation to return to work in any capacity. 
There is little evidence that claimant has legitimately tested the labor market since his 
employment with Midwest Rebar Services ended. By his own admission, Gutierrez has 
only applied for two jobs since April 2022. (Hr. Tr., pp. 34, 42-45) He submitted both 
applications in the summer of 2023. (Hr. Tr., pp. 43-44) It is difficult to accept 
applications submitted in the weeks leading up to the evidentiary hearing as evidence of 
a legitimate work search. I find Gutierrez failed to prove he conducted a legitimate work 
search following his termination from Midwest Rebar Services.   
 
At the time of the evidentiary hearing, Gutierrez was a 47-year-old individual with 
limited education. He now has physical restrictions that he did not have when he started 
working for Midwest Rebar Services. The evidence demonstrates that Gutierrez is no 
longer physically capable of performing the type of work he has been well-suited for 
over the past 22 years. I find that Gutierrez has sustained a loss of future earning 
capacity as a result of his injuries.   
 
 
Considering his limited educational background, employment history, age, 
permanent restrictions, permanent impairment, lack of motivation, as well as all other 
factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that Gutierrez 
has proven he sustained a 50 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the 
combined effects of the July 30, 2000 left arm injury and April 15, 2022 left knee injury.   
 
The parties stipulated that the functional loss from the first injury to Gutierrez’s 
left arm is 2 percent of the upper extremity, which equals 5 weeks of benefits. The 
parties further stipulated that the functional loss from Gutierrez’s prior right knee injury is 
2 percent to the lower extremity, which equals 4.4 weeks. Lastly, it is stipulated that the 
functional loss from Gutierrez’s work-related left knee injury is 2 percent to the lower 
extremity, which equals 4.4 weeks. Per the parties’ stipulations, the total credit owed to 
defendant is 13.8 weeks. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Gutierrez seeks an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. Iowa's 
version of a second injury fund is found in Iowa Code sections 85.63 through 85.69. The 
heart of the statutory scheme is found in section 85.64(1), which states: 
 
If an employee who has previously lost, or lost the use of, one hand, one 
arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye, becomes permanently disabled by a 
compensable injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss of use of 
another such member or organ, the employer shall be liable only for the 
degree of disability which would have resulted from the latter injury if there 
had been no pre-existing disability. In addition to such compensation, and 
after the expiration of the full period provided by law for the payments 
thereof by the employer, the employee shall be paid out of the “Second 
Injury Fund” created by this division the remainder of such compensation 
as would be payable for the degree of permanent disability involved after 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
first deducting from such remainder the compensable value of the 
previously lost member or organ. 
 
Before the Fund’s liability is triggered, three requirements must be met. First, the 
employee must have lost, or lost the use of, a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye. Second, the 
employee must sustain a loss, or loss of use of, another specified member or organ 
through a compensable injury. Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the 
initial injury and the second injury. 
 
Other than the express requirement that the second loss be the result of 
permanent disability caused “by a compensable injury,” the text of section 85.64(1) 
provides no basis from which to create different standards for what constitutes a 
qualifying loss to an enumerated body part based on whether it happened first or 
second in time. See Iowa Code section 85.64(1). Moreover, the Iowa Supreme Court 
held it would be “senselessly inconsistent” to apply different standards based on the 
order of occurrence. Gregory v. Second Injury Fund, 777 N.W.2d 395, 400 (Iowa 2010). 
Therefore, the case law delineating the contours of what constitutes a qualifying loss 
under the statute is generally applicable regardless of when such a loss took place. See 
Id. 
 
The initial dispute mentioned in the Hearing Report is whether Gutierrez has 
proven a qualifying first injury. On July 30, 2000, Gutierrez sustained an injury to his left 
arm when he was attempting to change a tire on a vehicle and the vehicle came off the 
car jack. He sustained a left displaced distal ulnar fracture and underwent surgery to 
repair the same. He continues to have problems with his left arm. Gutierrez’s testimony 
regarding this injury is accepted as accurate and it is concluded that Gutierrez met his 
burden of proving a qualifying first injury on July 30, 2000. 
 
The next dispute to be decided is whether Gutierrez has proven a qualifying 
second injury. It is clear and obvious from the medical records in evidence that claimant 
sustained an injury on April 15, 2022 to his left knee. An MRI of the left knee was 
performed on May 4, 2022 and showed a complex tear of the medial meniscus. Dr. Ash 
opined the injury was work-related and recommended surgery. Dr. Ash performed a 
partial meniscectomy of the left knee on August 1, 2022.  
  
I found the medical opinions of Dr. Ash and Dr. Bansal to be convincing and 
credible. As such, I found that Gutierrez carried his burden of proving he sustained a 
permanent disability to the left knee as a result of the April 15, 2022 work injury.   
 
Having found that claimant carried his burden of proving permanent disability to 
the left arm as a result of the July 30, 2000 injury, as well as permanent disability to the 
left knee as a result of the April 15, 2022 work injury, I conclude that claimant carried his 
burden of proving a compensable claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. Iowa 
Code section 85.64. 
 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Section 85.64. 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal Co., 
274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1979). 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). The analysis now also requires 
consideration of claimant's proximity to retirement. 
 
Compensation for industrial disability shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the 
disability bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. However, the Second Injury Fund 
is entitled to a credit for all permanent disability attributable to either of the qualifying 
scheduled member injuries. 
 
In this case, I found that Gutierrez sustained 50 percent loss of earning capacity 
as a result of the combined effects of the first and second qualifying injuries. This is 
equivalent to 250 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  
 
The Second Injury Fund is entitled to 13.8 weeks of credit against the industrial 
disability award. Reducing the 250 weeks by the 13.8-week credit, I conclude that 
claimant is entitled to an award from the Second Injury Fund in the amount of 236.2 
weeks of benefits. 
 
Second Injury Fund's benefits commence upon the expiration of the employer's 
obligation to pay benefits for the second injury. Iowa Code section 85.64(1).  In the 
agreement for settlement between Gutierrez and Midwest Rebar Services, the parties 
agreed that Gutierrez was entitled to 5 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on April 27, 2023. The commencement date for benefits from the Fund is 
June 2, 2023. 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
 
The Second Injury Fund shall pay claimant two hundred thirty-six point two (236.2) 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on June 2, 2023. 
 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of one thousand one hundred 
thirteen and 48/100 dollars ($1,113.48).   
 

GUTIERREZ V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
Signed and filed this     3rd     day of June, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Joseph Powell (via WCES) 
 
Andrew Duffelmeyer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be 
filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
 
  
