Case Number: 5029888.01
Case Title:  MCCARTHY, JAMES V. JELD WEN HOLDING INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      McCarthy James-5029888.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JAMES McCARTHY 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 5029888.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
        REVIEW-REOPENING 
JELD-WEN HOLDING, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
      DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :       Head Note Nos.:  1800; 1803; 1804; 
 
Defendant. 
  :                                    2905; 4100 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, James McCarthy, filed a petition for review-reopening seeking 
workers’ compensation benefits from self-insured employer Jeld-Wen Holding, Inc.  
Gary Nelson appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Stephanie Techau appeared on 
behalf of the defendant.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on July 25, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the hearing 
occurred electronically.  The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-3, Claimant’s Exhibit 1-4, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-F.  The exhibits were received into the record without objection.   
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Carin Eckhoff was appointed the official 
reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record closed at 
the end of the hearing, and the matter was fully submitted on August 29, 2022, after 
briefing by the parties.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
 
2. That the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of, and in the course of 
employment on July 30, 2009.   
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Oct-18  14:15:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 2 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
 
5. That the claimant was married, and entitled to two exemptions at the time of 
the alleged injury, and that the corresponding rate of compensation is three 
hundred seventy-five and 78/100 dollars ($375.78).   
 
6. That prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid 400 weeks of compensation 
at the agreed upon weekly rate.   
Entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits is no longer in dispute.  
Medical benefits are no longer in dispute.  The defendant waived its affirmative 
defenses.     
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant is entitled to review-reopening benefits.   
  
2. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded.   
  
3. Whether the permanent disability should be evaluated as an industrial 
disability. 
 
4. Whether the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded is June 1, 2018, which is the last permanent partial disability 
payment made by the defendant, or June 15, 2020, the date of filing of the 
petition for review-reopening.   
 
5. Whether the claimant is permanently and totally disabled under the odd-lot 
doctrine.   
  
6. Whether an assessment of costs is appropriate.   
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 3 
Procedural History  
The claimant was injured on July 30, 2009.  He subsequently filed a petition for 
arbitration.  That matter came for hearing on June 17, 2011.  (Defendant’s Exhibit A:1-
10).  Another deputy commissioner issued an arbitration decision on September 1, 
2011.  (DE A:1-10).  The parties stipulated that the claimant sustained an injury to his 
respiratory system on July 30, 2009, and that the injury was a cause of permanent 
disability.  (DE A:2).  At the time of his 2011 hearing, the claimant was 56 years old.  
(DE A:2).  He worked for the defendant since 1978.  (DE A:2).  In July of 2009, he was 
laid off.  (DE A:2).  At the time he was ranked one of the lowest production workers.  
(DE A:4).   
While at Jeld-Wen, the claimant assembled garage doors, loaded a production 
line, and cut pieces for special orders.  (DE A:2).  Mr. McCarthy developed a sensitivity 
to a chemical known as diphenylmethane diisocyanide.  (DE A:2).  Mr. McCarthy 
became sensitized to the chemical during an exposure in the early 2000’s.  (DE A:2).  At 
that time, the Jeld-Wen plant used a spray insulation that contained the chemical.  (DE 
A:2).  Jeld-Wen brought the chemical back into use in September of 2008.  (DE A:2).  
Around this time, the claimant began to experience “more serious respiratory response 
to the exposure.”  (DE A:2).  Between April and June of 2009, the claimant was off work 
for a hernia surgery.  (DE A:2).  During that time, his respiratory issues receded.  (DE 
A:2).  Upon returning to work, his respiratory distress and issues worsened.  (DE A:2).  
On July 30, 2009, the claimant worked in close proximity to a glue processing area, 
where he experienced a direct exposure to diphenylmethane diisocyanide, contained in 
the glue.  (DE A:2).   
Several medical providers agreed that Mr. McCarthy suffered an exposure to 
diphenylmethane diisocyanide, which caused a sensitivity to isocyanates.  (DE A:2).  
The parties in the underlying arbitration proceeding stipulated that the claimant 
sustained a permanent disability as a result of his exposure.  (DE A:2).  The parties 
disputed the extent of the claimant’s disability.  (DE A:2).  Ronald Schope, M.D., opined 
on February 18, 2010, that Mr. McCarthy had “irreversible reactive airway disease,” and 
that his pulmonary function testing showed FEV1 to vital capacity at around 80 to 85 
percent.  (DE A:2).   
As a result, Patrick Hartley, M.D., recommended that the claimant avoid 
exposure to isocyanates, dusty work environments, or extremes of heat, cold or 
humidity.  (DE A:3).  Dr. Hartley also recommended that the claimant avoid exposures 
to irritating chemicals.  (DE A:3).  He also concluded that the claimant could only lift up 
to 40 pounds on an occasional basis and 20 pounds on a frequent basis.  (DE A:3).  Dr. 
Hartley assigned the claimant an 18 percent permanent impairment rating.  (DE A:3).  
Dr. Hartley concluded, “[i]n general most of the improvement occurs early on, but there 
can continue to be improvement up to about two years.  Thereafter, it’s unlikely that 
there will be further improvement.”  (DE A:5).   
 
The arbitration decision noted that Mr. McCarthy’s lungs were fragile, and that his 
condition worsened when he was exposed to cold and dampness.  (DE A:5).  At the 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 4 
time of the underlying arbitration proceeding, Mr. McCarthy had attempted to obtain new 
employment through a Workforce Development Center.  (DE A:5).  He applied for jobs, 
but was not successful in obtaining employment until February of 2010 when he found 
part-time work as a shredding clerk.  (DE A:5).  He gathered up cardboard and scrap 
paper, which he fed into a machine for shredding.  (DE A:5; Testimony).  He worked 
there until January 16, 2011, when his position was eliminated.  (DE A:5).   
 
The claimant then worked with an individual to attempt to find employment.  (DE 
A:5).  His work with this person involved rebuilding a resume, reviewing a list of jobs on 
a monthly basis, and discussing hints and tips on interviewing.  (DE A:5).  Despite this 
work, he did not obtain any job offers after his part-time job was eliminated.  (DE A:5).  
Barbara Laughlin, a vocational expert, opined that the claimant suffered a 90 percent to 
100 percent loss of employability due to his age, education level, the existing labor 
market, and his restrictions.  (DE A:5).   
The arbitration decision also discussed the claimant’s issues with tinnitus.  (DE 
A:3-4).  Based upon the evidence in the record, that does not appear to be an issue in 
the review-reopening proceedings.  (DE A:3-4).  Therefore, discussions of the alleged 
tinnitus issues are omitted.  (DE A:3-4, 6-7). 
The deputy commissioner who drafted the arbitration decision determined that 
the claimant achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”), and thus permanent 
disability benefits were to begin September 29, 2010.  (DE A:8).  The claimant was also 
awarded healing period benefits from July 31, 2009, to September 28, 2010.  (DE A:9).  
Finally, the deputy commissioner determined that, based upon the claimant’s pulmonary 
issues, Mr. McCarthy was entitled to an 80 percent industrial disability.  (DE A:9).  This 
is 400 weeks of benefits.  (DE A:9).   
On August 2, 2012, the Commissioner filed an appeal decision.  (DE B:11-12).  
The claimant asserted that the deputy commissioner erred in not finding that he was 
permanently and totally disabled.  (DE B:11).  The defendant asserted on a cross-
appeal that the deputy commissioner erred in finding that the claimant sustained an 80 
percent industrial disability.  (DE B:11).  The Commissioner affirmed the entirety of the 
underlying arbitration decision.  (DE B:11).   
Mr. McCarthy appealed the arbitration decision to the district court.  (DE C:13-
23).  Judge Robert Blink heard the appeal, and issued a ruling on April 11, 2013.  (DE 
C:13-23).  The claimant again asserted that he was permanently and totally disabled as 
a result of his respiratory injury.  (DE C:13-14).  The defendant filed a cross-petition 
asserting that the Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner erred in awarding the 
claimant healing period benefits.  (DE C:14).  Judge Blink reviewed the applicable 
evidence in the record.  (DE C:13-18).  Judge Blink noted that the defendant performed 
two pulmonary function tests on the claimant in 2009.  (DE C:15).  The first test, in 
February of 2009, was “relatively normal,” while the second test in August of 2009, 
found significant deterioration.  (DE C:15).  Judge Blink determined that substantial 
evidence supported the Agency’s findings of partial disability, rather than a permanent 
total disability.  (DE C:20).  Judge Blink also determined that substantial evidence 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 5 
supported the Agency’s award of healing period benefits.  (DE C:21).  Judge Blink 
affirmed the underlying decision, and appeal to the Commissioner in their entirety.  (DE 
C:23).   
The claimant then appealed to the Iowa Court of Appeals.  (DE D:24-35).  The 
Court of Appeals reviewed the procedural and factual background of the case.  (DE 
D:24-26).  The Court of Appeals affirmed the findings of the district court with regard to 
healing period benefits.  (DE D:31).  The Court of Appeals also affirmed the district 
court’s ruling with regard to the award of 80 percent industrial disability.  (DE D:32).  A 
dissent was filed by Judge Vogel in which they opined that they did not find substantial 
evidence to support the award of healing period benefits.  (DE D:34-35).   
Medical Care 
While his case proceeded through the appeals process, Mr. McCarthy continued 
to seek medical care for his pulmonary issues.  On August 10, 2012, Mr. McCarthy 
presented to Grand River Medical Group, where Ronald W. Schope, M.D., examined 
him for an intractable cough and reactive airway disease related to a diisocyanate 
exposure.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1-2).  Mr. McCarthy told Dr. Schope that his cough was 
“really no better.”  (JE 1:1).  He also reported significant shortness of breath with activity 
and recovery time after activity that equaled the amount of time he was active.  (JE 1:1).  
Dr. Schope recommended that the claimant continue using Advair, Accolate, DuoNeb, 
Dalisrep, and Omeprazole.  (JE 1:1).   
Mr. McCarthy returned to Dr. Schope’s office on February 15, 2013.  (JE 1:3-4).  
He continued to complain of a cough and reactive airway issues due to his chemical 
exposure.  (JE 1:3).  He had no improvement in his cough, and saw no benefit from 
using Dalisrep.  (JE 1:3).  Cold weather significantly aggravated his cough.  (JE 1:3).  
Dr. Schope recommended that the claimant continue using Advair and Omeprazole.  
(JE 1:3-4).   
Jill Powers, D.O., examined the claimant on July 9, 2013.  (JE 1:5-6).  Mr. 
McCarthy wanted to establish a doctor-patient relationship with Dr. Powers so that he 
could have a physical examination.  (JE 1:5).  Mr. McCarthy recounted his reactive 
airway disease caused by a chemical exposure at work, and that he struggled with 
breathing.  (JE 1:5).  Mr. McCarthy also complained of right hip pain that worsened over 
time due to osteoarthritis.  (JE 1:5).  While examining Mr. McCarthy, Dr. Powers 
observed that he was fidgety and that he frequently sighed loudly.  (JE 1:5).  His lungs 
were clear for the most part, but Dr. Powers noted some occasional wheezing.  (JE 1:5).  
Dr. Powers also observed that Mr. McCarthy had difficulty taking a deep breath and that 
coughing during his exam made it difficult to listen to his lungs.  (JE 1:5).  Given his lung 
disease, Dr. Powers provided Mr. McCarthy with the pneumonia vaccine.  (JE 1:5-6).  
Dr. Powers requested that he return in one year.  (JE 1:6).   
On August 15, 2013, Mr. McCarthy returned to Dr. Schope’s office for a six-
month follow-up visit.  (JE 1:7-9).  Dr. Schope reviewed Mr. McCarthy’s history, and 
noted that Mr. McCarthy continued to have shortness of breath going up an incline.  (JE 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 6 
1:7).  However, he could walk on a flat surface with no problems if he took his time.  (JE 
1:7).  He attempted various medications, some of which he indicated provided no help.  
(JE 1:7).  Dr. Schope opined that it would “be good to relook at everything and see 
where he stands in terms of pulmonary function tests, chest x-ray, CBCs and IgE 
levels.”  (JE 1:7).  Upon examination, Dr. Schope found Mr. McCarthy’s lungs to sound 
“fairly clear.”  (JE 1:8).  Dr. Schope also noted that Mr. McCarthy’s oxygen saturation 
was 98 percent while at rest and 95 percent while walking.  (JE 1:9).     
Dr. Schope examined Mr. McCarthy again on December 18, 2013.  (JE 1:10-11).  
He recently had his right hip replaced.  (JE 1:10).  Dr. Schope noted that Mr. McCarthy 
had no changes in his cough.  (JE 1:10).  A lung capacity test in 2009 showed a vital 
capacity of 2.8, and an FEV1 of 2.29.  (JE 1:10).  In August of 2013, this testing was 
repeated, and showed a vital capacity of 4.07 and an FEV1 of 3.2.  (JE 1:10).  The 
FEV1 to vital capacity was 79 percent.  (JE 1:10).  Dr. Schope continued by noting that 
Mr. McCarthy’s “DLCO” was 27 or 36 or 76 percent and his residual volume was 
elevated at 4.7.  (JE 1:10).  Dr. Schope also observed that Mr. McCarthy’s FEV 25-75 or 
“peak flow” was 80 percent, and that his oxygen saturation was 95 percent to 98 
percent.  (JE 1:10).  Further, Dr. Schope noted that Mr. McCarthy had normal 
hemoglobin, hematocrit, white blood cell, and eosinophil counts.  (JE 1:10).  Dr. Schope 
opined that the claimant’s cough was likely linked to diisocyanate and was “probably 
irreversible.”  (JE 1:10).  Dr. Schope requested that the claimant return in six months.  
(JE 1:11).   
On April 10, 2014, Mr. McCarthy returned to Dr. Schope’s office for continued 
follow-up care.  (JE 1:12-13).  His lungs continued to sound “absolutely clear,” but Dr. 
Schope observed that he had “some shortness of breath with activity.”  (JE 1:12).  Dr. 
Schope opined that there was nothing more to be done for Mr. McCarthy’s intractable 
cough.  (JE 1:12).  Dr. Schope recommended that Mr. McCarthy continue using Advair 
and Omeprazole.  (JE 1:12).   
Dr. Schope examined Mr. McCarthy again on August 12, 2014, for his continued 
pulmonary issues.  (JE 1:14-15).  Dr. Schope observed that Mr. McCarthy attempted a 
number of medications, with no improvement.  (JE 1:14).  Dr. Schope recommended 
that Mr. McCarthy continue to use Advair and Omeprazole, and have another IgE.  (JE 
1:14).  He also requested that Mr. McCarthy return in six months.  (JE 1:15).   
Ammar Hatab, M.D., saw the claimant on August 19, 2014.  (JE 1:16-18).  Mr. 
McCarthy expressed a desire to explore Xolair injections to treat his issues following his 
diisocyonate exposure.  (JE 1:16).  Mr. McCarthy told Dr. Hatab that he could only 
perform four hours activity per day.  (JE 1:16).  Mr. McCarthy also reported a daily dry 
cough and “frequent chest tightness.”  (JE 1:16).  Dr. Hatab treated the claimant with an 
injection of Xolair, and advised him to continue using his Advair.  (JE 1:17).  Dr. Hatab 
opined that Mr. McCarthy’s airway inflammation was triggered by his exposure to 
isocyanates.  (JE 1:17).  He also opined that “[e]nvironmental allergens are likely 
playing a significant role in his symptoms at this time, especially that he is allergic to 
multiple perennial and seasonal allergens.”  (JE 1:17).  Dr. Hatab recommended 
allergen avoidance and control measures.  (JE 1:17).   

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 7 
Patrick Hartley, M.D., examined Mr. McCarthy again on November 5, 2014.  (JE 
3:77-83).  Dr. Hartley reviewed Mr. McCarthy’s history since his last visit in 2010.  (JE 
3:77).  Mr. McCarthy indicated he was recently evaluated by an allergist, and was found 
via skin test to be allergic to “a number of trees, grasses, weeds, molds, and dust mite, 
dogs, cats, horses, cockroaches [sic].”  (JE 3:77).  Mr. McCarthy told Dr. Hartley that he 
felt “slightly better’ in comparison to his last visit in 2010, and he was not coughing 
constantly anymore.  (JE 3:77).  He walked about one mile per day, maintained his 
outside activities as much as possible, and wore a mask outside during winter months 
due to the cold air.  (JE 3:77).  At the time of his examination, he was not working.  (JE 
3:77).  Upon examination, Dr. Hartley observed no wheezes or crackles in the lungs.  
(JE 3:79).  Dr. Hartley reviewed spirometry results, which showed a normal FEV1 of 
3.39 (90 percent), an FVC of 4.44 (89 percent), which is an FEV1/FVC1 of 76 percent.  
(JE 3:79).  Dr. Hartley saw no significant change to these numbers after use of an 
inhaled bronchodilator.  (JE 3:79).  In the past, Mr. McCarthy’s IgE was 286 IU/mL, and 
313 IU/mL.  (JE 3:80).  Dr. Hartley found no significant isocyanate IgE antibody levels 
during this visit, which “confirmed that he has no significant isocyanate antibodies 
detected.”  (JE 3:81).  Dr. Hartley opined that the use of Xolair injections, as 
recommended by the allergist, was not supported by medical evidence.  (JE 3:81).  Dr. 
Hartley continued, “[i]t is more likely than not that Mr. McCarthy’s elevated IgE levels 
are related to his atopy to environmental aeroallergens.”  (JE 3:81).  He concluded that 
Mr. McCarthy’s respiratory symptoms were disproportionate to the objective lung 
function measures.  (JE 3:81).   
On February 12, 2015, the claimant returned to Dr. Schope’s office for his 
continued complaints.  (JE 1:19-20).  Dr. Schope mentioned that Xolair may provide Mr. 
McCarthy with relief.  (JE 1:19).  Mr. McCarthy recounts that he had wheezing and 
pressure in his chest, especially when he exerts himself.  (JE 1:19).  Dr. Schope noted, 
“I wonder whether he shouldn’t have a chemical stress test more because I don’t think 
he can walk.”  (JE 1:19).  Dr. Schope indicated that he would discuss the chemical 
stress test with a cardiologist, and recommended that the claimant pursue the Xolair 
injection.  (JE 1:20).   
Dr. Powers examined Mr. McCarthy again on July 21, 2015, for a physical.  (JE 
1:21-23).  Mr. McCarthy was dismayed by his lung function, but was “getting along 
okay.”  (JE 1:21).  He remained active by gardening, and was trying to eat healthier.  
(JE 1:21).  He planned on buying a treadmill so he could keep his weight down over the 
winter.  (JE 1:21).   
On August 25, 2015, Mr. McCarthy continued his care with Dr. Schope, for his 
reactive airway disease.  (JE 1:24-25).  Dr. Schope was still worried about the pressure 
in Mr. McCarthy’s chest.  (JE 1:24).  Dr. Schope reviewed the results of a nuclear stress 
test that Mr. McCarthy had in February, which showed a “fixed inferior wall defect.”  (JE 
1:24).  This caused the cardiologist to recommend coronary angiography to further 
evaluate the claimant for coronary artery disease.  (JE 1:24).  Mr. McCarthy declined 
the procedure, and continued to have chest pains.  (JE 1:24).  Dr. Schope 
recommended that Mr. McCarthy return to the cardiologist, for a “cardiac cath to make 
sure he doesn’t have coronary artery disease.”  (JE 1:24).  Dr. Schope also prescribed 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 8 
Spiriva in the morning, followed by albuterol, to see if it helps Mr. McCarthy’s cough.  
(JE 1:25).   
Dr. Schope saw Mr. McCarthy again on September 5, 2017.  (JE 1:26-29).  His 
cardiac cath results were normal despite his chest pain.  (JE 1:26).  He had no change 
in his cough, and found Xolair and albuterol to be ineffective.  (JE 1:26).  Mr. McCarthy 
could not take Spiriva, or other atropine type drugs, as he developed increased 
shortness of breath.  (JE 1:26).  Mr. McCarthy reported that his cough was “just as 
intense and as long lasting as it has always been.”  (JE 1:26).  This has been intractable 
since 2009.  (JE 1:26).  Dr. Schope recommended that Mr. McCarthy have another 
chest x-ray, a repeat spirometry, and repeat oximetry.  (JE 1:27).  He prescribed 
hydrocodone-acetaminophen and Mucinex.  (JE 1:27).  Pulmonary function tests 
showed a vital capacity of 2.82 and a FEV1 of 2.34.  (JE 1:28).  The tests also showed 
restrictive lung disease with normal 5.02 on a vital capacity and FEV1 of 3.77.  (JE 
1:28).  Dr. Schope opined, “this is restrictive lung disease related to his exposure to 
diisocyanate.”  (JE 1:28).  The chest x-rays had no change.  (JE 1:28).   
On March 5, 2018, Mr. McCarthy followed-up with Dr. Schope for his continued 
intractable cough and reactive airway disease.  (JE 1:30-31).  Mr. McCarthy felt “spacy” 
after taking hydrocodone, and did not use it.  (JE 1:30).  Dr. Schope concluded that Mr. 
McCarthy had restrictive lung disease.  (JE 1:30).  He noted that Mr. McCarthy looked 
“really good” at that time, despite his chronic cough.  (JE 1:31).  Dr. Schope 
recommended that the claimant continue his albuterol, Advair, and Mucinex.  (JE 1:31).   
Mr. McCarthy returned to Dr. Schope’s office on July 18, 2018, for continued care 
following his chemical exposure.  (JE 1:32-33).  Mr. McCarthy continued to have a 
chronic cough due to his reactive airway disease.  (JE 1:32).  Dr. Schope recommended 
that the claimant return in six months and continue taking his medications.  (JE 1:32).   
On August 20, 2019, Dr. Schope re-examined Mr. McCarthy.  (JE 1:34-35).  He 
recounted Mr. McCarthy’s current medications, and noted that Mr. McCarthy was under 
strain as his adult daughter battled leukemia.  (JE 1:34).  Dr. Schope recommended that 
Mr. McCarthy continue taking Advair, albuterol, and ProAir HFA.  (JE 1:35).   
Braden Powers, M.D., saw Mr. McCarthy on January 8, 2020.  (JE 1:36-38).  Dr. 
Schope retired, so Mr. McCarthy transferred his care to Dr. Powers.  (JE 1:39).  Mr. 
McCarthy was not taking Advair at the time, and noted that winter caused his reactive 
airway disease to worsen.  (JE 1:36).  Mr. McCarthy continued to have a daily cough 
and wheezing.  (JE 1:36).  Dr. Powers recommended additional pulmonary function 
testing and a methacholine challenge test to confirm that the claimant still had reactive 
airway dysfunction syndrome.  (JE 1:36).  If the diagnosis continued, Dr. Powers 
recommended that the claimant begin Symbicort rather than Advair.  (JE 1:36).   
Mr. McCarthy had a pulmonary function test at the UnityPoint Pulmonary 
Function Lab on February 6, 2020.  (JE 2:59-72).  The examiner noted that the testing 
was very difficult to complete, as Mr. McCarthy complained of severe shortness of 
breath with each test.  (JE 2:61).  He complained of extreme lightheadedness and visual 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 9 
difficulty.  (JE 2:61).  He also required “a lengthy recovery time” after each test.  (JE 
2:61).  Despite this, the examiner opined that Mr. McCarthy gave his best effort.  (JE 
2:61).  The pulmonary function test showed impingement of tidal breathing on the flow 
volume loop.  (JE 2:62).  His lung volumes also showed severe air trapping with mild 
hyperinflation.  (JE 2:62).  A methacholine challenge test showed that the claimant had 
severe airway hyperresponsiveness.  (JE 2:65).   
Dr. Powers called Mr. McCarthy on February 7, 2020, with the results of his 
airway testing.  (JE 1:40).  The testing showed that Mr. McCarthy had nonspecific 
ventilatory limitations, severe air trapping with mild hyperinflation, and severe airway 
hyperresponsiveness.  (JE 1:40).  Dr. Powers opined that “[t]hese findings are 
consistent with reactive airway dysfunction syndrome given his prior isocyanate 
exposure.”  (JE 1:41).  Dr. Powers recommended that Mr. McCarthy begin Symbicort.  
(JE 1:40).   
On June 9, 2020, Dr. Powers responded to a check-box-type letter from 
claimant’s counsel.  (JE 1:43-44).  Dr. Powers agreed that Mr. McCarthy’s pulmonary 
condition worsened since September of 2011.  (JE 1:43).  He also agreed that the 
claimant’s pulmonary condition was the result of his exposure to isocyanates while 
employed with the defendant.  (JE 1:43).  For future medical treatment, Dr. Powers 
recommended, inhaled corticosteroids, long-acting beta agonists, long-acting 
muscarinic antagonist inhalers, and short-acting beta-agonists.  (JE 1:44).  Dr. Powers 
recommended that Mr. McCarthy avoid inhaled fumes, chemicals and allergens, which 
may exacerbate his reactive airway dysfunction syndrome.  (JE 1:44).   
Dr. Powers saw Mr. McCarthy again on November 16, 2020, for continued follow-
up of his reactive airway dysfunction syndrome.  (JE 1:45-48).  He continued doing 
poorly due to the winter weather.  (JE 1:45).  He used inhalers with “some benefit.”  (JE 
1:45).  Mr. McCarthy could walk one flight of stairs and less than one mile on his 
treadmill.  (JE 1:45).  Dr. Powers recommended that Mr. McCarthy continue his use of 
Breo, Spiriva, and albuterol.  (JE 1:47).   
Claimant’s counsel requested that Dr. Powers complete a whole person 
impairment rating in April of 2021.  (JE 1:49-51).  Dr. Powers could not complete a 
whole person impairment rating, as he noted, “that is not within my expertise.”  (JE 
1:49).   
Dr. Hartley examined Mr. McCarthy again on October 13, 2021, for his ongoing 
pulmonary issues.  (JE 3:84-93).  He was seen on the referral of the insurer and 
“defence [sic] attorney” for an opinion on whether the continuing symptoms were 
“attributable to his isocyanate-induced lung disease.”  (JE 3:84).  Mr. McCarthy told Dr. 
Hartley that he had increased dyspnea with less exercise tolerance.  (JE 3:84).  
Bending over in his garden causes his shortness of breath to increase.  (JE 3:84).  He 
experienced episodic wheezing, for which he used a rescue inhaler.  (JE 3:84).  Dr. 
Hartley did additional testing, and noted that Mr. McCarthy’s pulmonary function testing 
worsened in comparison to his last "PFTs” in November of 2014, which suggested “a 
greater degree of respiratory impairment.”  (JE 3:93).  Dr. Hartley could not opine 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 10 
whether this was caused by the claimant’s environmental allergies or his isocyanate-
induced airway disease.  (JE 3:93).  Dr. Hartley noted that the claimant had findings 
suggestive of pulmonary hypertension and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction on a 
recent echocardiogram.  (JE 3:93).  Dr. Hartley also did not opine as to whether this 
was attributed to the isocyanate related airway disease or other factors.  (JE 3:93).  Dr. 
Hartley continued by noting that the medication which Mr. McCarthy took for atrial 
fibrillation may contribute to his reduced exercise tolerance.  (JE 3:93).  Dr. Hartley 
recommended that Mr. McCarthy have a CT scan to “assess for small airway disease 
with air trapping.”  (JE 3:93).   
Mr. McCarthy had a CT scan of his check performed on October 27, 2021.  (JE 
1:52).  The CT showed no acute abnormalities.  (JE 1:52).  The CT also showed no 
evidence of significant air trapping.  (JE 1:52).   
On November 2, 2021, Dr. Hartley reviewed the CT scan results and issued his 
final opinions.  (JE 3:95-96).  Dr. Hartley agreed with the interpreting radiologist that “the 
CT did not reveal any significant evidence of air-trapping or peribronchiolar changes to 
suggest small airway disease.”  (JE 3:95).  Dr. Hartley hypothesized that Mr. McCarthy’s 
decreased exercise tolerance, “may be multifactorial in etiology.”  (JE 3:95).  Among 
these factors include Mr. McCarthy’s occupational asthma, weight gain and 
deconditioning, cardiovascular disease, and any residual chest wall effects associated 
with his sternal fracture in 2019.  (JE 3:95).  Dr. Hartley then noted Mr. McCarthy’s 
allergies, including to his two dogs, to which Dr. Hartley indicated, “it’s hard to believe 
that his dog allergy, with continuing daily exposure, isn’t a factor [in] his continued 
airway disease.”  (JE 3:95).  Dr. Hartley recommended immunotherapy, anti-IgE 
therapy, or another biologic therapy for treatment.  (JE 3:95).  This therapy would be 
unrelated to his occupational-induced asthma according to Dr. Hartley.  (JE 3:95).   
Dr. Hartley then provided an updated permanent impairment rating pursuant to 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (JE 3:95-
96).  This updated impairment, based upon his reduced pulmonary function seen in the 
2021 testing, was 25 percent of the whole person.  (JE 3:96).  Dr. Hartley also opined 
that no changes were required to the December of 2010 work restrictions, which were,  
He should not be exposed to isocyanates.  A dusty work environment or 
extremes of heat, cold or humidity should be avoided.  In addition I would 
recommend that he limit or avoid exposure to irritant chemicals, which are 
likely to trigger cough.  He could lift up to 40 lbs [sic] occasionally, 20 lbs 
[sic] frequently. 
(JE 3:96).     
Dr. Powers saw Mr. McCarthy again on November 17, 2021.  (JE 1:53-55).  
Since his last visit, Mr. McCarthy had worsening dyspnea, which he attributed to “the 
change in the weather.”  (JE 1:53).  Mr. McCarthy continued to use inhalers, as 
prescribed.  (JE 1:53).  Dr. Powers continued to note that Mr. McCarthy had severe, 
persistent, poorly controlled reactive airway dysfunction syndrome.  (JE 1:53-54).  Dr. 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 11 
Powers recommended that the claimant continue using Breo, Spiriva, and albuterol.  
(JE 1:54).  Dr. Powers also considered a referral to allergy specialists.  (JE 1:54).  Mr. 
McCarthy discussed the COVID-19 vaccine with Dr. Powers, and the record concluded 
with Mr. McCarthy refusing the COVID-19 vaccine.  (JE 1:54).   
 
Mr. McCarthy reported to Short Physical Therapy, PLLC, for a functional capacity 
evaluation, on May 5, 2022.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1:5-17).  The examiner determined that 
Mr. McCarthy gave a consistent effort with all of his test items, and that he was “very 
cooperative.”  (CE 1:5).  At the beginning of the FCE, he rated his pain 0 out of 10.  (CE 
1:6).  By the end of the FCE, his pain increased to 8 out of 10 along his chest wall.  (CE 
1:6).  The examiner found that Mr. McCarthy had slight or no limitations with sitting.  
(CE 1:6).  He showed some limitations with elevated work, forward bent standing, 
standing work, and walking.  (CE 1:6).  Mr. McCarthy displayed significant limitations 
with kneeling/half-kneeling, stairs, lifting 20 pounds from the floor to the waist, lifting 15 
pounds from the floor to the waist, and front carrying up to 20 pounds up to 50 feet.  (CE 
1:6).  Based upon the examination and due to his decreased strength and endurance, 
including deconditioning and breathing dysfunction, caused Mr. McCarthy to fail to meet 
the capabilities of the sedentary category of physical demand.  (CE 1:6).  Because of 
Mr. McCarthy’s breathing issues, and decreased respiratory rate, he should limit his 
standing and walking combined to up to 30 percent of the day.  (CE 1:6).  Mr. McCarthy 
should also be allowed to change positions between sitting, standing, and walking as 
needed.  (CE 1:6-7).  The examiner continued by recommending that Mr. McCarthy limit 
elevated work and non-material handling activities to an occasional basis.  (CE 1:7).   
 
During his examination, Mr. McCarthy told the examiner that he had a foggy 
feeling, and/or difficulty focusing.  (CE 1:7).  At times, this caused him to be unsteady on 
his feet.  (CE 1:7).  The examiner opined that this was demonstrated consistently 
throughout the FCE.  (CE 1:7).  The examiner noted that Mr. McCarthy used his upper 
chest and neck muscles when breathing rather than his diaphragm.  (CE 1:9).   
Again on May 9, 2022, Dr. Powers agreed that Mr. McCarthy’s worsening 
pulmonary condition since September 2011, was the result of an exposure to 
isocyanates at work.  (JE 1:57).  He also agreed that this was “a material contributing 
factor” in the results of the FCE.  (JE 1:57).  Dr. Powers also considered the 
recommended restrictions in the FCE to be permanent.  (JE 1:57).   
Claimant’s Testimony 
James McCarthy, the claimant was 68 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He resides on 12 acres in East Dubuque, Illinois.  (Testimony).  He does 
some gardening.  (Testimony).  He also tends to apple, pear, cherry, and peach trees.  
(Testimony).  As a hobby, he makes wine from the fruit that he cannot use.  
(Testimony).  He does not use pesticides or fertilizers on his fruit trees.  (DE F:45).  One 
of his other hobbies is target shooting.  (Testimony; DE F:45).  He used to hunt with a 
bow, but he could no longer do that after his work injury.  (DE F:48).  Mr. McCarthy also 
has dogs.  (Testimony; DE F:47-48).  He is allergic to dogs.  (Testimony; DE F:47).  Dr. 
Powers recommended at one time that he should get rid of his dogs.  (DE F:47).   

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 12 
Five days per week, Mr. McCarthy spends the morning with his 86-year-old 
mother.  (Testimony).  He helps her with whatever she needs around her house, and 
keeps her company.  (Testimony).  He also takes her grocery shopping, to pick-up 
prescriptions, and picks her up from getting her hair done.  (Testimony).   
He mows two of his acres on a riding lawn tractor.  (Testimony).  When he mows, 
he can only mow for two hours before he becomes lightheaded and is unable to 
continue.  (Testimony).  He blames this on his lung condition.  (Testimony). 
 
On April 21, 2021, Mr. McCarthy had his deposition taken.  (DE F:42-49).  He felt 
that his asthma was getting worse gradually, and that it had “never stopped getting 
worse.”  (DE F:43).  He testified that since the 2011 hearing, he has been “less able to 
function on almost anything.”  (DE F:43).  He had shortness of breath, and a hard time 
focusing on what he does.  (DE F:43).   
Since his hearing in June of 2011, Mr. McCarthy testified that his stamina has 
decreased.  (Testimony; DE F:46).  He also testified that when his stamina wanes, he 
experiences difficulty focusing mentally.  (Testimony; DE F:46).  At the time of the 
hearing, Mr. McCarthy testified that he could walk a half mile to one mile on his home 
treadmill.  (Testimony).  At times, he walks outside, but when the heat and humidity are 
too much, he cannot do it.  (Testimony).  He also wears a face mask if the temperature 
drops below 40 degrees, or the weather was excessively windy or damp.  (Testimony).   
In 2011, Mr. McCarthy began installing solar panels on his property.  
(Testimony).  He installed two additional sets, including the last in 2017.  (Testimony).  
He testified that he worked for two hours at a time, as he would become fatigued, and 
“foggy.”  (Testimony).  He indicated that he was afraid he would injure himself if he 
attempted to work through the fatigue.  (Testimony).   
In 2017 or 2018, Mr. McCarthy built a 12 foot by 14-foot sunroom onto his home.  
(Testimony).  He testified that he worked for two hours and then take a break for two 
hours.  (Testimony).  Since he was working at his own home, he could work at his own 
pace.  (Testimony).  It took him an entire summer to finish the project.  (Testimony). 
In 2019, Mr. McCarthy had a car accident, wherein he lost control of his truck on 
black ice.  (DE F:45).  He broke three bones in his sternum as a result of the accident.  
(DE F:45).   
Mr. McCarthy still used an inhaler, Albuterol, Spiriva, and Breo, to treat his 
asthma.  (Testimony).  These were prescribed by Dr. Powers.  (Testimony).  These are 
the same medications that he took at the time of the 2011 hearing, and they continued 
to help him.  (Testimony).  
Neither the claimant, nor his wife smoke.  (Testimony).  He used to smoke a 
pipe, but he stopped doing so in 2009.  (Testimony).  His son smokes, but not when he 
is around Mr. McCarthy.  (Testimony).   

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 13 
Mr. McCarthy helps hang laundry on the line, and fold it.  (Testimony).  He also 
does most of the cooking and grocery shopping for his household.  (Testimony). 
During the hearing Mr. McCarthy audibly sighed on occasion.  He testified that he 
does this because he has to catch his breath after he talks for a protracted period of 
time.  (Testimony).  He also testified that he needs to remain hydrated in order to speak.  
(Testimony).  Specifically, Mr. McCarthy stated, “[i]f I’m not drinking, I’m not talking.  It’s 
as simple as that.”  (Testimony).  He testified further that doing anything bothered him, 
even small tasks like cutting or cooking vegetables.  (Testimony). 
Mr. McCarthy receives social security retirement and social security disability.  
(Testimony).  At the time of the hearing, he was not working.  (Testimony).  He also was 
not looking for work because he felt that he was not capable of working.  (Testimony).  
He testified that he felt that he could not find a job wherein he could work for two hours 
and then “knock off” for two hours, and then finish his day.  (Testimony).  He also 
testified that he could not spend time with his mother if he found a job.  (Testimony).  
Mr. McCarthy indicated that he wished to work until he was 66 and one-half years old, 
at which time he planned on retiring.  (Testimony).  He planned on working part-time 
after that until he decided to stop.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
Review-Reopening 
Iowa Code section 86.14 governs review-reopening proceedings.  When 
considering a review-reopening petition, the inquiry “shall be into whether or not the 
condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of 
compensation so awarded.”  Iowa Code section 86.14(2).  The deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner does not re-determine the condition of the employee 
adjudicated by the former award.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 391 
(Iowa 2009).  The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner must determine “the 
condition of the employee, which is found to exist subsequent to the date of the award 
being reviewed.”  Id.  (quoting Stice v. Consol. Ind. Coal. Co., 228 Iowa 1031, 1038, 291 
N.W. 452, 456 (1940)).  In a review-reopening proceeding, the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner should not reevaluate the claimant’s level of physical 
impairment or earning capacity “if all of the facts and circumstances were known or 
knowable at the time of the original action.”  Id. at 393.   
The claimant bears the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence 
that, “subsequent to the date of the award under review, he or she has suffered an 
impairment or lessening of earning capacity proximately caused by the original injury.”  
Simonson v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 588 N.W.2d 430, 434 (Iowa 1999)(emphasis in 
original).   

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 14 
Before considering any other disputed issue in this case, I must first determine 
whether Mr. McCarthy has established a change in condition following the previous 
decisions.  Mr. McCarthy presents his own testimony, medical evidence, and a valid 
FCE.  The defendant presents medical evidence from Dr. Hartley and argue that the 
claimant’s own testimony supports their contention that the claimant has not suffered a 
lessening of earning capacity proximately caused by the original injury.  When 
considering expert testimony, the trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert 
opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the 
claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the 
examination, the expert’s education, training, and practice, and “all other factors which 
bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 
366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).    
The defendant argues that this case is “practically identical” to another arbitration 
decision in Brownrigg v. GITS Manufacturing Co., File No. 5042388.01 (Review-
Reopening, September 20, 2021).  First, the undersigned would note that this decision 
is not binding on the undersigned, as it is a review-reopening decision, and not a 
decision of the Commissioner, a district court, the Court of Appeals, or the Supreme 
Court.  Secondly, the decision by my colleague in Brownrigg appeared to be based on 
the fact that the claimant in that case voluntarily retired from employment, and had not 
sought additional employment.  The quoted decision in the defendant’s post-hearing 
brief notes on several occasions that the claimant voluntarily retired, and remained 
retired.  The evidence in this matter does not reflect that the claimant voluntarily retired.  
Mr. McCarthy testified very credibly during the hearing.  He testified that he planned on 
working until he was 66 and one-half years old, at which time, he planned on retiring.  
After that, he testified that he planned on working part-time until such time as he 
decided to stop.  While a loss of earning capacity due to voluntary choice or lack of 
motivation to return to work is not compensable, I do not find that this is the case in this 
matter.  See e.g. Id. (citations omitted).  Mr. McCarthy was terminated by the employer 
in 2009.  He sought some part-time work after this, but was subsequently laid off from 
the part-time position.  While Mr. McCarthy has not actively sought work since his 2011 
hearing and decision, this is because of his lack of physical capability to do so.  He has 
not voluntarily retired.  Mr. McCarthy credibly noted that he could not identify jobs that 
would allow him to work for two hours and then take a two-hour break.  While this two-
hour restriction is self-imposed, it is well documented in the claimant’s testimony and 
medical records that he experiences issues with feeling foggy or mentally slower after 
exerting himself for two hours.   
Mr. McCarthy was re-evaluated by Dr. Hartley in November of 2021.  At that 
time, Dr. Hartley opined that he would not change Mr. McCarthy’s permanent 
restrictions.  These restrictions were adopted by the deputy commissioner in the 
underlying arbitration decision.  He did, however, increase the claimant’s permanent 
disability from 18 percent of the whole person to 25 percent of the whole person.  He 
also agreed that the claimant’s pulmonary testing results worsened.  While he could not 
definitively opine that Mr. McCarthy’s worsening condition was the result of his chemical 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 15 
exposure, he did not deny that this was the case.  It is important to note that Dr. Hartley 
was asked by the insurer and defense counsel to provide opinions as to the claimant’s 
continuing symptoms.  While Dr. Hartley previously treated the claimant, I view his 
subsequent examination as akin to a defendant’s arranged independent medical 
examination.  This factors into my assessment of the credibility of his opinions.   
Dr. Powers was Mr. McCarthy’s treating pulmonologist.  He opined on several 
occasions that Mr. McCarthy had a worsening pulmonary condition as the result of his 
exposure to isocyanates while working for the defendant.  Pulmonary testing also 
showed worsening conditions for Mr. McCarthy.  Mr. McCarthy also had a valid FCE, for 
which he provided consistent effort.  The FCE revealed that Mr. McCarthy failed to meet 
the capabilities of even the sedentary category of physical demand.  This is more 
restrictive than Mr. McCarthy’s capabilities from the arbitration decision.  In the 
arbitration decision, it was determined that the claimant was capable of working some 
amount of sedentary or light duty work.  This is evidence of a worsening of the 
claimant’s condition, and a lessening of the claimant’s earning capacity.   
Based upon the information in the record, the claimant has proven, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that he suffered an impairment and/or lessening of 
earning capacity.   
Permanent Disability Benefits 
 
The claimant was previously awarded an 80 percent industrial disability.  This 
was affirmed on several occasions in the appeal process.  The various levels of appeal 
also declined to declare the claimant to be permanently and totally disabled.  The 
claimant does not make an argument in their post-hearing briefing that the claimant is 
simply increased in his permanent disability and/or industrial disability.  The claimant’s 
argument is that the claimant is now permanently and totally disabled.  The defendant 
disputes this, and argues that the claimant’s potential ability to earn wages has 
increased since 2011.     
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code 85.34(2)(v).  The extent 
of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
 
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in Iowa Code 
85.34(a) – (u) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 16 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936).   
 
In Iowa, a claimant may establish permanent total disability under the statute, or 
through the common law odd-lot doctrine.  Michael Eberhart Constr. v. Curtin, 674 
N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004)(discussing both theories of permanent total disability 
under Idaho law and concluding the deputy’s ruling was not based on both theories 
rather, it was only based on the odd-lot doctrine).  Under the statute, the claimant may 
establish that they are totally and permanently disabled if the claimant’s medical 
impairment, taken together with nonmedical factors totals 100-percent.  Id.  The odd-lot 
doctrine applies when the claimant has established the claimant has sustained 
something less than 100-percent disability, but is so injured that the claimant is “unable 
to perform services other than ‘those which are so limited in quality, dependability or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.’”  Id.  (quoting Boley v. 
Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 130 Idaho 278, 281, 939 P.2d 854, 857 (1997)).   
 
“Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.”  Walmart 
Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 501 (Iowa 2003)(quoting IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 2000)).  Total disability occurs when the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee’s experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform.”  IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 633. However, finding that the claimant could 
perform some work despite claimant’s physical and educational limitations does not 
foreclose a finding of permanent total disability.   See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File 
No. 661698 (App. October 1987); Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial 
Commissioner Report 134 (App. May 1982).   
 
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen, Co., the Iowa Supreme Court formally adopted the 
“odd-lot doctrine.”  373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985).  Under that doctrine, a worker 
becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining 
employment in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus 
totally disabled if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, 
dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., 
at 105.   
 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to provide evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of fact finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, then the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d 
at 106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot 
employee include: the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady 
employment, vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not 
available for the worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, 
education, age, training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 17 
on the issue.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  
Even under the odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and 
credibility of evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has 
been carried, and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as 
to compel a finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106.   
 
The claimant has made a prima facie case that he is not employable in the 
competitive labor market.  This is bolstered by the results of the FCE, the impairment 
rating of Dr. Hartley, and the opinions of Dr. Powers.  The defendant points to the 
claimant’s visits to his mother, including performing small tasks for her, as evidence that 
the claimant is capable of performing home companion work, which is “generally in 
demand.”  (Defendant’s Post-Hearing Brief, page 4).  However, this is simply an 
argument.  The defendant produced no evidence to back up their assertion.  They had 
no vocational expert report and no competing FCE that showed that the claimant was 
capable of working in this area.   
I reject the notion that the claimant is voluntarily retired.  He was fired from his 
employment with the defendant.  He was subsequently laid off from his part-time 
employment.  Since that time, his condition has deteriorated.  He credibly testified that 
he can only perform certain tasks for two hours at a time before he requires a two-hour 
break to recover.   
 
The claimant is now 68 years old.  He is a high school graduate.  He worked at 
Jeld-Wen from 1978 to 2009.  During that time, Mr. McCarthy assembled garage doors, 
loaded production lines, and cut pieces for special orders.  He had no other training in 
areas such as personal care.  He also never worked a sedentary job, based upon the 
evidence in the record.  While he has a potential for retraining, his employment history 
indicates that he has the requisite skills to be a home companion for anyone other than 
his mother.  Additionally, the claimant is providing care to a family member.  There is no 
evidence that he provided care for any other elderly individuals, nor is there evidence 
that he would be capable of doing so.   
 
Dr. Hartley determined that the claimant experienced increased disability 
between 2011 and 2021.  Pulmonary testing also showed that the claimant’s condition 
worsened.  Dr. Powers connected the worsening of the condition to Mr. McCarthy’s 
work-related chemical exposure.  Dr. Hartley tried to connect the worsening condition to 
Mr. McCarthy’s allergies and environmental condition.  However, Dr. Hartley’s opinion 
was not conclusive as to this issue.  I find Dr. Powers’ opinions more credible.   
 
Mr. McCarthy underwent an FCE.  The FCE was deemed valid, and it was noted 
that Mr. McCarthy provided a good effort in the FCE.  The results of the FCE provided 
Mr. McCarthy with significant limitations.  The examiner concluded that Mr. McCarthy 
failed to even meet the capabilities of the sedentary category of physical demand for a 
job.  This is a change from the previous arbitration decision, in which it was noted that 
Mr. McCarthy was capable of working light duty or sedentary work.  The defendant 
presented no evidence to rebut this besides their simple arguments presented above.   

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 18 
 
I am concerned that Mr. McCarthy has sought no work since being laid off from 
his part-time position.  A reasonable, but unsuccessful effort to find employment is a 
factor to consider in an odd-lot analysis.  Mr. McCarthy has not made a reasonable 
effort to find employment.  Claimant argues in their post-hearing brief that the defendant 
should provide the claimant with assistance in this regard.  I do not find this persuasive.  
If Mr. McCarthy desired to work, he should have looked for a job within his restrictions.  
While I am concerned about this, there is no one factor that is dispositive in an odd-lot 
analysis.  Mr. McCarthy testified credibly that he felt that he could not find a job that 
would allow him to work for two hours and rest for two hours.  Certainly, based upon the 
results of the FCE and considering Mr. McCarthy’s employment history, and age, it 
seems that he would have had difficulty finding subsequent employment.  Also, the 
defendant did not provide any evidence that there were jobs available to Mr. McCarthy 
within even the restrictions provided by Dr. Hartley, let alone those provided in the valid 
FCE.   
 
Based upon the evidence in the record, the claimant is permanently and totally 
disabled under the odd-lot doctrine.   
Commencement Date of Benefits 
 
The parties indicated in their hearing report that there was a dispute as to the 
commencement date of benefits.  The claimant concedes in their post-hearing brief that 
the benefits should commence on the date of the filing of the review-reopening petition, 
which was June 15, 2020.  Therefore, no further analysis is required as to this issue.   
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 4.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
 
 

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 19 
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (Noting 
additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the 
underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or 
deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 
5056857(App., September 27, 2019).   
 
The claimant requests reimbursement of costs as follows: 
 
Filing fee – one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) 
Short Physical Therapy FCE – nine hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars 
($950.00) 
(CE 4:30-34).  The claimant is entitled to recover the filing fee.  The claimant is only 
entitled to recover the costs of the FCE report.  According to the invoice, that is three 
hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($350.00).   
 
Based upon my discretion, I award the claimant one hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($100.00) for the filing fee.  I also award the claimant the cost of the FCE report of three 
hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($350.00).  The total costs awarded are four hundred 
fifty and 00/100 dollars ($450.00).     
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant has proven an entitlement to review-reopening benefits pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 86.14. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of three hundred seventy-
five and 78/100 dollars ($375.78) per week.   
Defendant shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits on a weekly 
basis from June 15, 2020, through the date of the review-reopening hearing, and 
continuing into the future during the period of claimant’s total disability.   
Defendant shall be entitled to a credit for four hundred (400) weeks of 
compensation at the rate of three hundred seventy-five and 78/100 dollars ($375.78) 
paid to date.   

McCARTHY V. JELD WEN HOLDING, INC. 
Page 20 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.   
Defendant shall reimburse the claimant four hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars 
($450.00) for costs.   
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this _18th  day of October, 2022. 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
Joe Quinn (via WCES) 
Stephanie Techau (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
