Case Number: 19003230.01
Case Title:  GRABOSCH, JOHN V. ARCONIC, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Grabosch John-19003230.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOHN GRABOSCH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                   File No. 19003230.01 
ARCONIC, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                        ARBITRATION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           DECISION 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA (TPA – 
  : 
HELMSMAN MANAGEMENT  
  : 
SERVICES, LLC), 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
      Head Note Nos.:  1100; 1108;   
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
 
 1400; 1402.30 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, John Grabosch, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Arconic, Inc. (“Arconic”), and its insurer, Indemnity 
Insurance Company of North America.  James Hoffmann appeared on behalf of the 
claimant.  Jane Lorentzen appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on November 17, 2020, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  An order issued on March 13, 2020, 
and updated June 1, 2020, August 14, 2020, and October 12, 2020, by the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, In the Matter of Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact 
on Hearings (available online at: https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/order-coronavirus-
covid-19 (last viewed December 29, 2020)) amended the hearing assignment order in 
each case before the Commissioner scheduled for an in-person regular proceeding 
hearing between March 18, 2020, and March 19, 2021.  The amendment makes it so 
that such hearings will be held by internet-based video using CourtCall.  The parties 
appeared electronically, and the hearing proceeded without significant difficulties.  The 
matter was fully submitted on December 4, 2020, after briefing by the defendants.  The 
claimant did not submit a post-hearing brief.     
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Mar-04  14:41:39     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 2 
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits A-F.  The claimant submitted an 
exhibit, but withdrew the exhibit at hearing as it was duplicative of an exhibit in the joint 
exhibits.  Testimony under oath was also taken from the claimant, David Ellermets, and 
Jennifer Kruse. Delayne Johnson was appointed the official reporter and custodian of 
the notes of the proceeding.   
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. The disability is a scheduled member disability to the bilateral upper extremities.   
 
3. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded, is February 20, 2020.   
 
4. The claimant’s gross earnings were $1,071.00 per week.   
 
5. The claimant was married and entitled to two exemptions.  
 
6. The weekly rate of compensation is $688.43.     
There is no longer any dispute as to entitlement to temporary disability and/or 
healing period benefits.  There is no longer any dispute as to entitlement for credits to 
any award.  The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment, and whether the injury occurred on January 1, 2019, or on 
January 30, 2019.   
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
3. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded.   
 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
  
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to an assessment of costs.   
 

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 3 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
John Grabosch, the claimant, was 68 years old at the time of hearing.  
(Testimony).  He worked for Arconic for about eight years prior to the alleged work 
incident.  (Testimony).  While working at Arconic, Mr. Grabosch held a variety of jobs.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch worked as a roll grinder in the maintenance department for 
almost six and a half years.  (Testimony).  As a roll grinder, he would take large rolls 
into the shop and grind them to particular specifications.  (Testimony).  This required 
disassembling the rolls and bearings which weighed upwards of 30 to 40 pounds.  
(Testimony).  The grinder that he used to grind the rolls was automated.  (Testimony).  
After a few weeks, Mr. Grabosch would rotate onto another job and testified that he was 
“constantly doing different jobs throughout the time” he was at Arconic.  (Testimony).   
In October of 2018, Mr. Grabosch moved from roll grinding to production on the 
84” Line and the 84-2” Line.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch was trained on an entrance 
job, an exit job, and a rewind job for the 84” Line” and the 84-2” Line.  (Testimony).  The 
result was that Mr. Grabosch performed six different jobs.  (Testimony).  In the entry job, 
Mr. Grabosch readied coils of metal to be sent through the production line.  (Testimony).  
This required cutting bands and feeding metal into a machine.  (Testimony).  In the exit 
job, Mr. Grabosch changed tubs of metal sheets using a forklift and would undo any 
jams that occurred.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch also ran a crane, which moved pallets 
of aluminum to ship to different departments.  (Testimony).  When he ran the crane, he 
would push buttons on a pendant and walk with the crane.  (Testimony and Video 
Evidence).   
Mr. Grabosch agreed that his job varied on a day-to-day and week-to-week 
basis.  (Testimony).  He did not use vibratory tools, but used a hammer from time to 
time on a limited basis.  (Testimony).  At times, he would need to hammer a screwdriver 
under a band on a coil of metal.  (Testimony).  He did this 9 to 11 times during a 12 hour 
day.  (Testimony).  He lifted sheets of aluminum if there was a jam, but noted that this 
was not a daily activity.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch testified that when there was a jam, 
the line would be down for two to three hours, during which time he would not work.  
(Testimony).   
David Ellermets, a process improvement engineer at Arconic and Mr. Grabosch’s 
former supervisor, also testified at the hearing.  (Testimony).  Mr. Ellermets began 
employment at Arconic in 2013 as a production operator, became a production 
supervisor in 2016, and shortly after became a process improvement engineer.  
(Testimony).  He works on the production line to improve processes and address 
productivity issues.  (Testimony).  He clarified that much of Mr. Grabosch’s work 
involved pressing buttons on a crane.  (Testimony).  He testified that Mr. Grabosch’s 

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 4 
 
work was “not overly repetitive.”  (Testimony).  Mr. Ellermets disputed the frequency of 
jams that Mr. Grabosch stated occurred.  (Testimony).  Mr. Ellermets also testified that, 
in his time at Arconic, he had never witnessed the procedure described by Mr. 
Grabosch in which a hammer and screwdriver were used to break a band on a roll of 
metal.  (Testimony).  Mr. Ellermets indicated that this could damage the metal.  
(Testimony).   
Jennifer Kruse also testified on behalf of the defendants.  (Testimony).  Ms. 
Kruse has a bachelor’s degree in athletic training and a master’s degree in human 
development.  (Testimony).  She works as an athletic trainer for Arconic.  (Testimony).  
As an athletic trainer, she performs ergonomic assessments and injury investigations.  
(Testimony).  She spoke with Mr. Grabosch after his carpal tunnel became 
symptomatic.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch could not tell her what specific job duties 
increased his symptoms.  (Testimony).  Ms. Kruse testified that she maintained 
familiarity with the Department of Labor standards relating to occasional, frequent, and 
constant repetitive motion.  (Testimony).  Based upon her familiarity with those 
standards, and Mr. Grabosch’s job duties, Ms. Kruse opined that Mr. Grabosch had no 
work tasks that were repetitive in nature.  (Testimony).    
About ten and a half years before the injuries at the basis of this matter, Mr. 
Grabosch experienced bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  (Testimony).  At that time, Mr. 
Grabosch worked for Nichols Windstream.  (Testimony).    
Mr. Grabosch’s prior medical records were provided as exhibits.  On November 
17, 2008, Mr. Grabosch visited Genesis Health Group requesting clonazepam.  (Joint 
Exhibit A:1).  Mr. Grabosch returned to Genesis Health Group on December 22, 2008, 
with complaints of numbness in his hands and arms for the past several weeks.  (JE 
A:1).  The numbness began to happen during the day.  (JE A:1).  His provider referred 
him to another doctor for possible carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE A:1).   
Mr. Grabosch reported to Brian J. Anseeuw, M.D., on January 13, 2009, for his 
carpal tunnel complaints.  (JE B:3).  He noted that his numbness progressively 
worsened and woke him from sleep.  (JE B:3).  Dr. Anseeuw scheduled Mr. Grabosch 
for an EMG and nerve conduction study.  (JE B:3).  Mr. Grabosch had an EMG on 
February 5, 2009. (JE B:5-7).  The study showed evidence of “compressive neuropathy 
of both median nerves at the wrists, worse on the left.”  (JE B:7).  
On February 11, 2009, Mr. Grabosch returned to Genesis Health Group for a 
follow-up of his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE A:2).  Mr. Grabosch visited a 
neurologist that performed a nerve conduction study.  (JE A:2).  The nerve conduction 
study showed carpal tunnel syndrome that was worse in his right wrist than his left.  (JE 
A:2).  He was scheduled to see a Dr. Cobb to consider surgery.  (JE A:2).  On February 
19, 2009, Mr. Grabosch received a referral to a surgeon regarding his bilateral carpal 
tunnel issues.  (JE A:2).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 5 
 
On March 16, 2009, Mr. Grabosch reported to ORA Bone & Joint Centers for 
complaints of hand numbness and tingling.  (JE C:10-11).  He reported dropping objects 
such as coins and keys.  (JE C:10).  Mr. Grabosch reported that he shook his hands in 
the morning to “awaken them.”  (JE C:10).  His EMG was consistent with left hand 
severe median nerve compression and right moderate to severe nerve compression.  
(JE C:10).  The provider recommended that Mr. Grabosch undergo a carpal tunnel 
release to both hands.  (JE C:10).  
 On April 14, 2009, Mr. Grabosch had a right open carpal tunnel release at Quad 
City Ambulatory Surgery Center.  (JE C:12).  As of April 28, 2009, he was instructed to 
remain off work.  (JE C:13).   
On May 1, 2009, Mr. Grabosch had an open carpal tunnel release to his left 
wrist.  (JE C:14).  At his May 14, 2009, surgical follow-up he noted progress on his right 
side, and a return of sensation to his left fingers.  (JE C:15).  By June 9, 2009, Mr. 
Grabosch achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”), and could return to full 
unrestricted activities.  (JE C:16).   
Mr. Grabosch returned to ORA Bone & Joint Centers on October 15, 2009 with 
complaints of pain and tingling in his right thumb and index finger.  (JE C:17).  The 
provider gave Mr. Grabosch an injection into his thumb.  (JE C:17).   
On July 12, 2010, Mr. Grabosch again returned to ORA Bone & Joint Centers 
with complaints of catching and locking in his left thumb.  (JE C:18).  He also reported 
numbness of the right thumb and index finger.  (JE C:18).  He noted that this was 
unchanged from his postoperative status and to some degree it was getting worse.  (JE 
C:18).  The treating physician, Mark Stewart, M.D., advised Mr. Grabosch to undergo an 
A1 pulley release if this still bothered him.  (JE C:18).   
At the time that Mr. Grabosch began work for Arconic he suffered no lingering 
issues from his previous carpal tunnel syndrome and resulting surgeries.  (Testimony).  
Mr. Grabosch took, and passed, a physical prior to commencing work with Arconic.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch claimed that in late January of 2019, he began to 
experience numbness in his hands.  (Testimony).  He also began to drop things and the 
numbness affected his work.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch could not articulate at the 
hearing which elements or duties of his job caused him increased pain or issues.  
(Testimony).  He indicated that the symptoms experienced in early 2019 were the same 
that he experienced in 2009.  (Testimony).   
 
On January 10, 2019, Mr. Grabosch reported again to ORA Orthopedics.  (JE 
C:19-20).  Dr. Stewart examined him again for complaints of bilateral hand numbness.  
(JE C:19).  Mr. Grabosch reported the numbness occurred for about two months and 
was getting worse.  (JE C:19).  His pain and numbness did not radiate, but woke him 
from sleep.  (JE C:19).  Dr. Stewart found slightly positive median nerve compression 
testing bilaterally.  (JE C:19).  Dr. Stewart recommended further EMG testing.  (JE 
C:19).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 6 
 
The EMG and nerve conduction studies were repeated on January 16, 2019, due 
to complaints of bilateral hand numbness.  (JE B:8-9).  Dr. Anseeuw noted an abnormal 
study showing electrophysiological evidence of compressive neuropathy of the right 
median nerve at the wrist.  (JE B:9).   
On January 29, 2019, Mr. Grabosch returned to Dr. Stewart’s office following his 
EMG and nerve conduction studies.  (JE C:23).  Mr. Grabosch continued to complain of 
numbness in each hand.  (JE C:23).  He again reported dropping keys and small 
objects, and noted that his work activities bothered him.  (JE C:23).  Dr. Stewart noted 
that the EMG showed compression of the median nerve, especially on the right, but also 
on the left.  (JE C:23).  Dr. Stewart recommended staged carpal tunnel releases.  (JE 
C:23).  Mr. Grabosch noted to Dr. Stewart that “he is going to report this as a workers’ 
comp injury.”  (JE C:23).   
At this time, Mr. Grabosch informed Arconic of his carpal tunnel syndrome 
recurring.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch testified that Arconic sent him to a company 
physician who instructed him to come back whenever he had symptoms.  (Testimony).  
This displeased Mr. Grabosch because he felt he needed to have surgery to his hands 
in order to resolve his problems.  (Testimony).  Mr. Grabosch continued to report to the 
company medical area and was displeased that surgery was not authorized.  
(Testimony).   
Denise Wieberg of Helmsman Management Services drafted a letter to Jonathan 
Winston, M.D. of ORA Orthopedics on April 12, 2019.  (JE D:24-25).  The letter posed a 
series of questions for Dr. Winston to address.  (JE D:24-25).   
Dr. Winston replied to Ms. Wieberg’s letter on May 1, 2019 noting that he 
performed an IME on Mr. Grabosch on the same day.  (JE D:26-29).  Dr. Winston noted 
Mr. Grabosch’s current history.  (JE D:26-27).  Mr. Grabosch alleged that he reported 
his injury to Arconic on January 30, 2019, and that he had numbness and tingling in his 
hands.  (JE D:26).  Numbness and tingling worsened in the evening.  (JE D:26).  His 
symptoms were worse on the right than the left.  (JE D:26).  Mr. Grabosch reported 
pushing buttons at Arconic, using a hammer every other week, and lifting objects off the 
floor.  (JE D:27).  Mr. Grabosch reported pulling on a rope several weeks prior, which 
aggravated his symptoms.  (JE D:27).  Dr. Winston noted that the January, 2019, nerve 
study showed an improvement over the 2009 nerve study.  (JE D:27).  Dr. Winston 
diagnosed Mr. Grabosch with recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome that was not caused by 
his job activities, but rather his “index injury.”  (JE D:28).  However, Dr. Winston 
concluded the repetitive nature of Mr. Grabosch’s employment caused a substantial 
aggravation of his preexisting carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE D:28).  Dr. Winston 
recommended no formal work restrictions, and indicated that Mr. Grabosch had a 50 
percent chance of improvement with a revision surgery.  (JE D:28).  Dr. Winston 
recommended a diagnostic therapeutic injection.  (JE D:28).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Winston confirmed, in a letter dated June 26, 2019, that the “index” surgery is 
the carpal tunnel release previously performed on both hands.  (JE D:30).  Mr. 
Grabosch subjectively indicated to Dr. Winston that on a repetitive basis, he lifted items 
between 2 and 20 pounds.  (JE D:30).  Dr. Winston offered to revise his opinion should 
information show that Mr. Grabosch did not perform these tasks on a regular basis.  (JE 
D:30).   
Mr. Grabosch testified that he scheduled carpal tunnel surgery on his own with 
Dr. Stewart and underwent the surgery in June of 2019, and then a second surgery in 
July of 2019.  (Testimony).  When Mr. Grabosch returned to work following his 
surgeries, he returned to the same job on the production line with no decrease in pay.  
(Testimony).   
On October 16, 2019, ORA Orthopedics provided Mr. Grabosch with a return to 
work note indicating that he was able to return to work as of November 4, 2019, with no 
restrictions.  (JE D:31).   
In a letter dated November 4, 2019, Ms. Wieberg wrote to Dr. Winston indicating 
that Jennifer Kruse performed an ergonomic assessment of Mr. Grabosch’s job.  (JE 
D:32-33).  Ms. Kruse found no repetitive lifting of objects and that Mr. Grabosch lifted 
items infrequently.  (JE D:32).  Ms. Kruse also found that Mr. Grabosch hand banded 
flat sheets, but not more than one time per hour.  (JE D:32).  Dr. Winston also visited 
Arconic and witnessed different jobs being performed.  (JE D:41).   
On November 7, 2019, Mr. Grabosch filed a form with Arconic titled “Intent-to-
Retire Notice Incentive for Arconic-Davenport Works USW & IBEW Employees.”  (JE 
F:57).  He indicated that he intended to retire on April 1, 2020.  (JE F:57).  By submitting 
this form, Mr. Grabosch was entitled to a $500 payment, less applicable taxes.  (JE 
F:57).   
Arconic issued a written warning to Mr. Grabosch for an improper report of an 
absence on December 14, 2019.  (JE F:56).   
Ms. Wieberg sent another letter to Dr. Winston on February 10, 2020, asking the 
same questions and requesting again that Dr. Winston change his opinion.  (JE D:41-
42).  Dr. Winston was provided with, among other things, a video of Mr. Grabosch’s job 
activities.  (JE  D:41-42).  After reviewing the provided documentation, Dr. Winston 
replied on March 3, 2020.  (JE D:43).  Dr. Winston changed his opinion and noted, “I do 
not feel that the amount of activity he is doing is enough repetitive activity to cause his 
recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome.”  (JE D:43).  Dr. Winston concluded, “Again, his 
diagnosis of recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by his prior carpal tunnel 
release and because his job is not doing repetitive forceful activities, and instead it is 
more ergonomic in nature, his job is not causing or contributing to his symptoms in any 
way.”  (JE D:43).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 8 
 
On February 20, 2020, at the direction of claimant’s counsel, the claimant visited 
Sangeeta Shah, M.D., C.I.M.E., for an IME.  (JE E:46-54).  Dr. Shah’s letterhead 
indicates that she is the head of the neurology department at Mercy One Medical 
Center in Waterloo, Iowa.  (JE E:46).  Dr. Shah noted Mr. Grabosch’s history of manual 
work including removing bands from rolls of metal and readying them for the machine.  
(JE E:46).  Mr. Grabosch noted symptoms beginning in December of 2018, including 
dropping things and difficulty holding onto keys.  (JE E:46).  He also experienced 
numbness of his hands.  (JE E:46).  Dr. Shah reviewed Mr. Grabosch’s medical history, 
and mentioned his previous carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE E:46-50).  Mr. Grabosch 
indicated to Dr. Shah that he continued to have pain in both of his hands.  (JE E:50).  
He also had difficulty gripping, grasping, and lifting things, along with sleeping.  (JE 
E:50).  He reported that the right was worse than the left.  (JE E:50).  Upon 
examination, Dr. Shah found a lack of sensation in the right median nerve distribution.  
(JE E:51).  Dr. Shah’s impression of Mr. Grabosch’s conditions was: 
1. Carpal tunnel syndrome status post release with residual symptoms of 
severe pain and decreased sensation in the median nerve distribution.   
2. Severe carpal tunnel syndrome at the left wrist with severe numbness, 
pain and weakness of the left hand in the distribution of the median 
nerve.   
(JE E:52).   
With regard to causation, Dr. Shah opined that Mr. Grabosch’s symptoms had 
completely resolved until 2018.  (JE E:52).  Dr. Shah noted the following occupational 
factors can cause or aggravate carpal tunnel syndrome: repetitive hand and wrist use; 
forceful hand and wrist use; work with vibrating tools; sustained wrist or palm pressure; 
prolonged wrist extension and flexion; and, use of hands in cold temperatures.  (JE 
E:52-53).  Dr. Shah indicated that if Mr. Grabosch’s condition was secondary to his prior 
surgery, symptoms would have recurred within one to two years due to scar tissue.  (JE 
E:52).  In this case, Dr. Shah opined that Mr. Grabosch’s symptoms happened 
secondary to his repetitive use of his hands at work.  (JE E:52).  Dr. Shah’s diagnoses 
included bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome “S/P surgery” for bilateral carpal tunnel, and 
left knee injury in the past with no residual deficit.  (JE E:53).  Dr. Shah opined that Mr. 
Grabosch reached MMI.  (JE E:53).  Dr. Shah provided an impairment rating for Mr. 
Grabosch’s right upper extremity of 10 percent.  (JE E:53-54).  Dr. Shah translated this 
to a 6 percent impairment of the whole person.  (JE E:54).   
Regarding the left upper extremity, Dr. Shah opined that Mr. Grabosch suffered a 
2 percent impairment of the upper extremity.  (JE E:54).  Dr. Shah translated this to a 1 
percent impairment of the whole person.  (JE E:54).  Utilizing the combined value chart 
in the Guides, Dr. Shah opined that Mr. Grabosch suffered a 7 percent whole person 
impairment.  (JE E:54).  Dr. Shah did not provide a combined rating based upon his 
upper extremity impairments.  (JE E:54).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 9 
 
 
On May 1, 2020, Mr. Grabosch formally retired from Arconic.  (JE F:58).  He 
testified that his retirement had nothing to do with his injury, but had to do with his age 
and desire to “kick back and enjoy life a little bit.”  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Grabosch reported residual problems with his grip, and testified that his grip 
power was not as strong as prior to his surgery.  (Testimony).  His numbness 
dissipated, though he noted some continued numbness in his thumb and index finger.  
(Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of 
Appellate Procedure 6.904(3)(f).  
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence that the employee’s injuries arose out of, and in the 
course of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 
528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place and 
circumstances of the injury.  Id.  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Willis, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
   [i]t is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment merely 
because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically prescribed 
task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act which he deems 
necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer.   
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).  Whether a 
claimant’s injury arises out of the claimant’s employment is a “mixed question of law and 
fact.”  Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 10 
 
 
In this case, Mr. Grabosch alleges that he either had a new occurrence of 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, or that his work at Arconic substantially worsened or 
aggravated his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  The parties do not dispute that Mr. 
Grabosch has carpal tunnel syndrome; however, they dispute whether his carpal tunnel 
syndrome arose out of and in the course of his employment with Arconic.  Claimant’s 
own expert, Dr. Shah, notes that the following are some occupational causes of carpal 
tunnel syndrome: repetitive hand and wrist use; forceful hand and wrist use; work with 
vibrating tools; sustained wrist or palm pressure; prolonged wrist extension and flexion; 
and, use of hands in cold temperatures.  In this case, testimony indicated that Mr. 
Grabosch did not work with vibrating tools.  He did not do any task in a repetitive 
manner according to Department of Labor standards as observed by Ms. Kruse.  Mr. 
Grabosch also indicated that any lifting described to Dr. Winston as repetitive was 
actually lifting done by a crane.  The only fact that Mr. Grabosch can point to in support 
of his argument that his injury arose out of and in the course of his employment with 
Arconic is that the symptoms of his carpal tunnel syndrome occurred and that he 
worked at Arconic for a time between his 2009 surgeries and a recurrence of his carpal 
tunnel syndrome.   
Dr. Shah opines that Mr. Grabosch’s carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by his 
employment.  After further review of the entire record, Dr. Winston disagrees.  In this 
case, Dr. Winston was in a better position than Dr. Shah to opine on this matter as Dr. 
Winston reviewed the medical reports, the report of Ms. Kruse, the video evidence, and 
visited Arconic.  I find Dr. Winston’s opinion more credible as it relates to causation.   
Based upon the foregoing evidence, I find that Mr. Grabosch failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that his carpal tunnel syndrome arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with Arconic.   
Considering the above finding, the claimant would not be entitled to 
compensation for permanent disability.  An analysis of causation of permanent disability 
and/or the extent of permanent disability are not necessary.   
Reimbursement for an IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.   
Iowa Code 85.39(2).   

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 11 
 
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify for 
reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008).   
 
Iowa Code 85.39 was amended in 2017.  Iowa Code 85.39(2) added: 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.   
Iowa Code 85.39(2) (2017).   
 
The claimant requests reimbursement for the IME of Dr. Shah.  Joint Exhibit E:55 
includes the invoice for Dr. Shah’s IME and report, which totals $2,850.00.  Prior to 
attending the IME with Dr. Shah, Mr. Grabosch attended an IME with Dr. Winston.  Dr. 
Winston did not provide an impairment rating.  The undersigned found that the 
claimant’s injury did not arise out of and in the course of employment.  This makes Mr. 
Grabosch’s injury not compensable.  Pursuant to Iowa Code 85.39(2), the claimant is 
not entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Shah’s IME.   
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa 
Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 

GRABOSCH V. ARCONIC, INC 
Page 12 
 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
I decline, in my discretion, to award costs in this matter.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The claimant shall take nothing further. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this ____4th____ day of March, 2021. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
James Hoffman (via WCES) 
Valerie Landis  (via WCES) 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
Joshua Duden (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
                ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
