Case Number: 23004619.01
Case Title:  GRIFFITH, TAMMY V. ECOLAB, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Griffith Tammy-23004619.01d 1.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TAMMY GRIFFITH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
       File No. 23004619.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
ECOLAB, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AIU INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                          Head Note No. 1108 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Tammy Griffith filed a petition for arbitration on April 5, 2023.  She seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Ecolab, Inc., employer, and AIU Insurance Company, 
insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Nicholas Shaull.  The defendants 
were represented by Bryan Brooks. 
The matter came on for hearing on May 28, 2024, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 10; and Defense Exhibits A through C.  The claimant 
testified at hearing.  Delayne M. Johnson served as the court reporter.  The matter was 
fully submitted on July 8, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant’s work injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability. 
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to healing period benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jan-31  16:57:40     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to permanency benefits, and, if so, the extent 
of industrial disability. 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 8 and 9. 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to IME reimbursement under Section 85.39. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on June 7, 2022. 
3. The weekly rate of compensation is $1,162.91 per week. 
4. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Tammy Jo Griffith was 53 years old as of the date of hearing.  She 
testified live and under oath during the video hearing.  I find her testimony to be highly 
credible.  She was an excellent witness.  Her answers were responsive and 
straightforward.  She is an excellent historian with a good memory.  She provided 
appropriate details.  Her answers matched with other credible evidence in the record.  
There was nothing about her demeanor which caused me to question her truthfulness.  
In fact, the opposite is true. 
Ms. Griffith and her husband have lived in Ames since 2015.  She has a 
Bachelor’s of Science in Chemistry from the South Dakota School of Mines and 
Technology and is certified by the American Chemical Society.  She began working for 
the employer, Ecolab, Inc., in 2016, as a sales engineer.  Her salary is approximately 
$100,000.00 per year, and she also earns a commission.  She testified her primary job 
duty is equipment inspections with a sales aspect.  Her job required significant travel, 
consulting with customers of the employer with minimal physical requirements although 
she is required to perform the inspection work, including walking, occasional crawling or 
climbing functions.  She would essentially inspect equipment and provide consultation.  
The record reflects that Ms. Griffith is an excellent employee.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A, 
pages 8-39) 
On June 7, 2022, Ms. Griffith sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment for Ecolab.  On that date, she was working in Creston, Iowa 
at Green Valley Chemical, a fertilizer company.  She drove a company vehicle on this 
trip and wore her steel-toed boots.  The details of the events that day are well 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 3 
 
documented and otherwise described in the record.  She was joined on this work trip by 
a fellow Ecolab employee named Preston Underwood who was a technical expert and 
essentially her functional supervisor.  The two of them met with Green Valley 
representatives who were customers.  They inspected the equipment while it was not in 
use.  Around noon, Ms. Griffith and Mr. Underwood went into Creston for lunch.  Ms. 
Griffith fell abruptly on the sidewalk hitting her arms and knee.  Apparently, her boot 
caught an uneven portion of the sidewalk pavement and tripped her up.  She 
photographed the area where she fell.  (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 24-26)  Much later, Mr. 
Underwood prepared a statement for Ecolab, providing a detailed report of the incident.  
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 35)  This statement is entirely consistent with Ms. Griffith’s report and her 
sworn testimony. 
After her fall, Ms. Griffith sat on the ground for a couple of minutes, attempting to 
gather herself.  (Tr., p. 21)  Mr. Underwood retrieved her phone for her and the two 
eventually proceeded to the restaurant for this business lunch paid for with an Ecolab 
credit card.  The restaurant provided some ice for her for her abrasions.  The same day, 
Ms. Griffith texted her husband regarding the accident and provided numerous details.  
These texts are in evidence and support her testimony.  (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 14-23)  Ms. 
Griffith testified credibly that her entire body hurt at this time.  (Tr., p. 22)  After lunch, 
they returned to Green Valley to complete their inspections.  The following day, Ms. 
Griffith called and notified her manager about the injury. 
In the following days, Mr. Underwood checked in on her a couple of times.  Ms. 
Griffith described a sprained ankle and difficulty walking.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p.30) 
The primary question in this case is not whether this incident occurred.  It 
undoubtedly did.  The defendants have stipulated to this fact and the evidence 
overwhelmingly supports that it occurred whether stipulated or not.  The question is 
whether this incident caused her medical problems in her neck and/or shoulder(s) which 
were documented after March 2023. 
Ms. Griffith did not seek any treatment immediately following this incident.  Her 
scrapes healed up well.  She testified that she did not seek immediate treatment.  She 
testified that she did have bilateral arm and hand numbness, as well as pain in her neck 
and shoulders.  (Tr., p. 26)  She testified that she had not had these symptoms prior to 
the accident.  (Tr., pp. 27, 29)  Instead of seeking medical attention, she testified that 
she hoped her aches and pains would resolve.  (Tr., p. 26)  She testified that her 
symptoms did not, and in fact, they worsened over the next 9 months or so.  (Tr., pp. 
26-27)  She responded to this by purchasing new pillows and a mattress, yoga, red light 
therapy and chiropractic visits.  (Tr., p. 27)  I did not locate any chiropractic notes in the 
record. 
The primary fact in the employer’s favor regarding medical causation is that Ms. 
Griffith did not seek immediate treatment for her neck, shoulders or arms until March 
2023.  Consequently her symptoms are not particularly well documented in the record 
outside of her testimony regarding her condition.  The defendants also argue 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 4 
 
strenuously that Ms. Griffith has a history of arthritis in her knees and hips.  Thus, a 
careful review of the evidence regarding her treatment is required. 
Ms. Griffith testified that in February 2023, she had returned to a visit at Green 
Valley to inspect equipment.  She attempted to climb a 20-foot ladder at this visit and 
testified she did not feel safe doing so due to lack of strength in her arms.  (Tr., pp. 27-
29)  She related this to her June 2022 fall.  On March 15, 2023, she wrote an email to 
her supervisor seeking guidance on how to proceed.  (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 30-31) 
I have gotten a lot more clarity of the situation over the last week and I 
want to talk about it more. 
Last summer I fell and after reporting to Alex Innis (my boss at the time) I 
didn’t report on Intelex since it happened off customer site.  I do not think 
that was the right thing to do in hindsight as it is causing me long term 
issues now. 
Background – 
 Me and Preston were meeting a customer for lunch and when 
walking to the restaurant, I fell onto the sidewalk. (6/8/2022)  
6/7/2022 [hand-written] 
 I became more aware of the situation when I was climbing a 
tank at Green Valley last month and I realized I didn’t have the 
grip I used to and that I felt unsafe climbing on the ladder.  
(2/14/2023) 
 I recently went to get assessed after Bob has been telling me to 
do it all year (I never took the time to do it and I thought it would 
get better and hasn’t) 
 Both arms to have weakness along with tingling and muscle 
atrophy 
 I called a doctor to get an appointment today and they will not 
see me if it is a work injury 
 I need to pursue this evaluation and unsure how to proceed 
except to report it at this time.  I tried to submit on Intelex, but it 
does not allow me to, it says to contact Medcor 
(Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 30-31) 
Her employer initially encouraged her to contact Broadspire to seek care at Mary 
Greeley Hospital in Ames.  On March 15, 2023, she did.  The following history is 
documented: 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Patient presents to emergency department for reports bilateral arm 
weakness and neck pain that has been going on since June of 2022.  
Patient had a ground level fall onto her left side.  Patient reports that her 
primary symptoms at the time was wrist pain and ___ did have this worked 
up with no acute findings per the chart review.  The patient reports that her 
arms have been intermittently falling asleep.  Patient explains that her arm 
weakness is bilateral and that she has noticed that when crawling up a 
ladder she does not feel as strong as she used to be.  Patient’s neck pain 
is relieved by doing different yoga positions.  She is overall concerned 
because her father was diagnosed with ALS in his 70’s and passed away 
with a year of diagnosis.  Patient does sit at a desk and drive a lot for her 
job.  She is not sure if her symptoms could be related to this. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2)  The emergency physician performed x-rays which showed degenerative 
changes but not acute fracture.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6)  The diagnosis at that time was bilateral 
arm weakness and neck pain. 
She followed up with Concentra on March 16, 2023.  The full medical note from 
this visit is not in evidence, however, a Work Activity Status Report is.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 7)  
She was diagnosed with cervical radicular pain and numbness and tingling of both 
upper extremities.  Common sense work restrictions were provided, and some physical 
therapy was authorized.  On March 23, 2023, she reported to Concentra for follow up.  
“Continues to have a sharp pain to bottom of neck.  Reports numbness and tingling into 
both arms as well as weakness.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10)  At that visit she reported that over-
the-counter medications were not working.  She continued to follow up with Concentra 
through April 4, 2023.  She testified that on that date she was informed that treatment 
was no longer authorized.  (Tr., p. 33)  Nothing about the claim being denied is 
documented in the medical note and there is no denial letter in evidence that I could 
locate. 
In any event, Ms. Griffith sought treatment on her own through the Iowa Clinic 
with Danney Drewry, D.O.  On April 5, 2023, Dr. Drewry documented the following 
history: 
Patient comes in today for evaluation of upper back pain that has been 
ongoing since June 2022.  She fell on a sidewalk at work.  She had been 
following with Worker’s Comp. but that is subsequently discontinued.  She 
feels that she has weakness in both arms and has paresthesias worsening 
at night.  She has some discomfort in the upper back that is oftentimes 
aggravated with movement such as driving. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 27)  Dr. Drewry examined her and referred her to the Spine Center for 
further evaluation.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 28) 
Ms. Griffith followed up a few days later, and a nurse practitioner with Dr. Drewry 
noted “Patient is having symptoms of cervical radiculopathy that has not improved with 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 6 
 
conservative management.  Her symptoms started after a fall at work.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 31)  
An MRI was ordered and performed on April 18, 2023.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 33)  She followed 
up with Dr. Drewry a few days later.  Dr. Drewry documented that there were no acute 
or chronic changes on the MRI.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 34)  An EMG had already been scheduled 
and Dr. Drewry recommended bilateral shoulder x-rays.  She continued to follow up with 
Dr. Drewry who took her off work on June 15, 2023.  “Unfortunately at this time due to 
her upper extremity numbness along with weakness she is not able to work.  Based 
upon the above information she would be a risk for dropping hazardous chemicals or 
possibly falling off of a ladder.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 51)  In August 2023, Dr. Drewry referred 
her to Iowa Ortho to see a spine specialist.  Around this time, she also had an MRI of 
the right shoulder which revealed a labral tear.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55) 
On August 7, 2023, Brett Rosenthal, M.D., examined Ms. Griffith.  He examined 
her and personally reviewed the MRI films.  He documented the following history: 
Reports that all of her symptoms began after a slip and fall at work 
in June 2022 in Creston Iowa at Green Valley chemical.  It took quite 
some time for the symptoms she was having to be correlated with possible 
radiating symptoms from her cervical spine.  She was started on 
medications and undergone multiple tests.  She is currently doing physical 
therapy and weekly chiropractic care.  She feels the chiropractor helps 
with some of the pain on the right side of her neck for a temporary amount 
of time.  Her arms and hands are frequently going numb.  In February 
2023 she was again at Green Valley chemical in Creston Iowa and noticed 
while trying to climb a ladder in a tank that her upper arms were weak and 
not strong enough to pull herself up. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 58)  After a full workup, Dr. Rosenthal “personally and independently” 
reviewed the MRI.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62)  He interpreted it differently than the Iowa Clinic.  
He diagnosed severe left C3-C4 and C5-C6 and severe right C4-C5 foraminal stenosis.  
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62) 
Tammy has bilateral upper extremity radicular symptoms in the setting of 
severe foraminal stenosis from C3-C4 to C5-C6.  At this time her condition 
has been refractory to conservative treatment including physical therapy, 
care prior to care, and medication management.  Given the weakness she 
is experiencing in her right deltoid on physical exam and functional 
weakness in her upper extremities I think surgical management is 
indicated at this time. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62)  Before surgery was scheduled she saw a shoulder specialist, Steven 
Aviles, M.D.  A shoulder MRI had already revealed a torn labrum.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68)  Dr. 
Aviles recommended she proceed with her neck treatment first.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 69)  It is 
noted that at her first visit for her shoulders, the provider documented that she denied 
any specific injury or trauma for her right shoulder pain.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68) 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 7 
 
On October 4, 2023, Dr. Rosenthal performed surgery.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 97)  Ms. 
Griffith was placed in a cervical collar and placed on significant medical restrictions.  (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 71)  The surgery was successful at relieving her radicular pain, although she 
continued to have “some residual paresthesia especially at night in her left more so than 
her right arm.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 71)  Ms. Griffith returned to work in November 2023, on 
light duty.  (Tr., pp. 45-46)  By February 2024, Dr. Rosenthal documented significant 
improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 75-76)  He placed her at maximum medical improvement 
for her neck on February 26, 2024.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 78; Cl. Ex. 2, p. 7)  He ultimately 
assigned a 27 percent whole person impairment rating for her condition.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
7) 
Following her recuperation from neck surgery, Ms. Griffith testified she felt her 
shoulder pain persisted or worsened.  (Tr., pp. 38-39)  She returned to Dr. Aviles who 
diagnosed a left shoulder labral tear.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 81)  Dr. Aviles performed left 
shoulder surgery on May 2, 2024.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 87)  She testified at hearing that she 
has been off work since the surgery and that the surgery seemed to be generally 
successful.  At the time of hearing, she was actively undergoing physical therapy and 
otherwise recovering in an active healing period.  (Tr., p. 41)  Ms. Griffith is clearly not at 
maximum medical improvement for her left shoulder at the time of hearing. 
Her treating surgeons, Dr. Rosenthal and Dr. Aviles, both signed causation 
opinions that her work injury is related to her conditions in her neck, cervical spine and 
shoulders.  On October 23, 2023, Dr. Rosenthal signed off on a detailed report wherein 
he opined “that this fall represented a substantial aggravating factor in her neck pain, 
bilateral upper extremity paresthesia, and her cervical stenosis symptomology.”  (Cl. Ex. 
2, p. 6)  On March 6, 2024, Dr. Rosenthal authored an additional opinion assigning a 27 
percent whole person impairment rating for this condition using the appropriate sections 
of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 8)  On April 19, 2024, Dr. Aviles signed 
off on a detailed description of his opinions where he agreed the work injury caused her 
need for bilateral shoulder treatment, including the recommended surgeries.  (Cl. Ex. 3, 
p. 10) 
In addition to all of the treatment records in evidence, Ms. Griffith was examined 
by Paul Conte, M.D., for an independent medical examination at her attorney’s 
direction.  Dr. Conte reviewed the facts and circumstances with Ms. Griffith, thoroughly 
examined her and reviewed her relevant medical file before providing expert medical 
opinions.  He also reviewed the photographs and messages which documented her 
work injury.  Dr. Conte opined: “Ms. Griffith suffered a permanent functional impairment 
to her neck resulting in foraminal stenosis and degenerative changes in her discs 
requiring discectomy and fusion on levels C3 to C6.”  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 41)  He specifically 
opined that the fall at work was a “substantial causal factor in the impairment.”  (Cl. Ex. 
5, p. 41)  He assigned a 27 percent whole person impairment using the appropriate 
provisions of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 42)  Regarding the shoulders, 
he diagnosed SLAP tears in both shoulders and opined these were causally related to 
her fall at work.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 42)  He opined that she still needed surgery.  He did not 
place her at maximum medical improvement for her shoulders.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 43) 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Ms. Griffith testified at hearing that she continues to be symptomatic, both in her 
neck, shoulders and arms.  (Tr., p. 45)  She has significant medical expenses, including 
out-of-pocket expenses.  (Tr., pp. 42-43; Cl. Ex. 9, p. 53)  Claimant’s Exhibit 8 is a 
Medical Subrogation Itemization documenting the bills her insurance carrier paid. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether Ms. Griffith has met her burden of proof 
that her work injury is a substantial cause of her disability. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Ms. Griffith has met her burden of 
proof.  This is based upon Dr. Conte’s expert opinion, the contemporaneous medical 
notes, including the opinions of the treating surgeons, and Ms. Griffith’s highly credible 
testimony. 
The defendants argue that Ms. Griffith has a history of arthritis and joint pain 
which has affected other body parts.  Defendants are highly suspicious of the fact that 
she did not seek treatment immediately following the accident, and, instead, waited 8-9 
months before seeking care using this fact to question her credibility. 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 9 
 
I have found Ms. Griffith to be highly credible.  In retrospect, I agree that it would 
have been wise to seek treatment earlier; however, her explanation is logical and 
rational.  She had symptoms which she tried to manage on her own.  It is evident that 
she was also not entirely certain that her condition resulted from the work injury as she 
discussed the possibility of ALS with her treatment providers.  Overall, though, her 
explanation was quite reasonable.  I also agree with defendants that Ms. Griffith had 
degenerative conditions in other parts of her body.  The record is clear though, that she 
had never sought treatment for either neck, shoulder or arm symptoms prior to her 
stipulated work injury.  There is no actual evidence suggesting any other cause for her 
conditions.  In all likelihood, her degenerative conditions could have made her more 
susceptible to serious injury from a fall such as the one she suffered on June 7, 2022. 
Since I have found that the medical conditions in her neck and shoulders are 
related to her stipulated work injury, the next issue is whether Ms. Griffith is entitled to 
healing period and or permanency benefits. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
The imposition of a rating of permanent impairment is equivalent to an opinion 
that further significant improvement from the injury is not expected. Absent a showing 
that further improvement was expected, healing period ends when a permanent rating is 
given. Brown v. Weitz Company, File No. 830840 (App. March 13, 1990); Miller v. 
Halletts Materials, File No. 861983 (App. November 23, 1992). The persistence of pain 
does not prevent a finding that the healing period is over, provided the underlying 
condition is stable. Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 1993). Medical 
stability is viewed in terms of industrial disability; if it is unlikely that further treatment of 
pain will decrease the extent of permanent industrial disability, continued pain 
management will not prolong healing period. Id. at 392.  Specifically, when a condition is 
stable medically further treatment “may extend the length of the healing period if a 
substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result.  Id. at 392.  On the 
other hand, if the continued treatment is merely expected to assist with the symptoms 
rather than “decrease the extent of permanent disability” then the healing period should 
end.  Id. 
I find that Ms. Griffith is entitled to healing period benefits from March 15, 2023, 
through November 14, 2023, and May 2, 2024, up through the date of hearing and 
continuing until such time there is a basis for termination under Section 85.34(1). 
Claimant’s counsel argues that since Ms. Griffith received an impairment rating 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 10 
 
for her neck, the permanent disability benefits for her neck should be paid 
simultaneously with her running award of healing period.   
Permanent partial disability benefits commence upon the termination of the 
healing period.  Iowa Code section 85.34(1).  As the Iowa Supreme Court explained, the 
healing period terminates and permanent partial disability benefits commence at the 
earliest of claimant’s return to work, medical ability to return to substantially similar 
employment, or the point at which the claimant achieves maximum medical 
improvement.  Evenson v. Winnebago Industries, Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 374 (Iowa 
2016). 
This case, however, is distinguishable from Evenson.  Ms. Griffith is in an active 
healing period at the time of hearing. This is not a situation where she was placed at 
MMI and benefits were started before additional treatment was recommended.  In this 
case, she has two separate work-related conditions.  She has been placed at MMI for 
one condition (her neck) and is under an active healing period for her left shoulder at 
the time of hearing.  In these circumstances, the elements of Section 85.34(1) have not 
been met.  At this time, the issue of permanency is not ripe for adjudication. 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
 
Ms. Griffith has proven she is entitled to the past medical expenses in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 8 and 9.  She is entitled to reimbursement for all out-of-pocket expenses.  She 
is entitled to ongoing medical treatment with her chosen treatment providers. 
The next issue is IME costs and other expenses. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 11 
 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
Iowa Code section 10A.328 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 12 
 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009). 
I find Ms. Griffith is entitled to costs, including IME expenses, in the amount of 
$6,620.95. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
This matter is bifurcated and only the issues addressed herein are final.  At such 
point in the future when either party contends that claimant has reached maximum 
medical improvement or other justiciable issues arise, said party may request a 
bifurcated hearing by motion on permanency, or any other disputed issue, without filing 
a new petition. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant healing period benefits from March 15, 2023, 
through November 14, 2023 and May 2, 2024, through the date of hearing and 
continuing until such time as the defendants have a basis to terminate benefits under 
Section 85.34(1), at the rate of one thousand one hundred sixty-two and 91/100 dollars 
($1,162.91) per week. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall pay the past medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibits 8 
and 9 consistent with this decision. 
Defendants shall authorize the ongoing treatment with claimant’s physicians. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of six thousand six hundred twenty 
and 95/100 dollars ($6,620.95). 
 
 
 

GRIFFITH V. ECOLAB, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Signed and filed this ____31st ___ day of January, 2025. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nicholas Shaull  
(via WCES) 
Bryan Brooks 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
