Case Number: 1652412.04
Case Title:  RIFE, MICHAEL V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Rife Michael-1652412.04D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL RIFE, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
File No. 1652412.04 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION 
SECOND INJURY FUND 
  : 
OF IOWA,  
  : 
 
 
  : 
        Head Note Nos. 3201, 3202 
 
Defendant. 
  :                    
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Michael Rife, filed a petition for arbitration against the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa. The hearing occurred before the undersigned on February 9, 2023. This 
case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. In the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. All of those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 6, and Defendant’s Exhibits AA through FF. Claimant testified on his own 
behalf. No other witnesses were called to testify. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on February 9, 2023. The case was considered 
fully submitted upon submission of post-hearing briefs on March 27, 2023. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether claimant has established a compensable claim against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa, including whether claimant has established a qualifying 
first injury to the right leg; 
 
2. If so, the extent of functional loss to the first qualifying injury; 
 
3. Whether claimant has established a qualifying second injury to the right 
shoulder; 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jul-05  14:12:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
4. If so, the extent of functional loss to the second qualifying injury;  
 
5. The commencement date of SIF benefits, if any are awarded; 
 
6. The extent of claimant's entitlement, if any, to benefits from the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa; and 
 
7. The extent of defendant SIF’s entitlement to a credit under Iowa Code section 
85.64. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Michael Rife, claimant, was 58 years old at the time of the evidentiary hearing. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 8) He did not graduate high school or sit for the General 
Education Development (GED) test. (Id.)  His formal education is limited to the eleventh 
grade. (Id.)  Claimant’s employment history largely consists of work as a welder for P.M. 
Lattner Manufacturing Company, where he worked from November 18, 2002, to July 24, 
2019. (See Ex. CC, p. 2)  He obtained his welding certificate from Kirkwood Community 
College in 2004. (Hr. Tr., pp. 8, 10; see Ex. 1, p. 4)   
 
On March 10, 2005, claimant suffered an injury to his right ankle when he fell off 
a barstool. (Hr. Tr., p. 10) According to claimant, he experienced an episode of atrial 
fibrillation and passed out while sitting on the barstool.  Unfortunately, his right foot was 
trapped in a rung of the barstool and the fall “snapped” his ankle. (Id.)   
 
David Hart, M.D. performed an open reduction and internal fixation of the medial 
malleolus, right ankle, and insertion of syndesmotic screw for a right ankle fracture on 
March 10, 2005. (JE3, p. 79; JE9, p. 183) On June 14, 2005, Dr. Hart removed the 
syndesmotic screw from claimant’s right ankle. (JE9, p. 182)  He then performed an 
arthroscopic chondroplasty of the right ankle with removal of hardware medial malleolus 
on August 30, 2005. (JE3, p. 75)   
 
On November 17, 2005, Dr. Hart diagnosed claimant with probable post-
traumatic osteoarthritis of the right ankle and referred him to Warren Verdeck, M.D. for a 
second opinion. (JE3, p. 74) 
 
Claimant presented to Dr. Verdeck on January 12, 2006. (JE3, p. 73) He 
complained of ongoing pain over the lateral side of his right ankle and difficulty with 
walking. (Id.)  After reviewing claimant’s diagnostic imaging, Dr. Verdeck ordered an MR 
scan of the right ankle area and recommended consideration of an Arizona-type AFO. 
(Id.) 
 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
The MR scan revealed findings suggestive of avascular necrosis of the distal 
tibia with some articular collapse and fracture of subchondral bone and probable 
avascular necrosis of the talar dome or stress reaction. (See JE3, p. 72) As a result of 
these findings, Dr. Verdeck had claimant fitted for an Arizona AFO. (JE3, p. 72) 
 
X-rays of the right ankle collected in April 2006 revealed collapse of the lateral 
half of the tibial plafond and cyst formation. (See JE3, p. 71) Dr. Verdeck considered the 
changes degenerative in nature and discussed possible surgical interventions with 
claimant, including a total ankle arthroplasty. (Id.) Dr. Verdeck then referred claimant to 
Hugh Macmenamin, M.D. for a second opinion. (Id.) 
 
Claimant presented for a consultation with Dr. Macmenamin on May 11, 2006. 
(JE3, pp. 69-70)  Dr. Macmenamin conducted a thorough evaluation of the claimant and 
diagnosed him with post-traumatic arthritis of the right ankle, accompanied by evidence 
of avascular necrosis (AVN) in the distal tibia. (JE3, p. 69)  Despite considering various 
options, Dr. Macmenamin advised against opting for a total ankle arthroplasty.  Instead, 
he suggested continuing with brace treatment for the time being while keeping the 
possibility of an ankle fusion as a potential option in the future. (Id.) 
 
When x-rays collected on February 6, 2007, revealed further collapse of the 
tibiotalar joint and further arthritic change, Dr. Verdeck referred claimant to Annunziato 
Amendola, M.D. (Id.) 
 
On February 22, 2007, Dr. Amendola evaluated the claimant and recommended 
an arthroscopy and anterior debridement as a potential solution to alleviate the 
claimant’s anterior impingement symptoms, which would potentially improve his ability 
to tolerate his Arizona brace. (JE8, p. 150)  Acting upon his recommendation, Dr. 
Amendola performed an arthroscopy and excised the anterior osteophytes on March 9, 
2007. (JE8, pp. 165-166) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Amendola on April 2, 2007, reporting that his anterior 
pain was almost entirely resolved. (JE8, p. 173) On May 7, 2007, claimant reported 
ongoing pain while bearing weight, although it was not as severe as before the surgery. 
(JE8, p. 176)  During the appointment, Dr. Amendola discussed the natural progression 
of claimant’s condition – characterized by “very severe osteoarthritis,” and explored 
potential treatment options, including the choice between total ankle replacement and 
tibiotalar fusion. (JE8, p. 177)   
 
Ultimately, Dr. Amendola released claimant back to work on July 2, 2007, noting 
he had a “poor ankle” that “would probably require an ankle arthrodesis.” (JE8, p. 180) 
 
As part of his case against the Fund, the claimant pursued an independent 
medical examination (IME) with Farid Manshadi, M.D. (Ex. 3) The examination took 
place on May 6, 2021. (Ex. 3, p. 23) Dr. Manshadi conducted a thorough medical 
records review and conducted a physical examination of claimant. (Id.) On examination, 
claimant demonstrated negative 6 degrees of dorsiflexion, 30 degrees of plantar flexion, 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
14 degrees of inversion, and 12 degrees of eversion. (Ex. 3, p. 24) Dr. Manshadi 
compared the range of motion in claimant’s right and left ankles. (See id.)  Utilizing the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition, Dr. Manshadi 
assigned nine percent right lower extremity impairment for claimant’s reduced extension 
and inversion. (Id.)   
 
Claimant continues to experience problems with his right ankle. He reports 
swelling and considerable pain when standing for prolonged periods. He further asserts 
there are instances where the pain in his ankle becomes so intense that walking 
becomes unbearable. (Hr. Tr., p. 12) In October 2018, claimant’s ongoing pain led him 
to request work restrictions from his primary care provider that allowed him to sit 30 
minutes of each hour. (JE7, pp. 136, 144)    
 
I find claimant has carried his burden of proving permanent disability to the right 
leg as a result of the March 10, 2005, injury. I further find claimant carried his burden of 
proving he sustained a first qualifying injury on March 10, 2005. 
 
In 2009, claimant suffered a work-related injury to his right shoulder. (See Hr. Tr., 
pp. 51-52)  Fred Pilcher, M.D. performed a manipulation arthroscopy of the 
glenohumeral joint with minimal debridement of the subscapularis and supraspinatus, 
and an arthroscopic subacromial decompression on March 29, 2009. (Id. see JE3, p. 
62)  Sunny Kim, M.D. assessed claimant with 15 percent right upper extremity 
impairment, or 9 percent of the whole person, based on his loss of range of motion. (Ex. 
5, p. 39)  Claimant returned to work for P.M. Lattner following a period of recovery. 
 
On August 6, 2018, claimant suffered another work-related injury to the right 
shoulder. (JE3, p. 67)  While moving a blow-down separator, claimant heard a “pop” 
and felt a sharp pain in his right shoulder. (See id.)  For reference, a blow-down 
separator is a large steel pipe that apparently requires a significant amount of welding to 
ensure it will not leak.  At hearing, claimant testified that the pain started in the shoulder 
and eventually worked down towards the elbow. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19) 
 
An August 17, 2018 MRI of the right shoulder revealed moderate superior rotator 
cuff tendinopathy without evidence of a partial or full-thickness tear and mild 
acromioclavicular joint degeneration. (JE5, p. 111) 
 
Matthew White, M.D. of Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa evaluated claimant on October 
23, 2018. (JE3, p. 67)  Dr. White reviewed claimant’s diagnostic imaging and diagnosed 
adhesive capsulitis. (JE3, p. 68)  When conservative care failed to alleviate claimant’s 
pain, Dr. White recommended and performed an extensive debridement of the labrum 
and rotator cuff, along with capsular release, and a subacromial decompression. (JE1, 
pp. 22-24) The surgery occurred on June 13, 2019. (JE1, p. 22) Following surgery, 
claimant participated in several months of physical therapy. (JE4, pp. 80-110) 
 
Claimant produced a letter to Dr. White on August 24, 2020. (Ex. 4, p. 26) In the 
letter, claimant provided several pre-written opinions to Dr. White and asked him to 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
“Agree” or “Disagree” with each. (Ex. 4, pp. 26-29) Dr. White responded to the letter on 
September 1, 2020. (Ex. 4, p. 29)  In the response, Dr. White agreed with the 
statement, “The injury I treated is confined to the glenohumeral joint.” (Id.) Dr. White did 
not issue an impairment rating; however, he opined that he would expect some level of 
impairment to remain following the procedures he performed on June 13, 2019. (Ex. 4, 
p. 28)   
 
Daryl Short, DPT administered a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) with 
claimant on February 29, 2020. (Ex. 2) Mr. Short determined that claimant gave 
consistent effort throughout the evaluation. (Ex. 2, p. 16)  Claimant demonstrated 
significant limitations with elevated work, reaching, stairs, lifting waist to/from floor up to 
20 pounds, lifting waist to/from crown up to 5 pounds, and front carry up to 10 pounds 
up to 50 feet. (Ex. 2, p. 17) Mr. Short opined that due to claimant’s decreased range of 
motion, strength, and endurance of his right ankle, he does not meet the capabilities of 
the sedentary category of physical demand. (Ex. 2, p. 18) Mr. Short recommended 
claimant limit material and non-material handling activities between shoulder and crown 
level to a rare basis and no overhead lifting with the right shoulder. (Id.)   
 
Claimant sought a second independent medical examination (IME) with Dr. Kim 
on July 24, 2020. (Ex. 5)  Dr. Kim explained that claimant’s injury was confined to the 
glenohumeral joint and its supporting tissue, including the capsule and rotator cuff. (Ex. 
5, p. 34)  Dr. Kim opined that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) 
on June 13, 2020. (Ex. 5, p. 35)  He assessed claimant with 19 percent right upper 
extremity impairment, or 11 percent of the whole person, based on his loss of range of 
motion in the right shoulder. (Id.)  In terms of restrictions, Dr. Kim recommended 
claimant avoid lifting more than 20 pounds with his right arm, and no pushing or pulling 
over 50 pounds. (Id.) 
 
In an arbitration decision, filed on August 20, 2021, the undersigned found 
claimant sustained an injury to his right shoulder that did not extend into the body as a 
whole. The undersigned accepted the expert opinions of Dr. Kim and found claimant 
suffered 19 percent functional impairment to his right shoulder as a result of the August 
6, 2018 work injury. Rife v. P.M. Lattner Mfg. Co., File No. 1652412.02 (Arb. August 20, 
2021) Although the defendant employer appealed the arbitration decision, they did not 
appeal the above findings of fact. 
 
In the matter at hand, claimant is seeking benefits under the Second Injury 
Compensation Act. Claimant asserts the August 6, 2018 work injury resulted in a loss of 
use of his right arm and qualifies as a second loss. The Fund asserts claimant suffered 
an injury to the right shoulder and, as such, the August 6, 2018, injury does not qualify 
as a compensable loss. 
  
In support of his argument, claimant obtained an updated opinion from Dr. Kim. 
(See Ex. 5, pp. 31-32) In a letter dated September 9, 2022, claimant’s counsel asked 
Dr. Kim to address whether the August 6, 2018, work injury caused a “loss of use” of 
claimant’s right arm. (Ex. 5, p. 32) Dr. Kim responded to the letter on September 13, 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
2022. (Ex. 5, p. 31) According to Dr. Kim, the August 6, 2018 work injury caused a loss 
of use of claimant’s right arm. He explained: 
 
The reason for this is that chronic residual pain and loss of ROM impairs 
the ability of the R shoulder to support the R arm.  Without a sound basis of 
support, the R arm is unable to function optimally. Furthermore, chronic 
residual pain results in reflex inhibition of muscle groups above and below 
the level of injury. This is a natural protective reflex designed to prevent 
further injury. 
 
(Ex. 5, p. 31)  Dr. Kim did not assign any permanent impairment to the right arm. 
(See Ex. 5, pp. 31, 34-35) 
 
Claimant also introduced a vocational report from Barbara Laughlin. (Ex. 1)  Ms. 
Laughlin opined that claimant lost 99.7 to 100.00 percent of his access to the labor 
market using the restrictions outlined in Mr. Short’s FCE report. (Ex. 1, p. 9)  She further 
opined that claimant lost 99.4 to 100.00 percent of his access to the labor market using 
the restrictions at the light exertional level outlined by Dr. Kim. (Ex. 1, pp. 9-10)  Lastly, 
she opined that claimant lost 99.1 to 100.00 percent of his access to the labor market 
using the restrictions at the medium exertional level outlined by Dr. Kim. (Ex. 1, p. 10)   
 
I perceive no glaring errors in Ms. Laughlin's report. Ms. Laughlin appears to 
have gathered the applicable facts and her vocational analysis appears sound and 
reasonable. Defendant offered no competing vocational opinion and offered no specific 
bases of error in Ms. Laughlin's analysis. 
 
The central dispute in this case is whether claimant’s right shoulder injury, which 
affects his right arm, is a qualifying second injury for the purpose of Fund liability.  There 
is no evidence that claimant sustained a distinct permanent loss or loss of use of the 
right arm.  No expert, including Dr. Kim, assigned permanent impairment to the right 
arm.  Instead, the evidentiary record shows claimant’s second injury was confined to the 
right shoulder, an unenumerated part of the body.  Therefore, I find it more likely than 
not that the August 6, 2018, work injury caused permanent disability to the shoulder and 
merely affected the right arm.  For reasons that will be discussed in the Conclusions of 
Law section, I further find claimant failed to carry his burden of proving a second 
qualifying injury for purposes of Second Injury Fund liability.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
On December 29, 2021, Rife filed a petition seeking benefits from the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa alleging an injury to his “right leg” on March 10, 2005, and a second 
injury to his “right upper extremity” which occurred while he was employed with P.M. 
Lattner on August 6, 2018.  Rife did not name P.M. Lattner as a party in the current 
legal action. 
 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
Iowa's version of a second injury fund is found in Iowa Code sections 85.63 through 
85.69. The heart of the statutory scheme is found in section 85.64(1), which states: 
 
If an employee who has previously lost, or lost the use of, one hand, one 
arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye, becomes permanently disabled by a 
compensable injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss of use of 
another such member or organ, the employer shall be liable only for the 
degree of disability which would have resulted from the latter injury if there 
had been no pre-existing disability. In addition to such compensation, and 
after the expiration of the full period provided by law for the payments 
thereof by the employer, the employee shall be paid out of the “Second 
Injury Fund” created by this division the remainder of such compensation 
as would be payable for the degree of permanent disability involved after 
first deducting from such remainder the compensable value of the 
previously lost member or organ. 
 
Before the Fund’s liability is triggered, three requirements must be met. First, the 
employee must have lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye. Second, the 
employee must sustain a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ 
through a compensable injury. Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the 
initial injury and the second injury. 
 
Other than the express requirement that the second loss be the result of 
permanent disability caused “by a compensable injury,” the text of section 85.64(1) 
provides no basis from which to create different standards for what constitutes a 
qualifying loss to an enumerated body part based on whether it happened first or 
second in time. See Iowa Code section 85.64(1). Moreover, the Iowa Supreme Court 
held it would be “senselessly inconsistent” to apply different standards based on the 
order of occurrence. Gregory v. Second Injury Fund, 777 N.W.2d 395, 400 (Iowa 2010). 
Therefore, the case law delineating the contours of what constitutes a qualifying loss 
under the statute is generally applicable regardless of when such a loss took place. See 
Id. 
 
The initial dispute mentioned in the Hearing Report is whether Rife has proven a 
qualifying first injury.  Rife experienced an injury to his right ankle when he fell off a 
barstool in 2005.  Despite undergoing multiple surgeries, claimant continues to have 
problems with his right ankle.  The evidence indicates it is more likely than not that 
claimant sustained an injury to his right ankle that caused permanent impairment.  Rife’s 
testimony regarding the injury is accepted as accurate, and it is concluded that Rife has 
met the burden of proving a qualifying first injury on March 10, 2005.   
The main issue in this case is whether claimant’s right shoulder injury, which 
affects his right arm, is a qualifying second injury for the purpose of Fund liability.   
As an initial matter, I note the Iowa legislature enacted significant amendments to 
the Iowa workers' compensation laws, which took effect in July 2017. As part of those 
amendments, the legislature specified that injuries to the shoulder should be 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
compensated as scheduled member injuries on a 400-week schedule. Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n) (2017).  Of particular relevance to this case, the legislature did not 
add the shoulder to the list of enumerated scheduled member injuries under Iowa Code 
section 85.64(1). 
Claimant asserts that the legislature did not amend Iowa Code section 85.64 to 
include the term “shoulder” because it knew an injury to the shoulder producing loss of 
use to the arm could qualify for Fund benefits under established legal precedent. I do 
not find claimant’s argument persuasive as it ignores the recent legislative history of 
Iowa Code section 85.64.  In 2017, the legislature considered but failed to adopt a 
proposed amendment to Iowa Code section 85.64, which would have added the 
shoulder as a Fund-eligible injury. See id.; 2017 IA HF518, 87th General Assembly. On 
February 16, 2022, a bill was again introduced in the Senate seeking to amend Iowa 
Code section 85.64 to add the loss, or loss of use of, a shoulder as a compensable 
injury for Second Injury Fund benefits. 2022 IA SF2363, 89th General Assembly. There 
would be no need to reintroduce this proposal as recently as February 16, 2022 if the 
legislature already intended to include the shoulder as a Fund-eligible injury. 
 
Because a shoulder injury is not one of the enumerated scheduled member 
injuries listed in Iowa Code section 85.64 – which triggers entitlement to benefits from 
the Fund – claimant cannot recover any benefits from the Fund based solely on his 
injury to the shoulder. West v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, File No. 20001935.01 (App. 
Dec. April 21, 2022) 
 
Alternatively, claimant contends he sustained a loss of use to the right arm as a 
result of the August 6, 2018 right shoulder injury, which entitles him to Second Injury 
Fund benefits.  He relies on a single opinion from Dr. Kim, which provides the August 6, 
2018, work injury caused a loss of use of the right arm because the shoulder injury 
impaired the ability of the right shoulder to support the right arm. (Ex. 5, p. 31)  Both 
parties cite case law to support their positions. 
 
In 1995, the Iowa Supreme Court addressed a similar situation in Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  In Nelson, the claimant 
sustained a first qualifying injury to his leg in 1963. Years later, he sustained an injury to 
his shoulder that impaired the functionality of his arm.  The workers’ compensation 
commissioner concluded the Fund was liable for claimant’s cumulative industrial 
disability because the shoulder injury affected claimant’s arm and “an injury which 
affects a scheduled member is all that is necessary.” Id. at 264.  The Iowa Supreme 
Court specifically rejected the commissioner’s interpretation that an injury that “merely 
affects a[n enumerated] scheduled member is enough to qualify as an injury that 
triggers the Fund’s liability. Id. at 269; see Blake v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 967 
N.W.2d 221 (Iowa Ct. App. 2021)  The Court further explained that Iowa Code section  
 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
85.64 requires two scheduled member injuries listed in the Iowa Second Injury 
Compensation Act to invoke Fund liability.1 
 
To mitigate the impact Nelson has on his claim, claimant attempts to distinguish 
the case by arguing that the main issue in Nelson was “whether an unscheduled injury 
can trigger Second Injury Fund Liability” rather than whether a shoulder injury can 
qualify for Fund benefits.  Additionally, Rife asserts that Nelson stands for the 
proposition that an injury to a body part that solely results in unscheduled disability 
cannot be a Fund injury. (Claimant’s Brief, p. 5)  However, since subsequent decisions 
support the finding that the outcome in Nelson was not solely dependent on the 
unscheduled status of the shoulder, I find this distinction unpersuasive.   
 
One year after Nelson, the Iowa Supreme Court revisited section 85.64 in 
Stumpff v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 543 N.W.2d 904 (Iowa 1996).  In Stumpff, the 
claimant suffered a severe fracture at the distal aspect of the proximal phalanx in his 
right index finger and received benefits for a seventy-three percent loss to his finger. 
Stumpff, 543 N.W.2d at 905.  Following fractures to his wrists thirteen years later, the 
claimant sought benefits from the Fund. Id. at 905.  The deputy commissioner found 
there was no independent disability of the hand arising from the injury to the index 
finger. Consequently, the deputy commissioner determined the loss of use of claimant’s 
index finger failed to trigger the Fund's liability.  The Iowa Supreme Court agreed with 
the agency that an injury to a finger (an unenumerated member) that also affected the 
hand (an enumerated member) did not constitute a qualifying injury under section 
85.64. Stumpff, 543 N.W.2d 904, 906 (Iowa 1996).  The Court reasoned that because 
Iowa Code section 85.34 explicitly identifies finger injuries and hand injuries as separate 
scheduled member injuries, the legislature’s specific inclusion of “hand” in Iowa Code 
section 85.64 indicates its intention to exclude finger injuries from qualifying under that 
provision.  The Court provided, 
The Iowa legislature chose to allow a hand injury to qualify as a first injury 
against the Fund but not allow an injury to a finger to qualify. See Harry W. 
Dahl, The Iowa Second Injury Fund-Time for Change, 39 Drake L.Rev. 
101, 119 (1989-1990) (“The first loss must be to one scheduled part 
named in the Iowa Act, that is, one arm, one hand, one foot, one leg, or 
one eye.”). We think the industrial commissioner has correctly allowed 
recovery for a hand injury when the site of the injury is at the point where 
the bones of the finger connect to the bones of the hand (phalangeal-
metacarpal joint), Vogel v. Second Injury Fund, File No. 925720, p. 2 
(App. Decision April 30, 1993), and also has correctly denied benefits 
where only the finger was injured, Clester v. Second Injury Fund, File No. 
                                                 
1 In concluding section 85.64 requires two scheduled injuries to invoke Fund liability, the Court cited to a law review 
note, “observing that Iowa's second injury fund law provides “narrow coverage” because it does not cover all types 
of preexisting impairments, that Iowa's law “limit[s] coverage to specific ‘schedule’ losses” and that both the first 
and second injuries must “be to a scheduled part named in the Iowa Act[.]”  In the law review note, the term “Iowa 
Act” refers to the Iowa Second Injury Compensation Act. 
 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
990938, p. 3 (Arb. Decision February 2, 1994). This interpretation is 
consistent with the clear language of the statute and our prior cases. 
Id. at 906-07.   
 
Rife makes an incorrect assertion, relying on the above paragraph, that Stumpff 
stands for the proposition that disabilities to the joint connecting an enumerated 
member to an unenumerated scheduled member qualify for Fund benefits when a loss 
of use of an enumerated member occurs.  The issue of whether disabilities to the joint 
connecting an enumerated member to an unenumerated scheduled member qualify for 
Fund benefits when a loss of use of an enumerated member occurs was not before the 
Court.  The statement claimant relies on from Stumpff is considered dicta and does not 
constitute binding precedent.   
The Stumpff court also revisited its holding in Nelson, providing, 
In the recent case of Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, --- N.W.2d ---- (Iowa 
1995), the claimant suffered a nonscheduled shoulder injury. He 
suggested the injury to his shoulder was also an injury to his arm. We 
rejected the suggestion that a shoulder injury that affects the arm is 
sufficient to make the Fund liable. . . Likewise, we reject Stumpff's 
argument that the injury to his finger should be treated as a loss or loss of 
use of his hand thus qualifying as a first injury for the purpose of Fund 
liability. 
 
Stumpff, 543 N.W.2d at 907.  In doing so, the Court made it clear that Stumpff and 
Nelson both stand for the proposition that an injury to a member not listed in section 
85.64(1) that merely affects “to some extent” a listed member does not constitute a 
qualifying loss for the purpose of Fund liability. Stumpff, 543 N.W.2d at 906.    
 
Citing Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Gregory, 777 N.W.2d 395 (2010), Rife next 
asserts that disabilities producing permanent impairment to enumerated members 
qualify for Fund benefits regardless of whether an unenumerated part of the body is 
involved.  However, the argument presented by claimant is incomplete.  The Iowa 
Supreme Court has made it clear that for such a scenario, the injury to the enumerated 
member must also lead to a distinct permanent loss or loss of use of that specific 
enumerated member in order to be eligible for compensation under the Second Injury 
Compensation Act. See Gregory, 777 N.W.2d at 400-01; see also George, 737 N.W.2d 
at 146-47. 
 
 
In George, the injured worker sustained an injury to her left leg in 1996. Id. at 
144. In 2000, the worker sustained another work-related injury that caused disability to 
both of her legs. Id. The Fund contended George's 2000 right leg injury was not a 
qualifying second injury because her left leg was also injured in the same incident. Id. at 
145. Affirming the commissioner's determination that the bilateral nature of the 2000 
injury did not preclude its qualification as a second injury under section 85.64, the Iowa 
Supreme Court interpreted the phrase “loss of or loss of use of another such member” 
to mean a subsequent loss to another enumerated member notwithstanding more than 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
one enumerated member was disabled as a consequence of the same incident. Id. at 
147.  Three years later, the holding in George was reaffirmed in Gregory v. Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 396 (Iowa 2010). 
 
In Gregory, the claimant sustained a left hand injury in 2000.  She simultaneously 
sustained bilateral shoulder injuries and filed a workers’ compensation claim for all three 
conditions.  Given that shoulder injuries were involved, the work injury was considered 
industrial and the case was settled.  Two years later, the claimant sustained an injury to 
her right foot.  She subsequently filed a workers’ compensation claim against the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  The claimant argued that, although she sustained other 
“unscheduled” injuries because of the 2000 injury, she clearly also sustained a 
qualifying injury to her left hand for the purpose of generating a Fund claim.  The Iowa 
Supreme Court held that Gregory's left hand injury in 2000 was a first qualifying injury.  
The Court held, “The fact that Gregory combined in a single workers' compensation 
proceeding her claim for that scheduled loss with other scheduled and unscheduled 
injuries did not disqualify it as a first qualifying injury under section 85.64.” Id. at 401.  
The Court went on to explain that its determination respects the General Assembly’s 
choice of a comparatively narrow statute.  The Court provided, “The 2000 injury to 
Gregory’s left hand qualifies as a first injury only because it was situated in an 
enumerated member and was not confined to an unenumerated part of her body.” Id. at 
401. 
 
Read together, these cases establish that a permanent injury to an enumerated 
member constitutes a qualifying injury even though the injury also causes impairment to 
another enumerated or unenumerated member. See George 737 N.W.2d 141 (Iowa 
2007); Gregory, 777 N.W.2d 395 (Iowa 2010)  In the matter at hand, we have the 
opposite situation – Rife has an impairment to an unenumerated member that he 
asserts causes impairment to an enumerated, scheduled member.  This factual 
difference distinguishes George and Gregory and makes their holdings inapplicable to 
this case. 
 
Moreover, the injured workers in George and Gregory underwent separate 
surgeries, received separate impairment ratings, and were assigned separate 
restrictions for each specific injury.  In comparison, the undersigned previously found 
that claimant’s 2018 injury was confined to the right shoulder.  Rife did not sustain an 
injury to his right arm that can stand alone as a scheduled injury.  His right arm was not 
injured in such a manner that he sustained trauma that is separately ratable or for which 
restrictions can be provided; rather, he sustained only an unenumerated, right shoulder 
injury.  He underwent surgery, received impairment ratings, and received permanent 
restrictions solely for his right shoulder.  No expert, including Dr. Kim, assigned 
permanent impairment to the right arm. Instead, Dr. Kim opined the August 6, 2018, 
work injury caused a loss of use of the right arm because the shoulder injury impaired 
the ability of the right shoulder to support the right arm. (Ex. 5, p. 31)  Therefore, I found 
it is more likely than not the injury caused permanent disability to the shoulder and 
merely affected the arm.   

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
Additionally, Rife did not establish P.M. Lattner's legal liability for permanent 
impairment to his right arm from the August 8, 2018, date of injury, which is a condition 
precedent to qualifying for Fund benefits under section 85.64.   
  
The employer's liability for a right arm injury must be established directly against 
the employer and not collaterally in an action against the Fund only, because the 
employer is an actual party in interest and the employer is in a better position than the 
Fund to make an early and full investigation of the employee's claimed work injury. 
Eaton v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 723 N.W.2d 452 (Iowa Ct. App. 2006)  Allowing 
the claimant to determine P.M. Lattner’s liability for a right arm injury in an action filed 
and tried against a completely different party would raise questions of substantial 
fairness and due process.   
  
Had Rife successfully brought a right arm claim against P.M. Lattner, the 
combined injuries to the right shoulder and arm would have been compensable under 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  Anderson v. Bridgestone Americas, Inc., File No. 
5067475 (Arb. Jan. 25, 2022)  In such a situation, P.M. Lattner, not the Fund, would be 
liable for the claimant’s industrial disability. 
 
Ultimately, I reject claimant’s argument that the injury to his shoulder should be 
treated as a loss, or loss of use of his arm, thus qualifying as a second injury for the 
purpose of Fund liability. The correct application of the law would preclude a finding that 
the injury to the shoulder, which “merely affects” his arm, is a qualifying injury triggering 
entitlement to Fund benefits. As Rife failed to prove he sustained a second qualifying 
injury, he has not met his burden to establish the Fund’s liability. 
 
Having determined claimant failed to prove a second qualifying injury, I find the 
remaining issues are moot. Mr. Rife is not entitled to an award of benefits in this case. 
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant shall take nothing from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
 
 
 
The parties shall each bear their own costs.   
 
Signed and filed this    5th     day of July, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

RIFE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Anthony Olson (via WCES) 
Jennifer Beckman (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed 
via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
