Case Number: 21009040.01
Case Title:  GRAYBILL, TIMOTHY V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Graybill Timothy-21009040.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TIMOTHY GRAYBILL,   
  : 
 
 
  : 
          File No.   21009040.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP,     : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IMT INSURANCE,    
  : 
 
 
  : 
     Head Notes:  1402.40, 1803.1 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Timothy Graybill filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Murphy Construction Group, the employer, and IMT 
Insurance, the insurance carrier, for a stipulated work injury date of November 30, 2020. 
The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on September 27, 
2024. The case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all participants 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through C.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. His wife, Jeanne Graybill, also testified. 
George Murphy testified on behalf of defendants. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on September 27, 2024. The parties submitted 
post-hearing briefs on November 15, 2024, and the case was considered fully submitted 
on that date. 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-09  12:13:12     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  2 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
The nature and extent of claimant’s permanent disability; 
2. 
If permanent disability benefits are awarded, the commencement date for 
same; and 
3. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 67-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
8) He is a high school graduate, and does not have any additional education. (Tr., pp. 8-
9) He was married at the time of hearing, but was not married on the date of injury. 
(Defendants’ Exhibit C, p. 15; Deposition Transcript, p. 9) He does not have any 
children of his own, but through his wife’s children he has eight grandchildren. (Def. Ex. 
C, p. 15; Depo. Tr., p. 12) 
 
Claimant’s employment history is primarily in the trucking and construction 
industries. (Def. Ex. C, p. 16; Depo. Tr., p. 13) He worked as an over-the-road truck 
driver until approximately 2000. (Def. Ex. C, p. 16; Depo. Tr., p. 14) After that, he began 
working in construction, primarily as a carpenter. He started working for Murphy 
Construction in approximately 2017, and worked there for about six years. (Tr., pp. 9-
10) His job title was carpenter/labor, and he testified that he mainly did carpentry work, 
but also some general labor. (Tr., p. 10) 
 
On November 30, 2020, claimant was working on a house in Wisconsin that had 
recently had a fire. He was in the basket of a lift working on rafter tails, and at some 
point accidentally hit his head on one of the rafter tails behind him. (Tr., p. 11) This 
knocked him unconscious, and he fell out of the basket on the lift onto the frozen ground 
below. (Tr., pp. 11-12) He estimated that he fell about 16 feet. (Tr., p. 12) 
 
Claimant was taken by ambulance to Finley Hospital. Emergency room records 
indicate he complained of right shoulder pain, right chest pain, upper back pain, and 
right leg pain. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) He did not remember hitting the ground, but was 
unsure if he lost consciousness. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 15, and his 
mental status was at baseline as he was alert and oriented to person, place, and time. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 3-4) After testing and examination, claimant was diagnosed with subdural 
hematoma, closed fracture of the sternum, and closed fracture of multiple ribs on the 
right side. Due to the subdural hematoma, claimant was transferred via life-flight to 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  3 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) Once at UIHC, claimant 
was also noted to have a small pneumothorax. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 43)  
 
Claimant saw Satoshi Yamaguchi, M.D., at UIHC. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 47) His initial 
record notes that claimant complained of headache, right shoulder pain, and right sided 
chest pain immediately after the fall. He noted claimant had a T6 endplate fracture, in 
addition to the other injuries noted above. Additional imaging was performed, and Dr. 
Yamaguchi determined the subdural hematoma was stable, claimant was neurologically 
intact, and his cervical spine had been cleared. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 48) However, claimant was 
admitted to the intensive care unit for close neurologic monitoring. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 49) 
 
On December 2, 2020, claimant was deemed stable for transfer out of intensive 
care. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 113) On December 3, 2020, he was medically ready for discharge 
home with intermittent assistance. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 114) His significant other was able to 
provide the assistance.  
 
On December 14, 2020, claimant presented to the emergency room for 
headaches. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 19-20) He described intermittent, pulsating headaches daily, 
currently at a pain level of 7 out of 10. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 20) A repeat head CT showed no 
significant changes in the hematoma, and claimant was discharged. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 22-
24)  
 
Claimant returned to UIHC on December 17, 2020, and saw Timothy Neuzil, PA-
C, for follow up of his pneumothorax. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 129) Claimant reported continued 
pain mostly in his right anterior chest and right shoulder. He also noted occasional 
dizziness when standing. Repeat chest x-ray showed small bilateral effusions, and PA 
Neuzil recommended at least four more weeks of aggressive incentive spirometry. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 132) 
 
Claimant next returned to UIHC on December 22, 2020, and saw Dr. Yamaguchi 
for follow up of his subdural hematoma and thoracic endplate fracture. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 141) 
He reported ongoing headaches and said Tylenol alone was not helpful. He also 
reported slight weakness in his arms, but said he was starting physical therapy the next 
week and thought that might help. After another head CT and examination of claimant, 
Dr. Yamaguchi noted the subdural hematoma was “evolving as one would expect at this 
timeframe.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 143) The hematoma remained stable, but was not yet resolved 
so he wanted another head CT in two months. With respect to the headaches, Dr. 
Yamaguichi noted that posttraumatic headaches usually resolve over time, and there is 
no good solution other than healing over time. He did not have any specific work 
restrictions from a neurosurgical perspective, although he noted other care providers 
might. He released claimant to return to work beginning with light duty and advancing as 
tolerated from a neurosurgery perspective, but again noted he would need to be cleared 
from all other treating providers as well.  
 
Claimant was referred by the workers’ compensation insurer to Erin Kennedy, 
M.D., for continuing management of his work injuries. His first appointment with Dr. 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  4 
Kennedy was January 11, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 153) She noted his injuries from the fall 
included subdural hematoma, multiple rib fractures, sternum fracture, and T6 endplate 
fracture. She noted the subdural hematoma was stable and claimant did not develop 
neurologic deficits, but reported chronic bitemporal headache. With respect to the 
pneumothorax, Dr. Kennedy noted there was initially concern, but it is not mentioned in 
later reports. He was continuing the incentive spirometer for lung contusion with 
atelectasis. She also noted he was attending physical therapy.  
 
At the time of his initial visit with Dr. Kennedy, claimant reported pain at the 
interior chest, made worse with coughing, laughing, and sneezing, as well as moving his 
arms to reach. He reported midback pain over the spine, especially when standing or 
being in the same position for a long time. His greatest complaint was pain in the right 
shoulder. He rated that pain at a level 8 out of 10, and said he was not sure if he landed 
on it when he fell because he did not recall the incident. He also reported right elbow 
pain. With respect to the head injury, he reported generally feeling well, and denied any 
cognitive changes such as memory, concentration, and mood. He denied altered 
balance. His only symptom at that time was headache, less than daily, and easily 
resolved with Tylenol.  
 
After physical examination, Dr. Kennedy ordered an MRI of the right shoulder out 
of concern for a rotator cuff tear. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 154) She also ordered an x-ray of the right 
elbow to check for fracture. She noted the subdural hematoma was healing routinely 
with no evidence of deficits, but complicated by headache. The sternum fracture and rib 
fractures were healing routinely. She assigned restrictions due to the pending MRI of 
the right shoulder, and advised claimant to contact her if his symptoms worsened. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, pp. 154-155) 
 
Claimant’s right shoulder MRI took place on January 15, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 158) 
It showed findings consistent with AC joint separation and torn AC joint capsule, as well 
as irregularity of the acromion at the AC joint most consistent with a small avulsion 
fracture. It also showed shallow partial-thickness articular-sided tearing of the anterior 
fibers of the supraspinatus. He was referred to Schott Schemmel, M.D., who opined 
claimant had frozen shoulder and AC joint pain, and performed an AC joint injection on 
February 2, 2021. Dr. Schemmel then referred claimant back to Dr. Kennedy for 
continued conservative management. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Yamaguchi for follow up on February 23, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 148) He noted claimant had returned to work on light duty, and noticed pain in his 
mid-upper back when he worked a full day. He also reported some chest pain 
associated with the chest trauma. He reported no other concerns, including no 
headaches, and was doing well. Dr. Yamaguchi reviewed claimant’s head CT, and 
noted the previous subdural hematoma was resolved, and there was no evidence of 
intracranial injury at that time. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 150) He noted claimant’s upper-mid back 
pain was consistent with his known T6 fracture, and opined it would likely take six 
months or so to stabilize or resolve. He released claimant to activity as tolerated, and 
follow up with neurosurgery on an as-needed basis. 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  5 
 
Claimant continued with physical therapy and had regular follow up visits with Dr. 
Kennedy. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pp. 3-4) At his follow up with Dr. Kennedy on April 9, 
2021, he reported his chest and back being sore every night after work. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
158) He reported steady improvement in chest/sternum pain over time, but noted it 
usually occurred toward the end of the day and was worsened by moving his arms or 
reaching over the course of the day. With respect to his midback, he reported it 
bothering him when he stood for a long time or was in the same position for a long time. 
It was better if he moved and changed positions frequently. It had not improved since 
his last visit. 
 
Claimant continued to rate his right shoulder as his greatest source of pain. He 
described it as anterior shoulder, deltoid, and upper back pain. He had been working 
with physical therapy and had received a pulley system to assist with stretching it at 
home. He thought his mobility was improving, and reported being able to do some light 
lifting over shoulder level the past few weeks. He reported his right elbow pain had 
resolved. Regarding his head injury, claimant denied cognitive changes such as 
memory, concentration, and mood. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 158-159) His only symptom was 
headache, which he reported as less than weekly and resolved with Tylenol. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 159)  
 
After physical examination, Dr. Kennedy opined that claimant was in the “thawing 
phase” of adhesive capsulitis with respect to this right shoulder. She continued 
conservative management with physical therapy. She ordered a CT of the thorax to 
assess healing of his sternum, rib, and thoracic fractures, due to his continued pain. 
Finally, she noted his subdural hematoma had resolved and his residual headaches 
were steadily resolving, and he had been released from neurosurgery with no residual 
deficits reported. His work restrictions were work at ground level or up to six feet off the 
ground using a ladder. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 161) He was to continue with physical therapy. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Kennedy on April 26, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 163) He 
reported largely the same symptoms as on his previous visit, and continued to report 
some improvement. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 163-164) Dr. Kennedy noted the chest CT revealed 
no acute findings, and showed progressive healing of the lower sternal body and right 
second and third rib fractures. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 163) It also showed mild progressive 
collapse at the T6 compression fracture. After physical examination, Dr. Kennedy 
opined that claimant was still in the “thawing phase” of adhesive capsulitis, and 
continued conservative management, including physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 164) The 
remainder of his injuries were healed or healing, and she anticipated stabilization of the 
T6 fracture site in six to nine months. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 164-165) With respect to activity, 
claimant advised that he would not need to work at heights again, and was planning 
retirement in less than two years. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 165) As such, Dr. Kennedy said his 
activity status was “revised,” as he no longer needed to “desensitize” to working at 
heights. Dr. Kennedy anticipated claimant would complete physical therapy in the next 
month, and might be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) at that time.  
 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  6 
Claimant next saw Dr. Kennedy on May 27, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 166) He reported 
the pain in his chest area continued to steadily improve, and was best in the morning 
and worst at the end of the day. His midback pain continued to bother him with a lot of 
lifting or standing, and was worst in the morning and usually improved as he moved 
around. His shoulder was continuing to improve, and his therapist recommended an 
additional month of physical therapy as he continued to progress with range of motion 
and strengthening. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 166-167) He reported that he generally felt well with 
respect to his head injury, and denied cognitive changes such as memory, mood, and 
concentration. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 167) His only symptom continued to be headache, less than 
weekly and resolved with Tylenol.  
 
Dr. Kennedy ordered continued physical therapy for another month, until motion 
was maximized. She planned to request final range of motion measurements at his last 
therapy session in order to calculate his impairment. She also planned to request an x-
ray of his T6 fracture in order to measure the percent of compression for his rating. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 168) She noted he could continue to work full duty. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Kennedy on July 2, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 169) He had an 
x-ray of the thoracic spine, which showed unchanged compression deformity of the T6 
vertebral body, with anterior height loss of approximately 40 percent. Claimant reported 
that his midback pain had deteriorated since his last visit, mostly related to increased 
lifting at work. He reported continued improvement in his shoulder, noting less pain 
when reaching above shoulder height, and improved range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 170) 
He reported no changes in his head injury from the last visit.  
 
After physical examination, Dr. Kennedy noted that claimant asked to hold 
physical therapy, as he felt he had plateaued. He was to continue his home exercise 
program and discuss whether he needed to resume therapy at his next visit. Dr. 
Kennedy also noted that claimant was not tolerating full duty well. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 171) His 
pain had increased, and was not well controlled with over the counter medication. She 
indicated she would seek a pain clinic consult. Claimant advised that he thought he 
would be able to direct his own activities enough to prevent deterioration, but that had 
not proved true. As such, Dr. Kennedy assigned a 40-pound lifting restriction, and no 
use of greater than 8-foot ladder or work at heights. She ordered a follow up visit in one 
month to reassess restrictions, take final shoulder motion measurements, and calculate 
impairment assuming he was at MMI. 
 
Claimant saw Timothy Miller, M.D., at Finley Pain Clinic on July 22, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 28) Dr. Miller gave claimant several options, including medication, injections, and 
Voltaren gel. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 29) Ultimately, he opined that claimant’s pain was likely 
mechanical, and should be treated and managed with the least amount of medication 
possible.  
 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Kennedy on August 13, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 174) He 
noted no change in his anterior chest pain, but said he had been using the Voltaren gel 
at Dr. Miller’s recommendation. He found it helped for a couple hours and then wore off. 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  7 
He said it upset his stomach so he could only use it once per day. With respect to his 
midback pain, he reported no changes, and the tramadol he trialed per Dr. Miller’s 
recommendation upset his stomach. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 174-175) Regarding his shoulder, he 
reported continued slow improvement. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 175) He said he was dedicated to 
his home exercises and thought his mobility continued to improve. He denied any new 
issues with respect to his head injury.  
 
After physical examination, Dr. Kennedy opined that claimant was at MMI. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 176) He was to continue his home exercises for his shoulder but she expected 
his range of motion measurements to be stable at that point. She noted his continued 
pain in his sternum and ribs, as well as the routine healing of the subdural hematoma. 
Finally, she noted his continued pain related to the T6 compression fracture, which was 
stable. She concluded he had permanent loss of right shoulder motion, permanent loss 
of height at T6, and chronic chest pain that limits activity. She placed him on permanent 
restrictions of lift/carry no more than 40-pounds; use of ladders up to 8-feet; and no 
working at heights or on roofs. She noted an impairment rating would be calculated on 
request.  
 
Dr. Kennedy provided an impairment rating on September 3, 2021, using the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 177) 
She noted she would calculate permanent impairment for the musculoskeletal injuries, 
which excludes the subdural hematoma. With respect to the T6 endplate compression 
fracture, she found claimant sustained a category 3 injury equal to 16 percent of the 
whole person. For the sternum fracture, she used chapter 18 of the AMA Guides for 
pain, as there is not a specific methodology for rating a sternum fracture. She opined 
claimant sustained 1 percent whole person impairment for sternum fracture with chronic 
pain. With respect to the rib fractures, Dr. Kennedy assigned no impairment, as they 
had become asymptomatic. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 178) Finally, for the right shoulder, she used 
the range of motion method for rating impairment, and calculated 14 percent of the 
upper extremity, which converts to 8 percent of the whole person. Using the combined 
values table, Dr. Kennedy assigned a total combined rating equal to 24 percent of the 
whole person, as a result of his musculoskeletal injuries.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Kennedy on October 15, 2021, with increased pain in 
his back after lifting a 250-pound broaster at work. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 179) Dr. Kennedy 
ordered an x-ray to determine if there was further compression to T6 with the heavy 
lifting. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 180) She also spoke to claimant’s employer to remind them about 
claimant’s restrictions, and advised claimant to speak up if he was asked to do work 
tasks outside his restrictions. She resumed claimant’s physical therapy for a short 
period as well, and refilled his prescription for Voltaren. The x-ray did not reveal any 
acute changes. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 182) Claimant returned for follow-up with Dr. Kennedy on 
December 3, 2021, and reported he was “not feeling too bad.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 184) He had 
been attending physical therapy, which was helpful. Dr. Kennedy advised he should 
continue physical therapy for two more visits, and placed him at MMI for this incident as 
of December 20, 2021, unless he returned to care with concerns. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 185) She 
found no additional impairment as a result of this incident. 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  8 
 
On May 11, 2022, claimant presented to Joseph Compton, M.D., to establish 
primary medical care. (Claimant’s Exhibit 4, p. 49) Dr. Compton’s record indicates that 
claimant reported having difficulties with his return to work, “as one would expect given 
his age and multiple orthopedic complaints.” On physical examination, Dr. Compton 
noted tenderness over the sternum, and felt his speech and mentation seemed a bit 
slow, which claimant related back to the work fall. Dr. Compton referred claimant to 
psychiatry. 
 
Claimant saw Jami Wood, LISW, at Hillcrest Family Services for mental health 
therapy on May 31, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) He reported still having a lot of fear at work 
since his accident, and having nightmares, startling easily, and getting caught up in his 
thoughts about the accident. He stated that work was pushing him to get more done and 
he gets irritated, and that once he reinjured his back due to being pushed to do more. 
He reported when he gets home from work, he lacks motivation to get things done at 
home, and that he had been drinking more beer recently. He reported that he did not 
necessarily feel he was depressed, more like frustrated with his circumstances.  (Cl. Ex. 
3, p. 33) Ms. Wood diagnosed claimant with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and 
wanted to rule-out major depressive disorder. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 36) Claimant reported he 
wanted to process his trauma to get over some of his fear. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 34) Ms. Wood 
recommended individual therapy and medication management, but claimant did not 
want to take medication unless therapy alone did not help.  
 
Claimant’s next appointment took place on August 2, 2022, with Anne Hedrick, 
LISW. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 43-44) He advised he was still experiencing triggers since his 
traumatic work injury, which effected his mood and behavior. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 43) The plan 
was to focus on coping strategies to manage his triggers. The record notes that Ms. 
Hedrick was retiring in two days, so claimant would need to schedule with a new 
therapist. Claimant’s wife, Jeanne Graybill, testified that they had to wait a while for the 
next appointment, because Hillcrest was running short on therapists and had a large 
caseload at that time. (Tr., p. 49)  
 
His next appointment took place on September 14, 2022, with Martha Nowacki. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 41) Claimant reported nightmares, depression, anxiety/worries, and not 
being able to sleep well. He also reported hearing helicopters brought back memories. 
He indicated that work had been stressful since the accident, because they push him, 
and that he hoped to retire in April. They discussed strategies for helping manage his 
symptoms, and claimant indicated he would try the strategies and make another 
appointment if needed. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp., 41-42) 
 
Claimant testified that he started to have nightmares right away after his 
accident, and they were ongoing at the time of hearing. (Tr., p. 20) His wife agreed that 
since the accident he has been more worried, and that he yells out in his sleep two to 
three times per week, and is always moaning and groaning and waking up in the night. 
(Tr., p. 42) Prior to the accident, he did not have nightmares or moan and groan in his 
sleep. (Tr., p. 43) Claimant testified that in therapy, he was provided with “papers to 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  9 
review,” and the therapists gave him different things to work on. (Tr., p. 27) He testified 
that he goes through the papers from time to time when he feels like he needs to, but he 
has not called for another appointment since September of 2022. (Tr., p. 28) 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Robert Rondinelli, 
M.D., on January 17, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1) Dr. Rondinelli reviewed the medical records in 
detail, and met with claimant in person. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 2-4; 14-18; Tr., p. 20) Claimant 
testified his examination took six hours. (Tr., p. 20) At the time of the IME, claimant 
reported his main complaint was pain associated with his sternal fracture and his chest. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) His second complaint was upper midback pain around the T6 level, 
associated with the endplate fracture. His third complaint related to the difficulty with his 
right shoulder, including pain, particularly with reaching overhead, and some mild 
weakness. He felt his range of motion was good.  
 
Claimant’s fourth complaint related to residuals of his traumatic subdural 
hematoma, concussion, headache, and possible cognitive or behavioral issues. He 
reported headache anywhere from one to three times per week, usually resolved with 
Tylenol. He also reported irritability, with mild to moderate mood disorder and outbursts, 
which his significant other was “particularly aware of.” He reported trivial things 
upsetting him. He said he was receiving counseling for PTSD, depression, and anxiety 
at Hillcrest, and noted he had completed two counseling sessions.  
 
Dr. Rondinelli administered several tests, including a PTSD screening 
questionnaire, on which claimant scored 2.6, which indicated an average “moderate” 
severity of most of the items offered. Dr. Rondinelli explained that based on claimant’s 
scores, he met all DSM criteria for a “moderate” severity level of PTSD. 
 
Dr. Rondinelli administered other tests, including a self-assessment of perceived 
disability based on his upper extremity; a cognitive assessment; a neurological 
examination; a musculoskeletal examination; and additional miscellaneous tests for 
range of motion, gait, and other issues. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-8) After his physical 
examination and testing, Dr. Rondinelli answered questions addressed to him from 
claimant’s attorney. 
 
With respect to diagnoses, Dr. Rondinelli opined that claimant’s work injury 
resulted in the following: 
 
 Traumatic subdural hematoma, right side; concussion; probable brief loss of 
consciousness with amnesia; and mild traumatic brain injury (TBI); 
 T6 end plate fracture with 40 percent anterior compression, stable; 
 Right shoulder AC separation rotator cuff tear; frozen shoulder; 
 Sternal fracture; right rib fractures, healed with functional residuals of chest pain; 
 History of elbow pain, resolved; 
 PTSD, currently meets DSM criteria for “moderate” severity; 
 Functional residuals of pain in chest, right shoulder, and middle back with 
associated perception of 47 percent disability. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  10 
 
Dr. Rondinelli further opined that each separate diagnosis was causally related to 
the November 30, 2020 work injury. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) He opined that necessary and 
appropriate care had been rendered for the injuries. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) Regarding future 
treatment, Dr. Rondinelli opined that claimant’s recently diagnosed PTSD was in need 
of further evaluation and treatment. He felt claimant would likely benefit from formal 
psychiatric and neuropsychological consultations, and probably medication to help with 
sleep disturbance, mood dysfunction, and anxiety. He also felt claimant should continue 
with psychological counseling. To that end, he also opined that claimant had not 
reached MMI with respect to the PTSD, but otherwise remained stable and had 
achieved MMI from trauma and neurosurgical perspectives.  
 
Using the fifth edition of the AMA Guides, Dr. Rondinelli provided an impairment 
rating. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) He cautioned that his rating was preliminary and provisional, as 
he did not believe claimant had reached MMI for the PTSD. With that caveat, he stated 
that claimant qualified for a rating in the range of 15 to 18 percent of the whole person 
for the T6 compression fracture; 1 to 3 percent for pain associated with the sternal 
fracture; 1 percent for frozen shoulder residuals; 6 percent related to an avulsion 
fracture of the distal acromion; and 15 to 29 percent for the PTSD. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 11-12) 
Using the combined values chart, he opined claimant’s total permanent impairment was 
in the range of 34 to 48 percent of the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12)  
 
 
Finally, with respect to restrictions, he opined that claimant would eventually 
require lifting restrictions of 20 pounds occasionally, 10 pounds frequently. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
13) He also recommended claimant wear protective headgear at the work site and avoid 
working at heights.  
 
 
Claimant retired from Murphy Construction in June of 2023. (Tr., p. 24) George 
Murphy, the owner of the company, offered claimant part-time work in lieu of full 
retirement. Claimant testified that he told Mr. Murphy he would think about it for a few 
months. (Tr., pp. 24-25) At the time of hearing, claimant had not reached out to Mr. 
Murphy regarding his offer of part-time work, nor had he looked for any other work. (Tr., 
p. 25) Mr. Murphy testified at hearing. His demeanor at the time of hearing gave the 
undersigned no reason to doubt his veracity, and I find him credible. He testified that 
when claimant told him he was retiring, he said that since turning 65, he had to watch 
his hours and how much money he was making due to his retirement benefits and 
social security benefits. (Tr., p. 56) Mr. Murphy confirmed claimant’s testimony that he 
offered part-time work, and claimant said he would wait a couple months and then 
decide if he wanted to come back part-time. (Tr., pp. 56-57) He also confirmed that 
claimant had not contacted him about coming back to work since that time. (Tr., p. 57) 
 
 
Defendants set up an appointment with Robert Arias, Ph.D., for an independent 
neuropsychological evaluation on July 25, 2024. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) At the time of his 
evaluation, claimant reported continued soreness in his back and sternum, which 
disturbed his sleep. (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) He reported nightmares of falling a couple of times 
per week, and he said that he still had some anxiety with helicopter sounds. Claimant’s 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  11 
wife told Dr. Arias that claimant was much less active since the accident and seemed 
depressed. Claimant advised he had two or three weeks of counseling in July 2023, but 
quit because he “felt it wasn’t necessary.” His wife said he stopped going due to cost. 
He denied any pre-injury psychiatric history. (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
 
 
Dr. Arias performed his evaluation via telehealth, and noted there was no 
difficulty with using that format in obtaining claimant’s history and testing data. Dr. Arias 
administered a number of tests, in addition to his clinical interview and records review. 
He administered several performance validity tests, in addition to using other embedded 
performance validity tests. Claimant failed two of the independent validity tests, which 
Dr. Arias said indicated a 95 percent chance of noncredible performance on other 
measures due to suboptimal effort/intent to perform poorly. As such, he interpreted all of 
claimant’s results in that light. 
 
 
With respect to intellectual functioning, the testing suggested claimant was within 
the low to below average range. Language suggested impact comprehension, but 
exceptionally low vocabulary skills and general fund of knowledge. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 3-4) 
His attention was below average to exceptionally low for verbal and visual information, 
and average to low average for auditory-verbal. (Def. Ex. A, p. 4) Mental arithmetic was 
exceptionally low. His memory was high average to above average for verbal learning 
through repetition, and low average for immediate and delayed memory for short 
stories. Under executive functioning, his abstract thinking was below average, and 
social problem-solving and visual reasoning were low average. With respect to 
emotional functioning, Dr. Arias indicated validity concerns due to over-reporting of 
symptoms. Specifically, claimant generated “a much larger than average number of 
somatic symptoms rarely described by individuals with genuine medical conditions.” 
There was also an “unusual” combination of responses associated with noncredible 
memory complaints. With those cautions in mind, Dr. Arias noted that claimant 
complained of poor health, malaise, head pain, and neurological symptoms, including 
problems with memory and concentration. There were also indications of self-doubt, 
stress, and worry, with aberrant perceptions and thoughts. Finally, he noted there was 
likely to be underlying cynicism.  
 
 
In reaching his conclusions, Dr. Arias first reiterated that due to claimant’s failure 
on two independent performance validity tests, there was a 95 percent chance of 
noncredible performance on the other tests due to suboptimal effort/intent to perform 
poorly. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) With that in mind, he concluded that claimant sustained a 
“complicated mild TBI [traumatic brain injury]” as a result of the November 30, 2020 
work incident. He noted claimant only had brief post-traumatic amnesia and a small 
intracranial hemorrhage. There was no indication of alteration of mental status, and he 
stated claimant’s mental status, per hospital records, was “at baseline” shortly after the 
event with a GCS of 15. Dr. Arias stated that injuries of this nature result in the same 
prognosis as an uncomplicated mild TBI. Specifically, the vast majority of such cases 
experience full recovery within 10 to 14 days, and a maximum of three months. He cited 
to studies from the World Health Organization, American Medical Association, American 
Psychological Association, Department of Veteran’s Affairs, and Department of Defense 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  12 
for this conclusion, along with other studies. He also noted claimant had no cognitive 
complaints, signs of deficits, or mood complaints for many months after the incident. 
Rather, his only complaints were headaches.  
 
 
With respect to emotional functioning, the records indicate emotional complaints 
as of May 31, 2022, at Hillcrest Family Services. Dr. Arias noted this was more than 18 
months after the incident, and stated that delayed onset of PTSD is very rare, especially 
in people with no previous psychiatric history. Additionally, claimant’s test results 
revealed validity concerns due to over-reporting of symptoms in a noncredible fashion.  
 
 
In response to questions asked by defense counsel, Dr. Arias opined that the 
only neuropsychological injury claimant sustained due to the November 20, 2020 
incident was a complicated mild TBI. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 1-2) He noted there was no 
indication of preexisting conditions from a neuropsychological standpoint. (Def. Ex. A, p. 
2) He opined that claimant would have reached MMI from a mild TBI as of three months 
after the date of injury, to allow the maximum three months for recovery to occur. This 
would place MMI at March 2, 2021, from a neuropsychological standpoint. He further 
opined there was no indication of any permanent impairment from a neuro 
psychological standpoint, and none would be expected from the nature of his injury. He 
opined there were no permanent restrictions needed due to the TBI, and finally, no 
future treatment would be reasonable or necessary.  
 
 
With respect to Dr. Rondinelli’s IME, which Dr. Arias also reviewed, he noted that 
the psychometric evaluation of subjective symptoms and cognitive performance Dr. 
Rondinelli employed did not meet professional standards. (Def. Ex. A, p. 5) He noted 
there was no control for validity, and cited to the American Academy of Clinical 
Neuropsychology for the conclusion that all evaluations of cognitive and emotional 
functioning must proactively address symptom validity and performance validity. (Def. 
Ex. A, pp. 5-6) If an examiner fails to do so, the examiner is required to indicate the 
reasons for failing to do so, and qualify their opinions appropriately, which Dr. Rondinelli 
failed to do. (Def. Ex. A, p. 6) He also noted that there is no empirical support for 
delayed onset of cognitive or emotional difficulties after traumatic brain injury, as would 
be required for Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions to be correct, given the absence of any 
cognitive or emotional complaints or objective evidence of such in many months after 
the incident, “upon repeat examinations by multiple physicians throughout these 
records.”  
 
 
I find Dr. Arias’s opinion with respect to claimant’s mental/brain injury to be more 
convincing than that provided by Dr. Rondinelli. Dr. Arias specializes in psychology and 
neuropsychology, and has a great deal of experience with neuropsychological 
evaluations. (See Def. Ex. B) While Dr. Rondinelli is certainly a qualified physician, his 
experience with neuropsychology is limited compared to Dr. Arias. (See. Cl. Ex. 2) 
Additionally, as Dr. Arias stated, Dr. Rondinelli did not address symptom or performance 
validity. Further, even if Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions were given greater weight, he did not 
believe claimant had reached MMI at the time of his evaluation, so his impairment rating 
with respect to the mental health aspect of the claim was only provisional in nature. He 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  13 
noted that formal neuropsychological evaluation and testing could clarify the test results 
he obtained, which is exactly what Dr. Arias provided. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12)  
 
Dr. Rondinelli also did not address the delayed onset of the PTSD symptoms, or 
claimant’s lack of cognitive or mood changes following the incident. Dr. Arias noted 
delayed onset of PTSD is very rare. Dr. Rondinelli is the only physician who provided a 
PTSD diagnosis, based solely on a screening questionnaire. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) This is not 
sufficient evidence to determine that claimant’s PTSD is related to the work incident, or 
that it caused permanent impairment. 
 
Dr. Arias noted that Dr. Rondinelli’s evaluation did not meet the American 
Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology’s professional standards. When considering all of 
these factors, I find that Dr. Arias’s opinion is entitled to greater weight than that of Dr. 
Rondinelli with respect to the mental health/brain injury. As such, I adopt his opinion and 
find no permanent impairment related to the mild traumatic brain injury sustained on 
November 20, 2020. To the extent claimant suffers from PTSD, there is not sufficient 
evidence in the record to determine that it arose out of and in the course of his 
employment, or that it resulted in any permanent impairment. 
 
With respect to the musculoskeletal injuries claimant sustained, Dr. Kennedy 
provided a 24 percent whole body impairment rating, as outlined above. Dr. Rondinelli’s 
rating, when removing the portion related to mental health, is nearly identical. Dr. 
Kennedy calculated 16 percent for the T6 fracture; Dr. Rondinelli provided a range of 15 
to 18 percent. Dr. Kennedy assigned 1 percent for the sternum fracture; Dr. Rondinelli 
again provided a range of 1 to 3 percent. Dr. Kennedy provided 8 percent related to the 
right shoulder, while Dr. Rondinelli assigned 1 percent for range of motion and 6 percent 
for an “isolated distal clavicle resection arthroplasty,” which was not performed, but Dr. 
Rondinelli included by analogy due to the avulsion fracture of claimant’s distal acromion. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) Using the combined values chart, that makes Dr. Rondinelli’s rating 
related to the musculoskeletal injuries in the range of 22 to 26 percent of the whole 
body. It is unclear whether impairment may be assigned “by analogy” using Table 16-27 
with respect to the distal acromion in this case. In any event, I find that Dr. Kennedy’s 
rating adequately compensates claimant’s shoulder injury, as well as his remaining 
musculoskeletal injuries. As such, I find Dr. Kennedy’s combined 24 percent rating to be 
the most accurate and reliable representation of claimant’s permanent functional 
impairment. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  14 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
The parties stipulated that the work injury was a cause of permanent disability. 
They dispute the nature and extent of permanent disability, and the commencement 
date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are awarded. Under the Iowa 
Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is compensated either for a 
loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u), or 
as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 85.34(2)(v). Claimant 
sustained permanent disability to his shoulder, a scheduled member, and to his sternum 
and thoracic spine, which are unscheduled. When there is injury to some scheduled 
member and also to parts of the body not included in the schedule, the resulting 
disability is compensated on the basis of an unscheduled injury. Bridgestone Americas, 
Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676, 685 (Iowa 2024) (citing Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 16 (Iowa 1993)). Therefore, claimant’s permanent disability is 
compensated under the provisions of 85.34(2)(v). 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  15 
Prior to 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body part was 
compensated on an industrial disability basis. As part of the 2017 legislative changes, 
the General Assembly amended Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), which in pertinent part 
states: 
 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those described[,] ... 
the compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to 
five hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee's functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee's earning capacity. Notwithstanding section 
85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is eligible for compensation 
under this paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is 
compensated based only upon the employee's functional impairment 
resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated 
from employment by that employer, the award or agreement for settlement 
for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of 
reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the employee's 
permanent partial disability. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
 
The Iowa Court of Appeals recently addressed this statutory change in Den 
Hartog Industries v. Dungan, 2025 WL52449 (Iowa App. Jan. 9, 2025).1 The Court of 
Appeals determined that Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) is ambiguous. Therefore, 
interpreting the statute to the benefit of the employee, the Court held that a voluntary 
termination by a claimant for purely personal reasons was sufficient to trigger the 
provisions of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) and provide for an industrial disability 
analysis and award. Pursuant to that decision, claimant’s voluntary retirement from 
Murphy Construction triggered the provisions of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) for “a 
determination of any reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused the 
employee’s permanent partial disability.” 
                                                 
1 The Iowa Supreme Court has granted further review in this case, but the case is not yet submitted for 
decision by the Iowa Supreme Court. Therefore, the Court of Appeals’ decision is the only currently 
binding appellate case law on this issue. 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  16 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability, which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). There is not a 
mathematical formula to calculate industrial disability, and the agency is “not required to 
fix disability with precise accuracy.” Myers v. F.C.A. Servs., Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 357 
(Iowa 1999). 
 
In this case, claimant returned to work with the employer, with no reduction in 
pay, and worked for about two years before voluntarily retiring. Mr. Murphy testified that 
claimant “seemed good” after his return to work, but they watched his restrictions and 
were careful. (Tr., p. 58) When he announced his retirement, Mr. Murphy offered to let 
him continue working part-time so his earnings would not affect his social security 
retirement benefits. (Tr., p. 56) Claimant has not taken Mr. Murphy up on that offer, and 
has not looked for any other work since his retirement. (Tr., p. 25) Claimant also 
testified that he had not planned on retiring until he reached age 67, but the injury 
pushed him to do so a little earlier, at age 65. (Tr., p. 9) There was also testimony, 
however, that claimant retired in order to keep his income lower so it would not affect 
his social security benefits. Most likely, both factors contributed, considering claimant 
declined to return to part-time hours. 
That being said, claimant does have permanent restrictions, including a 40-
pound lifting restriction. He credibly testified that he tries not to “overdo it” in order to 
prevent aggravating his shoulder, sternum, or back. (Tr., p. 21) However, there is no 
evidence in the record to suggest claimant has lost significant earning capacity due to 
the work injury. He was able to continue working for two years despite his 40-pound 
restriction, and there was no testimony or other evidence presented to suggest he 
would not be capable of performing work or even that he has a reduced capacity to earn 
a living due to the work injury. Considering all the factors of industrial disability, I find 
that claimant’s industrial disability does not exceed his permanent functional impairment 
as assigned by Dr. Kennedy. Claimant has sustained a loss of earning capacity 
equivalent to 24 percent of the whole body. This entitles claimant to 120 weeks of 
benefits. The parties stipulated that prior to hearing, claimant was paid 120 weeks of 
compensation at the stipulated rate. As such, claimant is not entitled to any additional 
benefits at this time. 
The parties dispute the proper date for commencement of benefits. 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically indicated 
that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and that the 
extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the use of 
the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2). Dr. 
Kennedy placed claimant at MMI on August 13, 2021, which is the date defendants 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  17 
argue is proper. Claimant argues the proper date is September 14, 2022, which is the 
last time claimant had treatment at Hillcrest Family Services related to PTSD. I found 
that to the extent claimant suffers from PTSD, there is not sufficient evidence in the 
record to determine that it arose out of and in the course of his employment, or that it 
resulted in any permanent impairment. As such, the proper date for commencement of 
permanent partial disability benefits is August 13, 2021.  
The final issue to determine is costs. Iowa Administrative Rule 876-4.33 states 
that costs are assessed at the discretion of the deputy. In this case, I use my discretion 
and decline to assess costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant is entitled to one hundred twenty (120) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing August 13, 2021, at the stipulated rate of six hundred 
fifty-three and 22/100 dollars ($653.22). 
 
 
Pursuant to the stipulation of the parties, claimant was paid 120 weeks of 
compensation at the stipulated rate prior to hearing. Defendants are entitled to a credit 
for all benefits paid. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
Signed and filed this ___9th ___ day of June, 2025. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Rocco Motto   
 
(via WCES) 
Rene Charles Lapierre  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 

GRAYBILL V. MURPHY CONSTRUCTION GROUP 
Page  18 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
