Case Number: 5068408
Case Title:  PATRIE, PATRICK V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Patrie Patrick-5068408D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PATRICK PATRIE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5068408 
MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION 
  : 
CO., INC., 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ATLANTIC STATES INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                Head Note Nos.:  1803, 1804 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Patrick Patrie, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Martinson Construction, employer, and Atlantic States 
Ins. Co., insurer carrier, both as defendants.   
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on August 28, 2020, via CourtCall. The case was considered fully 
submitted on September 18, 2020, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-2, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-2, Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-D, and the testimony of claimant, Gary Tangen, Rick Patrie and James 
Patrie.  
ISSUES 
Extent of claimant’s disability;  
Whether claimant is entitled to a finding of permanent and total disability 
according to the odd-lot doctrine;  
And the assessment of costs. 
The parties agree claimant sustained a work related injury on or about December 
6, 2017. The injury was the cause of a temporary disability, entitlement to which is no 
longer in dispute. While the parties disagree as to the extent of claimant’s permanent 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jan-29  17:13:01     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
disability, they agree it is industrial in nature and that the commencement date of 
benefits is September 30, 2018.  
At the time of the hearing, the claimant’s gross earnings were $1,012.42 per 
week. He was single and entitled to one exemption. Based on the foregoing, the weekly 
benefit rate is $597.06.  
Defendants waive all affirmative defenses. While the hearing report indicates that 
the reimbursement of the independent medical evaluation (IME) is in dispute, the parties 
agreed at hearing that defendants would reimburse the IME and that no decision would 
need to be issued on that matter. 
Prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid $37,943.84, and defendants are 
entitled to a credit of that amount against the award of permanent partial disability 
(PPD) benefits.  
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties agree claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on December 6, 2017. They further agree that the injury was the cause of 
temporary disability entitlement to which is no longer in dispute.  
While the parties disagree as to the extent of claimant’s disability, they agree that 
if the injury is found to be the cause of a permanent disability, it is industrial in nature 
and the commencement date for PPD benefits would be September 30, 2019.  
At the time of the injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $1,1012.42 per week. 
Claimant was single and entitled to one exemption. Based on the foregoing numbers, 
claimant’s weekly benefit rate is $597.06. Claimant waives all affirmative defenses.  
Defendants have agreed to pay the outstanding IME fee and that issue is no 
longer in dispute.  
Prior to the hearing, claimant was paid 96.71 weeks of compensation at various 
rates itemized in Defendants’ Exhibit A for a total of $37,974.48 and the defendants 
would be entitled to a credit of that amount against any award of permanent benefits.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Patrick Patrie, was a 68-year-old person at the time of the hearing. He 
began working for the defendant employer on March 20, 1975, and has worked in the 
construction industry for 40 years. He did obtain a business degree in 1975, but has not 

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
used it. He held a few supervisory roles but none with hiring or firing or managerial 
experience. He does not believe he can return to the construction business as a heavy 
duty laborer nor does he believe there is an alternative position for him within the 
construction field.  
On December 6, 2017, claimant sustained multiple injuries after a skid loader ran 
over him. He suffered serious abrasions in multiple regions of his lower torso and lower 
extremities, broke his right arm, the bone above his right ankle, shattered his right knee, 
sprained his left knee, cracked his vertebrae and ribs, and injured his pelvis. (JE 1:1) 
Arnold Delbridge, M.D., gives a more exhaustive, detailed account of the injuries in his 
IME report. 
His history is that on December 6, 2017 while at work, he was run over by 
a skid loader and badly injured.  He was apparently taking some laser 
sightings at the time and was struck and injured by the skid loader.  He 
had numerous injuries which I will delineate throughout this 
communication.  He was taken first to Allen Hospital and put under 
anesthesia.  The orthopedic surgeon there found he had unstable pelvic 
fractures and decided to send him on to University Hospitals in Iowa City.  
He was seen there by the trauma surgeon and was operated on for his 
pelvis and left fractured humerus on December 8, 2017.  His pelvic injuries 
were considerable.  He had diastasis or displacement of both sacroiliac 
joints.  He had some chip fractures of his sacrum.  He had pelvic ring 
disruption with pelvic fractures of the rami and diastasis of the symphysis.  
In addition, he had a displaced, somewhat comminuted fracture of the left 
humerus.  Dr. Karam and his people took him to the operating room and 
reduced his pelvis and put two screws in the right sacroiliac joint and one 
screw in the left sacroiliac joint to stabilize the sacroiliac joints.  They did a 
closed reduction of the disrupted pelvic ring anteriorly.  Although Dr. Chen 
later states that he had fused sacroiliac joints, there is no mention in the 
record of any bone graft or shaving the joints or freshening the joints to 
expect that fusion would occur.  The best term is to say that Dr. Karam 
reduced the sacroiliac joints and stabilized them with screws as described. 
The fractured humerus was then reduced on the left side and then plated 
and was noted on post x-rays to be stable.  X-rays were taken on 12-9-17.  
They were ordered by Sara Burgcamp, MD.  It is also noted there was an 
ordering provider, Craig Akoh, MD, for fluoroscopic visualization during the 
procedure. 
The findings postop on 12-9-17 indicated there had been interval 
stabilization of the mild diastatic bilateral sacroiliac joints with two screws.  
X-rays on 12-9-17 showed interval stabilization of the sacroiliac joints with 
two screws through the right sacroiliac joint and a single screw through the 
left sacroiliac joint.  The extent of diastasis of the pubic symphysis 
appears about the same in comparison to preoperative imaging.  As far as 
the humerus is concerned, postoperative changes of side plate and screw 

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
fixation of the proximal to midshaft comminuted humeral fracture without 
intermediate complication and improved alignment was noted.  There is a 
displaced fracture fragment noted posterolaterally of the glenohumeral 
joint.  Surgical staples were noted.  There was some degenerative joint 
disease of the glenohumeral joint noted as well. 
In addition to the acute pelvic and humeral fractures noted were additional 
injuries consisting of an avulsion fracture of the medial condyle of the right 
femur, a right anterior cruciate ligament tear and medial collateral ligament 
tear of the right knee as well as a medial meniscus tear and there was 
also a medical meniscus tear of the left knee as well.  There was also a 
right fibula fracture and broken ribs and spine injuries consisting of 
avulsion of four or five of the transverse processes of the lumbar spine.  
Some reports state four and some state five.  I cannot be sure of the fifth 
one when I reviewed the x-rays, but there is [sic] at least four.  On 12-14-
17 there was a report of a 9 mm widening of the pubic symphysis of the 
pelvis. 
In addition to those injuries discussed above, when he was hit by the skid 
loader there was apparently no loss of consciousness.  There were large 
abrasions over his right plank and palm-sized ecchymosis and swelling of 
his low back.  He remembers the incident and assures me that he was not 
knocked unconscious.  The screws utilized on his sacroiliac joints were 
put in percutaneously after closed reduction under fluoroscopic control. 
Further evaluation at University Hospitals revealed that there was a right 
small pulmonary contusion which might be caused by an embolus but 
there was no indication that a pulmonary embolus occurred.  That was 
beneath the 10-12th ribs on the right. 
(CE 1:1-3) 
As stated in Dr. Delbridge’s notes, claimant was initially taken to Allen Hospital 
but because of the extensiveness of his injury, claimant was transferred to University of 
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). (JE 1:13)  
He began treating at the UIHC on December 8, 2017, and eventually underwent 
a right knee ACL reconstruction partial medial meniscectomy, superficial MCL 
reconstruction, deep posterior oblique ligament/deep MCL repair and mass excision on 
March 7, 2018, with Matthew Bollier, M.D. (Exhibit C:1) A month later, on April 8, 2018, 
he underwent left knee arthroscopy, partial medial meniscectomy, and synovectomy 
with Dr. Bollier.  
Claimant was discharged to a skilled nursing facility on December 21, 2017. (JE 
1:14)  

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
By July 9, 2018, claimant was four months following the right knee surgery and 
three months following the scope and meniscal debridement of the left knee. (Ex C:10) 
Claimant was doing well with aching, dull pain in the bilateral knees at a range of three 
to four on a ten scale. He also complained of pain in the right foot, right shoulder, and 
right hip with numbness from the mid-thigh to just below the right knee and at the 
anterior left knee and dorsal aspect of both feet. (Ex C:10) On examination, he had 
functional range of motion and strength. (Ex C:11) No restrictions were given regarding 
his knees but Dr. Bollier deferred on the issues of the pelvis and right shoulder to Dr. 
Karam. (Ex C:12)  
Dr. Bollier assigned the following impairments: 
To the nearest degree of medical certainty he has a permanent partial 
impairment rating of 2% of the right lower extremity according to the 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment of the AMA, 5th Edition.  
This rating is the result of partial medial meniscectomy per table 17-33 on 
page 546 of the Guides.  He was released to work without restrictions. 
(Ex C:12)  
To the nearest degree of medical certainty he has a permanent partial 
impairment rating of 2% of the left lower extremity according to the Guides 
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment of the AMA, 5th Edition.  This 
rating is the result of partial medial meniscectomy per table 17-33 on page 
546 of the Guides.  He was released to return to work without restrictions.  
Future treatment for this injury could include non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory medications and physical therapy. 
(Ex C:13) 
For his pelvic injuries, claimant was treated by Dr. Karam, who referred claimant 
to Dr. Chen for an impairment evaluation. On September 28, 2018, Joseph Chen 
completed an evaluation of claimant. (Ex D) During this appointment, claimant’s pain 
was a three to five on a ten scale and that prolonged standing and walking increased 
his pain. (Ex D:15) He also had dull, achy pain in the right arm. (Ex D:15) HIs gait was 
minimally antalgic and he reported that he used a cane for longer distance ambulation. 
(Ex D:17) Dr. Chen agreed that the use of the cane was appropriate for longer 
distances and that claimant should continue to work on longer distance endurance 
exercises, tacitly acknowledging claimant’s fatigue. (Ex. D:20) Dr. Chen placed claimant 
at maximum medical improvement (MMI) with restrictions of no lifting more than 50 
pounds on an occasional basis, no squatting, kneeling, climbing or lifting more than 10 
pounds overhead. (Ex D:20) Dr. Chen assigned the following impairment ratings: 3 
percent whole body due to the pelvic fracture, 3 percent of the whole body for the 
chronic right trochanteric bursitis leading to an abnormal gait, 2 percent impairment of 
the whole person for the decrease range of motion in the right shoulder. (Ex D:21) 
Given Dr. Bollier’s assessments of 2 percent lower extremity impairments bilaterally, Dr. 

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Chen concluded claimant sustained a 10 percent impairment of the whole person. (Ex 
D:21) 
Claimant has not returned to care since September 29, 2018. The parties agree 
that the commencement date for PPD is September 30, 2018.  
On July 22, 2019, claimant underwent an IME with Arnold Delbridge . (CE 1:1) 
Dr. Delbridge assigned a 37 percent whole person impairment and recommended 
claimant work a sedentary job. (CE 1:8-9) Dr. Delbridge was deposed on August 12, 
2020, and the testimony is part of the record as Claimant’s Exhibit 2. (CE 2) The 
statements of Dr. Delbridge are basically a recitation of his impairment assessment 
detailed below. Dr. Delbridge has 44 years of experience as an orthopedic surgeon. (CE 
2:2)  During the examination, claimant expressed good range of motion in the ankle but 
that he is stiff and in pain in the morning. (CE 1:6) Claimant’s pain ameliorates with 
some exertion. (CE 1:6) He had good range of motion in the hips, functional range of 
motion in the knees, but a deterioration in the right shoulder range of motion since his 
September 2018 evaluation with Dr. Chen. (CE 1:7) Dr. Delbridge disagreed with the 
finding by Dr. Chen that claimant suffered a weaver’s bottom or problems while sitting. 
(CE 1:7) The lack of pain in the bottom while sitting was confirmed by the claimant. (CE 
1:7)  
Dr. Delbridge agreed claimant had trochanteric bursitis but attributed the 
abnormal gait to weakness in the claimant’s hip abductors. (CE 1:7) Overall, Dr. 
Delbridge gave a higher impairment rating for the following reasons: 
From previous, Dr. Bollier had a 1% impairment of the body as a whole as 
a result of a meniscal resection of his knee giving a 2% impairment of the 
body as a whole on the right and left lower extremities. 
When we combine the 7% from abductor weakness with the 2% from the 
knee lower extremity impairment, we obtain a 9% impairment.  When we 
further combine that with 15% impairment from the diastasis pubis 
disruption of the pelvis, Table 15-19, page 428, we get 23% impairment of 
the body as a whole.  Combining 23 with 6% which is due to the sacroiliac 
disruption, gives a 28% impairment of the body as a whole.  That 28%, 
combined with a 4% body as a whole injury from the left shoulder, gives a 
31% impairment of the body as a whole. 
He had transverse process fractures in this spine, at least four and 
perhaps five, on the right side.  That is adequately described as being in 
impairment as a DRE Category II page 384 Table 15-3 (bottom of 2nd 
column) in Guides to Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, fifth edition.  
As such, he has a 5-8% impairment of the body as a whole on that basis.  
My conclusion is that he has an 8% impairment body as a whole because 
he has a lot of initial stiffness in his spine and had at least four transverse 
process disruptions.  An 8% impairment combined with 31! Is a 37% 
impairment of the body as a whole. 

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
(CE 1:8)  
Besides the differing opinion regarding the weaver’s bottom diagnosis, Dr. 
Delbridge pointed out additional errors in Dr. Chen’s report. First, Dr. Chen assumed 
that the claimant’s pelvis had been fused both in the rear and the front but it was only 
fused in the rear. Dr. Delbridge noted the single fusion in the rear could lead to 
instability and increased pain for the claimant. Dr. Chen did not assign any impairment 
rating for the spinal fractures either.  
For these reasons, Dr. Delbridge’s opinions are given greater weight and his 
impairment rating is adopted and relied upon going forward.  
Gary Tangen testified on behalf of the claimant. They have been friends for 45 
years. He retired in 2016 at the age of 72 and testified that claimant had planned to 
work into his 70s as well. Claimant’s brothers testified that they believed claimant could 
have continued to work into his 70s but for the work injury. They also testified it was 
unlikely claimant could find work outside of construction. Claimant’s younger brother, 
James Patrie, was 65 at the time of hearing, still working, with no plans for retirement. 
Beyond the general aches and pains that accompany his injuries, claimant is 
easily fatigued. He testified that he has to rest every few hours and often naps due to 
lack of endurance.  
Claimant testified that he intended to work until around the age of 70, possibly 
not past it. His friend and brothers testified that claimant had planned to continue to 
work as long as possible. Claimant’s older brother retired at the age of 72. His family 
has a history of working past the age of 65 and into the 70s. Based on the claimant’s 
testimony and that of his friend and brother, it is found that claimant likely would have 
retired around the age of 70.  
His transferrable skills are in the heavy duty, labor intensive work fields. He has 
not worked an office job in the relevant past and his skills are not transferable into light 
duty or sedentary duty work. He has no experience in office work, computer usage, 
internet work or clerical work. Claimant testified that driving for long periods of time 
results in pain in his legs which requires rest and no exertion before the pain is 
alleviated.  
Claimant has looked for sedentary work but most of the sedentary jobs claimant 
could find were in the medical field, outside of his area of expertise. Light duty jobs such 
as a line cook would present difficulties due to claimant’s inability to stand on his feet for 
significant periods of time. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 
258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature intended the 
term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity, and not a mere 
'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and 
mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017) now provides:  
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘t’ hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee's functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee's earning capacity. (emphasis added)  
It was previously found that claimant’s work was cut short by approximately 5 
years. He retired at the age of 65 but would have worked until the age of 70 but for the 
accident. He has looked for new employment but is not confident in his ability to retrain 
for sedentary work. He is an older worker with no experience with clerical, office, or 
customer service work. There was scant evidence as to what type of work claimant 
could do within restrictions of no lifting greater than 50 pounds and no squatting, 
kneeling, climbing, or lifting more than 10 pounds overhead. He also tires easily, 
requiring rest after a couple of hours on his feet. Driving long distances also results in 
increased pain. He has to use a cane for long distance ambulation. Claimant’s physical 
state is best suited for a desk job that allows him to take breaks every few hours. 
However, this type of work is not within claimant’s experience, training or background.  
Claimant’s injury was serious. He suffered a number of broken bones, had 
serious abrasions, fractures in his pelvis. He required three surgeries including fusion of 
his rear pelvis, repair to the right knee, and scope and debridement of the left knee. 
There was no employment offer from the defendants prior to hearing.  
Based on the claimant’s age, motivation to return to work, experience, education, 
qualifications, seriousness of the injury, restrictions and impairment, it is determined 
claimant is permanently and totally disabled.  
Claimant’s alternate theory of recovery under the odd-lot doctrine need not be 
considered.  

PATRIE V. MARTINSON CONSTRUCTION CO., INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
Claimant also requests an assessment of costs. 876 IAC 5.33 allows for the 
assessment costs at the discretion of the deputy. Given that claimant has prevailed in 
this matter, the assessment of costs against defendant employer and insurer are 
appropriate except for the examination of Dr. Delbridge. Only reports are permissible 
under 876 IAC 4.33.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, it is ordered: 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant permanent and total disability benefits 
at the rate of four hundred forty-two and 09/100 dollars ($442.09) per week from 
September 22, 2018 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.   
That defendants shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33 
except for the examination performed by Dr. Delbridge. 
That defendants are entitled to a credit of benefits previously paid.  
Signed and filed this        29th       day of January, 2021. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Judith O’Donohoe (via WCES) 
Jason A. Kidd (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
