Case Number: 5054541
Case Title:  COTE V. FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Cote, Alfred-5054541.Ruling on PET for Judicial Review.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
ALFRED FRANCES COTÉ’, 
 
Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
FEDERAL-MOGUL CORP. 
 
and 
 
TRAVELERS INDEMNITY COMPANY OF 
CT. 
 
Respondents. 
 
 
Case No. CVCV057816 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
This is a petition for judicial review from a final decision of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner. The Court heard this matter on December 13, 2019. Alfred Frances Coté (“Mr. Coté” or 
“Petitioner”) appeared through attorney Nicholas G. Pothitakis. Federal-Mogul Corp. (“Federal-Mogul”) 
and Travelers Indemnity Company of CT. (“Respondents”) appeared through attorney Julie A. Burger. 
After considering the arguments of the parties and having reviewed the file and the applicable case law, the 
Court now enters the following ruling. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Factual Background  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
At the time of his hearing, Alfred Cote’ was 58 years old. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 8]. He is an 
electrician by trade. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 11]. He started working for Federal-Mogul in May 2010. 
[Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 27]. Federal-Mogul is a company that makes automotive parts and they produce 
spark plugs at their Burlington, Iowa plant. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 28-9]. They use a number of different 
machines and chemicals in producing their spark plugs. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 29]. Mr. Coté performed 
electrical maintenance and troubleshooting for some of this machinery. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 27-8]. 
Mr. Coté typically worked weekend-overnight shifts at the plant, usually from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m. 
[Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 37-8]. On November 24, 2013, Mr. Coté and a technician were troubleshooting a 
SOLO (brand) annealing oven that stopped working earlier in the day. Mr. Coté had worked on this machine 
a few times before; however, he was less familiar with the machine this time because it was running, and it 
normally did not run on the weekends. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 38].  
At his administrative hearing, Mr. Coté reported that he did not fully understand the operation of 
the machine or what, if any, chemicals that it could potentially release during operation. [Arbitration Hr’g 
Tr.at 41]. Mr. Coté explained that he attempted to find this information later in order to figure out what 
substances he may have been exposed to at times relevant hereto. Id.  
Per Mr. Coté’s September 19, 2016 hearing testimony, the oven operates as follows: Nickel alloy 
parts are run through the oven on a metal conveyor belt at very slow speeds. The oven is about sixteen feet 
long. A component of the oven is an “ammonia cracker,” which, if functioning properly, heats ammonia to 
900 degrees Celsius.1 The superheated ammonia is piped into the oven to cause a chemical reaction with 
the nickel alloy parts. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 35]. The process is designed to remove the sulfur from the 
nickel alloy so that the spark plug parts do not corrode. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 39]. The oven is open at 
both ends and there are natural gas fires at each opening with flues above them. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 35]. 
Mr. Coté explained the fires exist to burn off the hydrogen and hydrogen sulfide waste products generated 
                                                          
1 At this temperature, the ammonia “cracks” and becomes 75 percent hydrogen, 25 percent nitrogen, with 
a small amount of ammonia residue leftover. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 35]. 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
by the annealing oven process. The nickel that Federal-Mogul uses contains sulfur in the approximate 
amount of 20 parts per million (“ppm”) Sulphur. [Ex. 10 at 2.]  
Mr. Coté explained his exposure event (the “Exposure Event”) as follows: He first checked that the 
electricity was on for the ammonia cracker and for the oven, which he determined it was. [Arbitration Hr’g 
Tr.at 44]. At the time, Cote explained that he was sitting in a low chair because the ammonia cracker “[is] 
way down low” and that he was “maybe within a foot, foot and a half of the end of the annealing oven 
where the parts come out where normally you’d have … that open flame.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 45]. The 
fires on either end of the oven were not turned on at the time, so any hydrogen and hydrogen sulfide waste 
products would have accumulated or escaped. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 45]. The pipe that feeds ammonia 
into the oven from the ammonia cracker was on Mr. Coté’s end of the oven and about six to eight inches 
from its opening, next to which Mr. Coté’s was seated within 1-1.5 feet. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 48]. The 
technician was about sixteen feet away at the other end of the oven. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 46]. 
Mr. Coté related that the technician said he was going to start up the oven so they could figure out 
what was wrong with it. The technician started the oven and Mr. Coté testified that “almost instantly … 
you could hear this hiss, and I got this very warm gas that was just coming out of there very fast.” 
[Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 47]. Cote noted that the ammonia gas supply to the cracker was set at 20 psi instead 
of 5 psi, which resulted in the release of more ammonia gas than usual. [Ex. 5 at 13]. Of the exposure, Mr. 
Coté stated, “It hit me so hard, I couldn’t get up... I instantly got a really bad headache, irritated my eyes 
and mouth. I immediately realized I was a bit confused.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 48]. Mr. Coté testified that 
the technician “gave out a big yell… He jumped up and jumped backwards … And then he came back over 
to [the control panel] and shut [the oven] off.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 47-8]. 
Mr. Coté explained that the technician came over and helped him up because, in Mr. Coté’s words, 
“it just really got me bad.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 48]. Mr. Coté related that they did not know “what the 
heck happened” though Mr. Coté observed that “there was an ammonia odor and another bad odor …” 
[Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 47]. Mr. Coté “started feeling worse” and “started noticing that [his] right arm and 
hand was shaking some.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 49-50]. He elaborated that he “felt really funny and kind 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
of tingly on my right side, my right arm” and he “felt funny in [his] face.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 50]. When 
Mr. Coté went to make a record of the attempt to fix the machine, he could not use the mouse because his 
hand was “shaking so bad that my fingers kept on hitting the mouse keys back and forth… realized [he] 
couldn't even do that… and just couldn’t function at all...” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 51].  
Mr. Coté went to the Great River Medical Center emergency room shortly thereafter. [Arbitration 
Hr’g Tr.at 51]. “He had a myriad of symptoms including tremors in the right arm, hand and fingers. He had 
numbness on the right side of his face, confusion, and a headache.” [Arbitration Decision at 11].  He was 
immediately administered oxygen. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 52]. Mr. Coté noted that he started feeling better 
and that they asked him what he was exposed to. Id. At the time, the only thing Mr. Coté could think of was 
ammonia from the ammonia cracker. Id. Mr. Coté testified that one of the doctors called the plant and asked 
them to send over a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) concerning what he might have been exposed to, 
which they failed to do. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 52]. Mr. Coté related that the hospital pulled up an MSDS 
for anhydrous ammonia and diagnosed Mr. Coté with a transient ischemic attack (TIA), or a temporary clot 
or blockage to the brain. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 54]. Mr. Coté was released from the hospital and instructed 
to see the company doctor in the morning. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 53].  
The following morning, Mr. Coté saw Dr. Rachel Oliverio. Id. On his occupational medicine clinic 
intake form, Cote described his current symptoms as “tremors in right arm, hand, and fingers, headache, 
right face numbness.” [Ex. 1 at 1]. Dr. Oliverio diagnosed Cote with (1) toxic effects from gases and (2) a 
transient ischemic attack. Id. at 4. Dr. Oliverio noted that Cote could return to regular duty, but instructed 
him to follow up with a neurologist for further evaluation. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 55].  
On December 5, 2013, Mr. Coté saw neurologist Dr. Anil Dhuna. Mr. Coté reported having 
occasional shakiness of the right side and right eye droopiness to Dr. Dhuna. [Ex. 2 at 1]. In his “Assessment 
and Plan”, Dr. Dhuna noted that: 
[Mr. Coté] had exposure at work to superheated anhydrous ammonia. Shortly after 
exposure [Mr. Coté] had burning in his eyes, shortness of breath and then right-sided 
weakness and incoordination. His symptoms have greatly improved but he still has some 
trouble with right hand tremor and right eye ptosis. My suspicion is that the stress of the 
chemical exposure may have precipitated a mild stroke. [Mr. Coté] has significant risk 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
factors for stroke with obesity and hypertension. … I am arranging for an MRI scan of the 
brain and carotid ultrasound. … [Mr. Coté] is to continue working full-time without 
restrictions.  
[Ex. 2 at 4]. Cote had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Dhuna on January 9, 2014. Id. at 5. Mr. Coté’s 
MRI And EEG exam results were found to be within normal ranges. Id. at 7. At this point, Dr. Dhuna 
indicated Mr. Coté’s symptoms were “more suggestive of a central tremor and may be exacerbated by his 
exposure to anhydrous ammonia, but I cannot rule out a clinical small vascular event. This could be a mild 
underlying essential tremor exacerbated by stress.” Id.  
Dr. Dhuna referred Cote to a stroke specialist, Dr. Harold Adams. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 60]. On 
April 16, 2014, Cote saw Dr. Adams at the University of Iowa stroke clinic. [Ex. 5 at 1]. Dr. Adams 
examined Cote and noted that “[Cote] does have a tremor which is absent at rest but increases dramatically 
with action and terminally.” [Ex. 5 at 3]. Dr. Adams looked at the imaging studies Cote brought and thought 
it was unlikely that Cote had a stroke. Id. Dr. Adams’ “working hypothesis” was that Cote had a Parkinson 
syndrome. Id. Dr. Adams’ basis for the diagnosis of parkinsonism included Mr. Coté’s tremor, rigidity, and 
bradykinesia. Id. As to the possibility of a relationship between his findings and  ammonia exposure, Dr. 
Adams opined that “it is unclear if a couple episodes of environmental ammonia exposure can cause these 
types of neurologic impairments.” Id. Dr. Adams ordered imaging studies of Mr. Coté’s brain, including a 
SPECT scan, to explore whether his initial diagnosis was correct. Id. The imaging study impression 
indicated “[f]indings of bilaterally decreased putaminal uptake … is suspicious for early Parkinsonian 
syndrome.” [Ex. 5 at 5].  
On June 4, 2014, Cote saw Dr. Dhuna for a follow-up appointment. [Ex. 2 at 8]. Dr. Dhuna 
recognized that Cote had a SPECT scan done at the University of Iowa and that the impression was Cote 
had a tremor consistent with Parkinson’s disease. Id. Dr. Dhuna observed that Cote “initially had right hand 
tremor which has improved now and he has more head titubation.” [Ex. 2 at 10]. Dr. Dhuna still concluded 
that he thought Cote most likely had essential tremor. Id.  
At a July 1, 2014 follow-up appointment, Dr. Adams again examined Cote. [Ex. 5 at 7]. He noted 
that:  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
Cote continues to have tremors and some other evidence of raised the [sic] concern of 
Parkinsonian syndrome. This is not Parkinson’s disease. He does not have postural 
instability. His movements are generally quite good. His findings are primarily rigidity 
with some element of cogwheeling in the right upper extremity. The cause for his 
Parkinsonian syndrome has not been established. His symptoms began after possible toxic 
substances in an incident at work. ... The nature of the toxic substances has not been 
established. Initially, there was a concern about ammonia. I cannot find evidence of 
ammonia playing a role in the development of parkinsonian syndrome but there are a 
number of other substances including heavy metals that may produce neurologic 
symptoms. I am unsure how we can move forward to establish a cause and effect 
relationship. 
 Id. at 9. In a letter to Dr. Janette Glass, Mr. Coté’s primary care provider, Dr. Adams reported that: 
My diagnosis remains a parkinsonian syndrome. The cause of his parkinsonian syndrome 
has not been established with certainty. There are cases of parkinsonism that have been 
associated with exposure to toxic substances. In most circumstances, this has been a 
chronic exposure. I am unsure on how to determine a cause-and-effect relationship in this 
incident in part because I do not know the possible substances and their concentrations that 
may have caused his symptoms. Still, his symptoms appeared shortly after his reported 
exposure. 
[Ex. 5 at 11].  
On September 24, 2014, at the request of Travelers Insurance, Cote saw Dr. Frederic Gerr at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics. Dr. Gerr performed an independent medical examination of Cote 
to address the issue of causation, among other things. [Ex. 5 at 12]. As to diagnosis, Dr. Gerr opined that 
Cote likely has a parkinsonian syndrome. Id. at 17. Dr. Gerr explained Mr. Coté’s imaging study and Mr. 
Coté’s treating neurologists supported this diagnosis. Id. Dr. Gerr further opined that “to a reasonable 
degree of medical certainty, the exposure to the ammonia substances and other contents of the vented gas 
were not a cause of [Mr. Coté’s] current condition.” Id. Dr. Gerr acknowledged that “the reported tight 
temporal relationship between the onset of Mr. Coté’s tremor and his exposure to gasses vented from 
annealing oven on November 24, 2013, are suggestive of a causal relationship ...” Id. But, he determined: 
[T]here is no biomedical evidence that such an exposure is capable of causing his condition. 
… There are no case reports nor any descriptions of rapid-onset, persistent Parkinsonism 
following acute exposure to any anhydrous ammonia (or nickel, copper, or zinc) in the 
biomedical literature. Furthermore, there is no epidemiological evidence that such 
exposures are capable of causing nearly instantaneous onset Parkinsonian illness (not 
Parkinsonian illness of less raid [sic] onset). In addition, the rapidity of onset of the 
condition … makes a toxicological cause resulting from the annealing oven exposure 
virtually impossible.  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
[Ex. 5 at 17].  
Cote sought out a tremor specialist for further evaluation and treatment. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 77]. 
On April 29, 2015 he saw Dr. Richard Dubinsky of the University of Kansas, Department of Neurology. 
[Ex. 9 at 1]. Cote represented to Dr. Dubinsky that he had an occupational exposure to hydrogen sulfide 
gas. Id. Dr. Dubinsky explained from the outset that he would not address questions of causation. Id. Dr. 
Dubinsky performed a physical and neurological examination of Cote and observed a tremor in Mr. Coté’s 
“hand both at rest and with action” but no evidence of “cog wheeling.” Id. at 2. Ultimately, Dr. Dubinsky 
opined that “[t]here is no clinical evidence of parkinsonism or Parkinson’s disease and with a normal sense 
of smell I am not concerned about incipient PD at this time. Id. at 3. Dr. Dubinsky diagnosed Cote with 
essential tremor. Id.  
On September 10, 2015. Dr. Dhuna saw Cote again. Cote reported to Dr. Dhuna that the gas(es) he 
was exposed to included hydrogen sulfide. In his Assessment and Plan notes, Dr. Dhuna explained:  
[T]here have also been cases with acute exposure of hydrogen sulfide exceeding 280 
mg/m3 causing long-term neurological effects with tremors, reduced motion function, 
ataxia and cognitive deficits. It would be possible that if [Cote] had been exposed to 
hydrogen sulfide at these dosages, that his present neurological symptoms could be related 
to his industrial exposure. There is no other etiology for his tremors determined at this 
point. His neurological symptoms have occured after his acute exposure and have 
remained. 
[Ex. 2 at 13].  
With the focus changing from ammonia exposure to hydrogen sulfide exposure, Cote and Federal-
Mogul each attempted to test for hydrogen sulfide around the annealing oven. Cote noted that sometime in 
the latter half of 2015, the night supervisor asked him to test for dangerous levels of gases in the plant. 
[Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 83]. Cote testified that, when he was about six or seven feet away from the opening 
of the oven, the testing equipment detected hydrogen sulfide, “[b]ut the level wasn't much higher than 
whatever that safe level was.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 85, 87]. At the time that Cote was getting his reading, 
the fire on the side of the oven was out, unlike when Cote was working on the oven on November 24, 2013. 
[Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 85]. On March 14, 2016, the Environmental Engineer at Federal-Mogul's Burlington 
plant, Gary McCauley, sampled the air directly around the annealing oven for hydrogen sulfide. [Ex. 10 at 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
2]. When the oven was up to temperature and full, McCauley reported that no measurable amount of 
hydrogen sulfide was exiting the oven. Id. However, the oven was in working order when the test was done, 
and the natural glass flames were both on, unlike when Cote was working on the oven on November 24, 
2013. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 90].  
Through counsel, Cote sought out Dr. Harry Elston, a chemist and certified industrial hygienist at 
Midwest Chemical Safety, to give his opinion on whether the annealing oven could generate 280 mg/m3 of 
hydrogen sulfide, an exposure level Dr. Dhuna opined could cause long term neurological effects. [Ex. 8]. 
Based on the assumption that the nickel wire processed in the annealing oven contained about 20 ppm of 
Sulphur, Dr. Elston explained that the hydrogen annealing of 28 pounds of wire could produce the exposure 
level Dr. Dhuna cited. Id. Dr. Elston ultimately opined, based on an assumption of the approximate 
dimensions of Mr. Coté’s working environment, that one could reasonably conclude that Cote more-likely-
than not had an acute exposure to hydrogen sulfide from the annealing oven. Id.  
Cote also sought a medical causation opinion from Dr. Dhuna. In a letter dated February 26, 2016, 
Dr. Dhuna concluded that Mr. Coté’s work-place exposure was more-likely-than-not a “substantial 
contributing factor” to his essential tremors. [Ex. 6]. Dr. Dhuna explained his opinion was based on the 
history presented to him, which included that (1) Cote experienced a high-level exposure to hydrogen 
sulfide and (2) that the tremors came on suddenly after exposure. Id. Dr. Dhuna also based his conclusion 
on his previous determination that an acute exposure to high-levels of hydrogen sulfide can cause essential 
tremors. Id.  
On June 15, 2016, Travelers Insurance sought a subsequent medical causation opinion from Dr. 
Gerr, updating the materials they provided him to reflect Mr. Coté’s contention that he was also exposed to 
hydrogen sulfide and that this exposure explained his present condition. Dr. Gerr's ultimate conclusion was 
that “there is no biological or medical basis to conclude that [Mr. Coté’s] occupational exposure to either 
ammonia gas or hydrogen sulfide gas caused, contributed to, or aggravated his current neurological illness.” 
[Ex. 7 at 2]. Dr. Gerr explained the rationale for his opinion as follows. First, Dr. Gerr found there was “no 
credible evidence that Mr. Cote was exposed to clinically or biologically relevant levels of hydrogen sulfide 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
gas allegedly emitted by the annealing oven ....” Dr. Gerr’s bases for this opinion were: (1) McCauley's 
report concerning the amount of hydrogen sulfide found to be leaving the oven when in operation, (2) the 
fact that [Mr. Coté’s] report of a rotten-egg smell was not made until eighteen months after the exposure 
event, and (3) that the literature demonstrates that individuals who experienced permanent neurological 
impairment from hydrogen sulfide exposure had concomitant severe and immediate lung injury, none of 
which Petitioner reported. Second, Dr. Gerr found that, based on his survey of the medical literature,  
[t]here is no known association between exposure to hydrogen sulfide and essential 
tremor nor between hydrogen sulfide and Parkinsonian syndrome or Parkinson's disease ... 
[E]xposure to high levels of hydrogen sulfide are associated with potentially permanent 
neurological impairment. However, such impairment does not manifest as essential tremor 
nor as parkinsonian illness. 
[Ex. 7 at 3].  
Prior to Mr. Coté’s exposure event on November 24, 2013, he had numerous health problems 
related to contracting West Nile virus in 2002. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 13]. Mr. Coté noted it is a chronic 
condition and left him with a compromised immune system. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 14]. Mr. Coté 
experienced a number of symptoms following and/or in connection with West Nile virus including 
headaches, hearing changes, balance problems, left-sided numbness, dizziness, nerve neuropathy, and 
dysphagia. Mr. Coté saw a number of doctors in connection with these symptoms. The record also shows 
Mr. Coté has a lengthy medical history of attempting to deal with these issues. Nevertheless, Mr. Coté 
testified – and the record reflects – that he did not have any type of tremor or shaking of his arms or head 
on the right side of his body prior to November 24, 2013. [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 16].  
B. Procedural History 
 
On September 22, 2015, Mr. Coté filed his petition for workers’ compensation benefits. In part, 
Mr. Coté alleged that he suffered a permanent disability arising from the exposure event from the annealing 
oven on November 24, 2013. Iowa Workers’ Compensation Deputy Commissioner Michelle McGovern 
(the “Deputy Commissioner”) held a hearing on this matter on September 19, 2016, and issued an arbitration 
decision on September 12, 2017. Per the hearing report, the parties stipulated that there was an exposure 
event, but disputed whether the alleged injury was a cause of temporary and/or permanent disability. If the 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
alleged injury was found to be a cause of permanent disability, the parties stipulated that it would be an 
industrial disability.  
After considering the facts detailed above, the Deputy Commissioner ultimately found that Mr. 
Coté sustained a work-place injury entitling him to medical expenses, but that Mr. Coté failed to establish 
that the exposure event caused him to sustain permanent disability. As an initial matter, the Deputy 
Commissioner laid out the causation standard that claimants must establish as a matter of law. She then 
proceeded to her causation analysis, which states in relevant part:  
This is an interesting but puzzling case. [Mr. Coté] consulted with a myriad of specialists 
from several University Medical Centers. He conferred with all types of neurologists, 
neuro-radiologists, and he underwent countless diagnostic tests. Nevertheless, physicians 
cannot agree upon a concrete diagnosis for [Mr. Coté]. Currently, it appears [Mr. Coté] 
suffers from essential tremor. The tremor did develop after the SOLO annealing oven 
malfunctioned on November 23, 2013. It is unknown whether [Mr. Coté] was exposed to 
anhydrous ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, both or neither. There is no doubt there was an 
exposure to something in the air but no sampling was done at the time. There is no empirical 
data to support an over-exposure to anything. No one knows the length of time [Mr. Coté] 
spent sitting on a chair next to the annealing oven. As a consequence, there is no data to 
establish the amount of time [Mr. Coté] was exposed. 
 
The exposure adversely impacted [Mr. Coté] immediately. He was unable to manipulate 
the mouse of his computer because of tremors in his right hand. [Mr. Coté] sought 
emergency medical care at the Great Medical Center. From the onset of his medical 
treatment, [Mr. Coté] complained of right arm, hand and finger tremors. He had other 
symptoms as well. He was confused, he developed a hoarse voice, both eyes were burning, 
the right side of his face became numb, he had sustained some toxic effects immediately 
following the exposure. In short, [Mr. Coté] sustained an injury that arose out of an in the 
course of his employment.  
 
However, the salient issue is the medical cause for the right hand, and right arm tremors. 
The other symptoms dissipated with time.  
 
[Arbitration Decision p. 24. ] 
The Deputy Commissioner went on to identify deficiencies with Dr. Elston’s opinion, 
noting that he could not state that Mr. Coté “was over exposed to hydrogen sulfide on the day in 
question” and that he “did not conduct any sampling in the [] plant … or even tour the facility.” Id. 
She also found McCauley’s sampling data for hydrogen sulfide to be irrelevant because “they do 
not affect what did or did not occur on November 24, 2013.” Id. at 25.  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
The Deputy Commissioner also referenced that “most of the medical professionals ignored 
the issue of medical causation with respect to the diagnoses they offered [Mr. Coté].” She 
explained: 
Dr. Oliverio opined [Mr. Coté] had a [TIA] but [Mr. Coté] was returned to work without 
any restrictions. Dr. Adams questioned whether ammonia exposure in the workplace could 
cause neurologic impairments such as a Parkinson syndrome. Dr. Dubansky [sic] refused 
to discuss whether hydrogen sulfide could cause essential tremor. No medical provider 
produced any literature or scientific studies to establish hydrogen sulfide was a cause for 
essential tremor. Many of [Mr. Coté’s] symptoms were the same as the ones he express 
after he developed West Nile Virus.  
[Arbitration Decision at 25].  
With respect to medical experts who offered opinions on causation, the Deputy 
Commissioner highlighted Dr. Gerr’s emphatic opinion that a causal relationship between Mr. 
Coté’s condition and exposure to hydrogen sulfide did not exist. And she noted that while Dr. 
Dhuna found a causal connection based on the history reported to him, she did not give it any 
weight because the opinion was “not based upon accurate facts” since “[Mr. Coté] reported he was 
exposed to hydrogen sulfide when there was no empirical data to support [his] contention.” Id. The 
Deputy Commissioner’s ultimate conclusion on the issue of whether Mr. Coté sustained a 
permanent injury was that Mr. Coté “failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his 
condition of essential tremor is causally connected to any exposure he sustained on November 24, 
2013.” [Arbitration Decision at 25].  
 
Of note, within the ‘Findings of Fact’ section of the Deputy Commissioner’s Arbitration Decision, 
she included the Mayo Clinic’s definition of essential tremor, their explanation of its symptoms and signs, 
a comparison between essential tremor and Parkinson’s disease, and causes of essential tremor. [Arbitration 
Decision at 16-7]. Neither party submitted the Mayo Clinic’s overview of essential tremor into evidence or 
offered it as an exhibit. Apparently, the Deputy Commissioner incorporated her own research into her 
findings. It is unclear the extent to which the Deputy Commissioner relied on this information in reaching 
her decision.  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
Upon a de novo review, the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner (the “Commissioner”) reached 
the same conclusions as the Deputy Commissioner and adopted her findings of fact and conclusions of law 
as the agency’s final decision. 
 
On appeal, Mr. Coté contends that the Commissioner erred in finding that his work injury did not 
cause him to sustain a permanent disability. Mr. Coté asks the Court to reverse the Commissioner’s decision 
and find that he sustained a permanent injury arising out and in the course of his employment or remand 
the matter for rehearing before the Commissioner to correct any errors made.  
 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 
Chapter 17A of the Iowa Code governs judicial review of administrative agency action. The district 
court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law by the agency. Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 
213, 219 (Iowa 2006). The Court “may grant relief if the agency action has prejudiced the substantial rights 
of the petitioner, and the agency action meets one of the enumerated criteria contained in section 17A.19 
(10) (a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care Cntr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom 
Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 N.W.2d 758, 762 (Iowa 2011)).  
Where an agency has been “clearly vested” with fact-finding authority, the appropriate “standard 
of review [on appeal] depends on the aspect of the agency’s decision that form the basis of the petition for 
judicial review.”. Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256. The standard of review varies depending on whether the 
alleged error involves an issue of (1) findings of fact, (2) interpretation of law, or (3) an application of the 
law to facts. 
The Court must also grant appropriate relief from agency action if such action was “[b]ased upon 
an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation has not clearly been vested by a 
provision of law in the discretion of the agency.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c). With respect to such 
provisions of law, the Court is not required to defer to the agency’s interpretation. Iowa Code § 
17A.19(11)(b). Additionally, the Court must grant relief from agency action that is “[b]ased upon an 
irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable interpretation of a provision of law,” based upon a 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

13 
 
misapplication of law to the facts, or “[o]therwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of 
discretion.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(1)(l–n). 
If “the claim of error lies with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge is to the agency’s 
application of the law to the facts, and the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion 
by, for example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.” 
Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. In other words, the Court will only reverse the Commissioner’s application of 
law to the facts if “it is ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’” Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518 (quoting 
Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007); see also Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (“When 
application of law to fact has been clearly vested in the discretion of an agency, a reviewing court may only 
disturb the agency’s application of the law to the facts of a particular case if that application is ‘irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’”). 
If the alleged error is one of fact, the standard of review is whether the findings are supported by 
substantial evidence. Harris, 778 N.W.2d at 196; Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 
557 (Iowa 2010). “[A] reviewing court can only disturb those factual findings if they are ‘not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is reviewed as a whole.’” Burton, 813 
N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)). The Court “is limited to the findings that were actually 
made by the agency and not other findings the agency could have made.” Id. "The commissioner, not the 
court, weighs the evidence." Ward v. Iowa Dep't of Transp., 304 N.W.2d 236, 237 (Iowa 1981). “[C]ourts 
must not simply rubber stamp the agency fact finding without engaging in a fairly intensive review of the 
record to ensure that the fact finding is itself reasonable.” Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 
493, 499 (Iowa 2003) (internal quotations and citation omitted). 
“Evidence is substantial if a reasonable person would find the evidence adequate to reach the same 
conclusion.” Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002) (citing Ehteshamfar v. 
UTA Engineered Sys. Div., 555 N.W.2d 450, 452 (Iowa 1996)).  
Here, Petitioner attempts to frame the issue in a way to get a less deferential standard of review. 
Petitioner argues that the agency applied the incorrect burden of proof. However, the substance of 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

14 
 
Petitioner’s argument is that the Deputy Commissioner erred by according Dr. Gerr’s expert opinion(s) 
more weight than the opinions of Petitioner’s experts. This is a challenge to the agency’s findings of fact, 
which will not be disturbed as long as they are supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
ANALYSIS 
Petitioner argues that the Deputy Commissioner made two errors. Each is addressed in turn.  
A. Incorrect burden of proof regarding causation: 
As stated earlier, regardless of how Petitioner phrased the issue, the substance of his argument is 
that the Deputy Commissioner erred in according Dr. Gerr’s expert opinion(s) more weight than the 
opinions of Petitioner’s experts. The Deputy Commissioner cites the appropriate burden of proof.  
Iowa Code section 85.3 creates a workers’ compensation claim and entails four basic elements. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 220 (Iowa 2006). First, “the claimant suffered a personal injury.” Id. 
(quotations omitted). Second, an employer-employee relationship existed between the claimant and the 
respondent. Id. Third, “the injury arose out of the employment.” Id. Fourth, “the injury arose in the course 
of the employment.” Id.  
The Iowa Supreme Court has recognized an additional requirement in workers’ compensation 
claims that is not directly implicated by Iowa Code section 85.3—a disability that is the subject of the 
workers’ compensation claim must have been proximately caused by the injury that arose out of and in the 
course of employment. Id. n.2 (citing Freeman v. Luppes Transp. Co., 227 N.W.2d 143, 148 (Iowa 1975)). 
“A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result.” Blacksmith v. All-Am., Inc., 
290 N.W.2d 348, 354 (Iowa 1980) (citation omitted). “It only needs to be one cause; it does not have to be 
the only cause.” Id. (citation omitted). “Ordinarily, expert testimony is necessary to establish the causal 
connection between the injury and the disability for which benefits are claimed.” Schutjer v. Algona Manor 
Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (citation omitted). “The commissioner must consider the 
expert testimony together with all other evidence introduced bearing on the causal connection between the 
injury and the disability.” Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 1998) (citation omitted).  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

15 
 
The claimant bears the burden to prove all of the elements of his workers’ compensation claim by 
a preponderance of the evidence, including that his work injury proximately caused the disability for which 
he seeks compensation. Id. “A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.” Id. A preponderance  
means superiority in weight, influence, or force. The evidence may preponderate, 
and yet leave the mind in doubt as to the very truth. In such cases the evidence does not 
fairly set the question at rest, but merely preponderates in favor of that side whereon the 
doubts have less weight.  
Walthart v. Bd. of Directors of Edgewood-Colesburg Cmty. Sch. Dist., 694 N.W.2d 740, 744 (Iowa 2005) 
(citation omitted). 
As the trier of fact, the Commissioner weighs the evidence and assesses the credibility of the witnesses. 
The experts in this case leave many questions unanswered. However, it was the Petitioner’s burden to prove 
all of the elements of his claim. Petitioner was inconsistent in his descriptions of what he was exposed to, 
including his comments to Dr. Dhuna, whose causation opinion Petitioner ultimately relies on. Petitioner 
speculated what he was exposed to and recounted the Exposure Event accordingly throughout his medical 
records. The Deputy Commissioner took issue with this inconsistency and found that Petitioner’s causation 
experts did not have accurate facts when rendering their opinions. For this reason, the Deputy 
Commissioner did not find Petitioner’s experts reliable and instead focused on Dr. Gerr’s causation opinion, 
which the Deputy Commissioner found credible and reliable. Whether or not this Court agrees with the 
Agency’s conclusion in this case, there is substantial evidence in the record to support the Deputy 
Commissioner’s finding that Petitioner failed to prove medical causation.  
B. Whether the Deputy Commissioner erred in relying on her personal investigation of medical 
authorities 
Petitioner takes issue with the Deputy Commissioner’s personal investigation of Essential Tremor. 
In her “FINDINGS OF FACT” section, the Deputy Commissioner includes the definition and overview of 
Essential Tremor from the Mayo Clinic’s website. [Arbitration Decision at 15-17]. Respondent correctly 
points out that Petitioner does not cite to any authority that the Deputy Commissioner’s incorporation of 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

16 
 
her personal research into her findings of fact violates any rule. [Res’p’s Brief 19]. This Court suspects that 
the Deputy Commissioner found herself in a position much like this court – wanting more information. It 
was Petitioner’s burden to prove his claim at the agency level just as it is the Petitioner’s burden to prove 
the merits of this appeal. Petitioner fell short in both instances. Regardless, the Deputy Commissioner does 
not refer to any of her research in her reasoning or conclusions of law. To the extent that she erred in her 
investigation, Petitioner failed to show that it resulted in any prejudice to the Petitioner.  
CONCLUSION 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED the Deputy Commissioner’s Order, affirmed by the 
Commissioner, is hereby AFFIRMED.  Costs of the appeal are taxed to Petitioner. 
 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV057816
ALFRED FRANCES COTE VS FEDERAL MOGUL ET AL
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-03-31 10:54:47     page 17 of 17
E-FILED  2020 MAR 31 10:54 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
