Case Number: 1663391.01
Case Title:  ZUKAJ, SKENDER V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Zukaj Skender-1663391.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SKENDER ZUKAJ, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  File Nos. 19000172.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
    1663391.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SENTRY INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
Headnotes: 1108.10, 1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
                1802, 2202, 2206, 2701, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Claimant Skender Zukaj filed a petition in arbitration, File No. 1663391.01, on 
July 11, 2019, alleging he sustained an injury to his back while working for the 
defendant, EFCO Corp Wilian Holding Co. (“EFCO”) on April 17, 2019.  EFCO and its 
insurer, the defendant, Sentry Insurance Company (“Sentry”), formerly known as Sentry 
Insurance, filed an answer on July 29, 2019.  Zukaj filed a second petition in arbitration, 
File No. 19000172.01, on July 11, 2019, alleging he sustained a heart attack and injury 
to his body as a whole while working for EFCO on June 27, 2019.  EFCO and Sentry 
filed an answer on July 17, 2019.   
 
An arbitration hearing was held by CourtCall on December 7, 2020.  Attorney 
Gregory Taylor represented Zukaj.  Zukaj appeared and testified.  Kadira Mujkanovic, 
Zukaj’s daughter-in-law, appeared and testified on Zukaj’s behalf.  Zijo Suceska 
provided Bosnian interpretation services during the hearing.  Attorney Michael Roling 
represented EFCO and Sentry.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 1 through 6, and Exhibits 1 through 
18 and A through N were admitted into the record.  The record was held open through 
February 5, 2021, for the receipt of JE 7 and post-hearing briefs.  JE 7 and the briefs 
were received and the record was closed. 
At the start of the hearing the parties submitted a hearing report, listing 
stipulations and issues to be decided.  EFCO waived all affirmative defenses.   
At the time of the arbitration hearing Zukaj alleged he sustained a permanent 
partial impairment due to a heart attack.  EFCO and Sentry disputed the claim.  In his 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-May-17  16:29:12     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
post-hearing brief, Zukaj withdrew his claim for permanent partial disability benefits and 
reported he was not seeking industrial disability benefits for his heart attack injury. 
FILE NO. 1663391.01 – BACK INJURY 
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between EFCO and Zukaj at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
 
2. 
Zukaj sustained an injury on April 17, 2019, which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with EFCO. 
 
3. 
The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
4. 
While entitlement to temporary benefits cannot be stipulated, Zukaj has 
been off work since January 27, 2020.    
 
5. 
If the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the disability is 
an industrial disability. 
 
6. 
At the time of the alleged injury Zukaj’s gross earnings were $880.15 per 
week, he was married and entitled to two exemptions, and the parties believe the 
weekly rate is $576.30. 
 
7. 
The costs listed in Exhibit 17 have been paid. 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of permanent disability? 
 
2. 
Is Zukaj entitled to a running award of temporary benefits from January 
27, 2020? 
 
3. 
If the injury is found to be the cause of permanent disability, what is the 
extent of disability? 
4. 
Has Zukaj reached maximum medical improvement, and if so, what is the 
commencement date for permanency? 
 
5. 
Is Zukaj entitled to alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27? 
 
6. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FILE NO. 19000172.01 – MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION 
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between EFCO and Zukaj at 
the time of the alleged injury. 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
2. 
While entitlement to temporary benefits cannot be stipulated, Zukaj was 
off work from June 28, 2019 through October 3, 2019.   
 
 
3. 
At the time of the alleged injury Zukaj’s gross earnings were $835.47 per 
week, he was married and entitled to two exemptions, and the parties believe the 
weekly rate is $549.53. 
 
4. 
The costs listed in Exhibit 17 have been paid. 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Did Zukaj sustain an injury on July 27, 2019, which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with EFCO? 
 
2. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
 
3. 
Is Zukaj entitled to temporary benefits from June 28, 2019 through 
October 3, 2019? 
4. 
Is Zukaj entitled to payment of medical expenses set forth in Exhibits 15 
and 16? 
5. 
Is Zukaj entitled to alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27? 
6. 
Is Zukaj entitled to an award of penalty benefits? 
 
7. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Zukaj was born and raised in Sarajevo, Bosnia.  (Transcript, page 9)  Zukaj 
attended elementary school in Bosnia and he has not received any additional education.  
(Tr., p. 9)  Zukaj moved to the United States in 2001.  (Tr., p. 9)  Zukaj can understand 
English, but he uses an interpreter for medical appointments and he used an interpreter 
during the hearing.  (Tr., p. 10)  Zukaj can read English, but he cannot write in English.  
(Tr., p. 10)  Zukaj can read and write in Bosnian.  (Tr., p. 10)  At the time of the hearing 
he was fifty-five.  (Tr., p. 9)   
 
While living in Bosnia, Zukaj worked for the Metro Transportation Company, 
where he was responsible for filling gasoline tanks.  (Tr., pp. 10-11)  Zukaj believes he 
could do that job today because it was not hard work.  (Tr., p. 11) 
 
After moving to the United States, Zukaj secured work as a full-time welder.  (Tr., 
pp. 11-12)  Since 2002 he has worked as a welder for various companies.  (Tr., p. 11)   
In 2017, Zukaj commenced employment with EFCO as a welder.  (Tr., pp. 11-12)  
The welder position requires frequent to continuous standing and frequent walking, in 
addition to other physical requirements.  (Ex. A)  Zukaj testified the welder position was 
not physically that hard because ninety percent of the welding is done with the help of 
cranes.  (Tr., p. 13)  Zukaj had to lift plates weighing up to fifty pounds a distance of four 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
feet.  (Tr., p. 13)  Zukaj testified he did not have any physical limitations or work 
restrictions for his back when he commenced his employment with EFCO.  (Tr., p. 12) 
On March 2, 2018, Zukaj crushed his left hand in a machine press at work.  He 
was diagnosed with a left hand crush injury with middle finger middle phalanx base 
fracture, intraarticular, diffuse pain and swelling of the left hand after crush injury, and 
left hand arthritis, and he received treatment.  (JE 1, pp. 1-3, 5)   
 
On February 8, 2019, Zukaj attended a pre-placement physical following the 
crush injury.  (JE 7)  Zukaj reported he had injured his left middle finger in a press 
machine in 2018, he was a smoker, and he denied having any problems with his back, 
legs, or cardiovascular system.  (JE 7)  The reviewing medical practitioner opined Zukaj 
was medically qualified to perform the essential functions of all positions with EFCO.  
(JE 7)  Zukaj worked on the painting line after he returned to work.  (Tr., pp. 13-14)   
On April 17, 2017, Zukaj was working on the painting line at EFCO.  (Tr., p. 14)  
After his painting partner left to use the bathroom, Zukaj bent over to pick up material on 
the line and when he tried to stand up he could not straighten up.  (Tr., p. 14)  Zukaj 
estimated the part he picked up weighed more than sixty or seventy pounds.  (Tr., p. 14)  
Zukaj testified he was in a crooked position and he instantly had back pain radiating into 
his left leg.  (Tr., pp. 14-15)  Zukaj denied ever having similar pain in his back or leg in 
the past.  (Tr., p. 15)  Zukaj later reported the work injury to EFCO, noting he could not 
sit or stand well because of pain in his lower back extending down his left leg.  (Ex. 4, p. 
20)   
 
On April 22, 2019, Zukaj attended an appointment with David Berg, D.O., an 
occupational medicine physician, complaining of low back pain with radiculopathy into 
his left lower extremity and numbness in his left small toe after lifting heavy metal at 
work and feeling sudden pain in his low back.  (JE 2, p. 15)  Dr. Berg examined Zukaj, 
and assessed him with a low back strain, left SI joint dysfunction, and left S1 
radiculopathy.  (JE 2, p. 15)  Dr. Berg administered a left SI joint injection, restricted 
Zukaj from working, and scheduled lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging.  (JE 2, 
pp. 15-16)   
 
On May 15, 2019, Zukaj underwent lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging.  
(JE 1, p. 10)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of: 
L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1 mild lumbar spondylosis, as detailed above, 
chronic three mm retrolisthesis of L5 on S1, chronic.  
At L4-L5 there is a small broad-based disc bulge eccentric to the right 
contracting the exiting right L4 nerve root as well as the traversing right L5 
nerve root, age indeterminate.  Mild right neural foraminal narrowing.  No 
spinal canal or left foraminal compromise.    
(JE 1, p. 10)   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
During a follow-up visit on May 29, 2019, Zukaj reported he did not receive much 
relief from the injection, but relayed after the injection he just had pain down the anterior 
aspect of his left thigh and no longer below his knee into his foot.  (JE 2, p. 18)  Dr. Berg 
assessed Zukaj with low back pain and left S1 radiculitis, restricted Zukaj to sedentary 
work, and recommended a referral to a pain specialist for consideration of an injection.  
(JE 2, pp. 18-19)   
 
On June 18, 2019, Zukaj attended an appointment with Clay Ransdell, D.O., a 
pain specialist, complaining of left lumbar pain radiating from his left side lower back 
into his left hip and down his left thigh to his knee.  (JE 3, p. 49)  Dr. Ransdell examined 
Zukaj, assessed him with lumbar radiculopathy, and administered a lumbar epidural 
steroid injection.  (JE 3, p. 52)  Two days later Zukaj’s daughter-in-law contacted Dr. 
Ransdell’s office and reported Zukaj’s pain had increased in his low back after the 
injection.  (JE 3, p. 54)  Zukaj testified two days after the injection the pain in his left leg 
subsided, but he developed pain in his right leg that was worse than his left leg pain had 
been and that he continued to experience low back pain.  (Tr., pp. 16-19)   
 
EFCO assigned Zukaj to put together screw and nut assemblies.  (Tr., p. 20)  
The boxes of unassembled bolts came on pallets that were delivered by a forklift.  (Ex. 
10, p. 17)  Zukaj testified he had to lift the boxes of bolts weighing fifty to fifty-five 
pounds from a pallet onto a table.  (Tr., pp. 21-22)  Crawford, Zukaj’s immediate 
supervisor, testified it was possible employees were placing the boxes of bolts on the 
floor and Zukaj then had to lift the bolts from the floor and put them on the table.  (Ex. 
10, Crawford Depo., pp. 5-7, 21)  Zukaj assembled the nuts and bolts on the table and 
placed each assembly into a bucket that held 100 assembled nuts and bolts.  He then 
used a jib hoist to lift each bucket to take the bucket away before reaching down to lift 
the next box to the table.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., pp. 9, 16; Tr., p. 21, 23-24)  
Crawford recalled that before June 27, 2019, Zukaj asked him if he could have some 
help lifting the boxes of unassembled nuts and bolts.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., pp. 27-
28)   
 
Zukaj worked evening shift.  Zukaj testified on June 27, 2019, at 11:15 p.m., 
toward the end of his shift, he experienced dizziness, light headedness, and a tight 
chest when he was returning from a ten-minute smoke break.  (Ex. 5, p. 22; Tr., p. 23)  
Zukaj testified he could not catch his breath or breathe and reported he had never had 
those symptoms or been diagnosed with a heart condition before.  (Tr., p. 25)  Zukaj 
reported before he experienced the symptoms he had lifted between ten to eleven 
boxes of bolts, each weighing 50 to 55 pounds.  (Tr., pp. 22, 24, 44)    
Crawford testified an employee flagged him down at work and told him Zukaj was 
about to pass out.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)  Crawford observed Zukaj looked 
flushed and he believed Zukaj was having issues with the heat.  (Ex. 10, Crawford 
Depo., p. 29)  Crawford transported Zukaj by electric cart to an air-conditioned office, 
gave him some water, and gave him a wet towel to wrap around his neck, and left him 
to sit and cool off for a few minutes.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)  When Crawford 
returned Zukaj was complaining of chest tightness, so Crawford gave him an aspirin 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
and told him he was going to call an ambulance.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 30)  Zukaj 
told Crawford not to call an ambulance because his daughter-in-law was coming to pick 
him up from work.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)  Crawford completed an incident 
report, Exhibit 5.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 30)   
 
On June 28, 2019, Zukaj attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Berg.  (JE 2, 
p. 21)  Dr. Berg noted Zukaj’s imaging revealed right-sided L4 and L5 nerve root 
irritations, he had some stenosis in the left L5 nerve, and he had “absolutely no right 
lower extremity symptoms.”  (JE 2, p. 21)  Dr. Berg documented Zukaj reported after Dr. 
Ransdell’s injection his left-sided pain was gone and had moved to his right lower 
extremity and that he was performing sedentary work and his employer was allowing 
him to lie down during his shift.  (JE 2, p. 21)  Zukaj complained of pain and difficulty 
sleeping at night.  (JE 2, p. 21)  Dr. Berg assessed Zukaj with a low back strain, found 
the epidural was helpful for his left-sided symptoms, which were gone, and stated he 
was uncertain what would have caused Zukaj’s right-sided symptoms, since he denied 
he had been reinjured after April 2019.  (JE 2, p. 21)  Dr. Berg prescribed tramadol and 
Voltaren, ordered physical therapy, and continued Zukaj’s restrictions.  (JE 2, pp. 21-22)   
Zukaj testified he did not tell Dr. Berg his left-sided pain was gone because he 
still had left-sided pain at the time of the hearing, but it was not as bad as the pain in his 
right leg.  (Tr., p. 40)  Zukaj also denied EFCO was letting him lie down at work, noting 
EFCO allowed him to sit in a chair.  (Tr., p. 49)  Dr. Berg’s records do not document 
Zukaj complained of any cardiac symptoms or that he told Dr. Berg what had happened 
the evening before.  Zukaj also denied attending an appointment with Dr. Berg on June 
28, 2019.  I do not find his testimony regarding the appointment credible. 
 
Zukaj returned to work for his next shift on June 28, 2019.  (Ex. 10, Crawford 
Depo., p. 30)  Crawford asked him how he was feeling and whether he was okay, and 
testified Zukaj “smiled and gave [him] a thumbs-up and started working.”  (Ex. 10, 
Crawford Depo., p. 30)  Zukaj did not complain to Crawford that he was continuing to 
experience cardiac symptoms. 
 
On June 29, 2019, Zukaj sought emergent care, complaining of chest pain, 
tightness, and bilateral arm numbness for two days.  (JE 4, p. 55)  Magdi Ghali, M.D., 
an interventional cardiologist with Iowa Heart Center, performed an emergency 
coronary angiography, left heart catheterization, and placed stents in Zukaj’s left 
anterior descending artery at the ostial position and proximal left anterior descending.  
(JE 4)  Zukaj was admitted to the hospital and discharged on July 1, 2019 with 
recommendations to stop smoking and to follow up with a cardiologist.  (JE 4, pp. 56-
59)   
 
On July 8, 2019, Zukaj attended an appointment with Liberato Iannone, M.D., a 
cardiologist with Iowa Heart Center.  (JE 5, p. 60)  Dr. Iannone noted Zukaj had a 
history of hyperlipidemia, a family history of coronary disease, and “has what sounds 
like possibly claudication involving more the right leg than the left.  (JE 5, p. 60)  Dr. 
Iannone diagnosed Zukaj with cardiac signs and symptoms with right leg pain, coronary 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
artery disease, arterial graft with stable angina, and prior myocardial infarction, and 
recommended additional testing and cardiac rehabilitation.  (JE 5, pp. 60-63)   
 
Zukaj returned to Dr. Berg on July 12, 2019, complaining of right-sided symptoms 
and reporting his left-sided symptoms were gone since his epidural.  (JE 2, p. 23)  Zukaj 
relayed since his last appointment he had a heart attack and received two stents, but he 
had not started physical therapy.  (JE 2, p. 23)  Dr. Berg assessed Zukaj with a low 
back strain and status post cardiac stents, continued his restrictions, and requested his 
cardiac records before commencing physical therapy.  (JE 2, pp. 23-24)   
 
On July 26, 2019, Zukaj returned to Dr. Berg, reporting he had not returned to 
work due to his heart condition, he was starting cardiac rehab, and he was experiencing 
pain in his back and radiculitis into his right lower extremity contained mostly in the SI 
joint area.  (JE 2, p. 25)  Dr. Berg released Zukaj to return to sedentary work and 
ordered physical therapy.  (JE 2, pp. 25-26)   
 
Zukaj attended a cardiac recheck with Rachel Onsrud, ARNP with Iowa Heart 
Center on July 31, 2019, complaining of right leg numbness that wakes him up at night 
and reporting he could not “walk more than 100 feet before [having] difficulty moving the 
right leg.”  (JE 5, p. 64)  Onsrud listed an impression of coronary artery disease with 
recent anterior wall myocardial infarction, LV dysfunction, abnormal ankle-brachial index 
with claudication symptoms on the right, mild carotid disease, and prior nicotine abuse, 
and referred Zukaj to a peripheral vascular disease specialist for evaluation and 
recommendations.  (JE 5, pp. 64-65)   
 
On August 14, 2019, Zukaj attended a peripheral vascular consult with James 
Ebaugh, M.D., with Iowa Heart Center.  (JE 5, p. 69)  Dr. Ebaugh noted Zukaj 
experienced a back injury and a new onset of right lower extremity pain.  (JE 5, p. 69)  
Dr. Ebaugh documented, 
[p]atient with recent onset right lower extremity 100 foot claudication and 
moderate to severe right lower extremity arterial inflow disease with 
evidence of inflow disease on physical exam.  I think he also has mixed 
nerve compression symptoms as his paresthesias and numbness are 
clearly related to his back issue.  I would like him to complete his cardiac 
rehabilitation and back rehabilitation program and then I will see him back 
to diagnose the level of his disease with an aortic and right iliac duplex, 
and full ABIs and PVRs. 
(JE 5, p. 69)   
 
 
On October 1, 2019, Dr. Ghali with Iowa Heart Center released Zukaj to return to 
work.  (JE 5, p. 78)   
 
On October 7, 2019, Zukaj attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Berg, 
complaining of right-sided back pain.  (JE 2, p. 27)  Dr. Berg listed an impression of low 
back pain with right lower extremity radiculitis, noted Zukaj was not a surgical candidate, 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
relayed Zukaj had been referred for lower extremity vascular studies by his cardiologist, 
and recommended a referral to a spine surgeon.  (JE 2, p. 27)   
 
On October 29, 2019, Zukaj attended an appointment with Lynn Nelson, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon, complaining of “right-sided low back pain greater than right 
posterior thigh and leg pain while walking” that commenced after lifting a panel at work 
weighing between fifty and seventy pounds.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Zukaj reported he was 
experiencing hard, aching pain that was the same throughout the day and worse with 
standing, lifting, and bending forward.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Dr. Nelson documented Zukaj 
relayed he was experiencing low back pain and left lower extremity pain, and after 
undergoing an epidural steroid injection, he began experiencing right lower extremity 
pain.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Zukaj relayed he had been placed on a five pound lifting restriction, 
but EFCO had not been following the restriction and was having him lift fifty pounds, 
and that Dr. Berg restricted him from working for the past two weeks.  (JE 1, p. 12)  
 
Dr. Nelson documented during his exam that Zukaj reported pain to palpation 
throughout his entire low back area and that lumbar flexion and extension elicited low 
back pain.  (JE 1, p. 12)  Dr. Nelson observed Zukaj ambulated slowly with an antalgic 
gait to the right, reviewed Zukaj’s x-rays and magnetic resonance imaging, and listed an 
impression of right-sided low back pain and L5-S1 degenerative joint 
disease/spondylosis.  (JE 1, p. 13)  Dr. Nelson noted he explained to Zukaj that he had 
some degree of degenerative change at L5-S1, which had been present and developing 
for many years, he did not find any significant neurological impingement at any level, 
and he did not believe Zukaj was a surgical candidate.  (JE 1, p. 13)   
 
On November 7, 2019, Dr. Iannone signed a letter prepared by counsel for 
EFCO and Sentry following a telephone conversation, without providing any comments.  
(Ex. B)  Dr. Iannone agreed Zukaj had preexisting heart disease with plaque in his 
arteries before June 27, 2019, that plaque in arteries can cause a myocardial infarction, 
and that a plaque may rupture spontaneously.  (Ex. B, p. 6)  At that time EFCO and 
Sentry believed Zukaj was engaging in sedentary work on June 27, 2019.  Dr. Iannone 
agreed given Zukaj was only performing sedentary work when he first experienced 
chest pain Zukaj’s myocardial infarction and/or chest pain was not caused by, 
aggravated, or accelerated by his work duties at EFCO, and that his employment duties 
at EFCO did not substantially or significantly contribute to the myocardial infarction that 
occurred on June 27, 2019.  (Ex. B, p. 6)  
 
During an appointment on November 13, 2019, Dr. Berg assessed Zukaj with low 
back pain and left lower extremity radiculopathy that had “completely resolved” as of 
June 28, 2019, and right lower extremity radiculitis unrelated to the April 17, 2019 work 
injury.  (JE 2, pp. 29-30)  Dr. Berg noted Zukaj was undergoing vascular studies and he 
believed the cramps Zukaj was experiencing while walking were most likely related to 
neurogenic or vascular disease of the lower extremities and unrelated to the work injury.  
(JE 2, p. 30)  Dr. Berg imposed a ten pound lifting restriction, noted he wanted to see 
Zukaj’s vascular records, found Zukaj’s symptoms from the work injury resolved as of 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
June 28, 2019, and opined Zukaj had not sustained an impairment or disability 
associated with the April 2019 work injury.  (JE 2, pp. 30-31)   
 
On November 15, 2019, Zukaj attended a peripheral vascular recheck with Dr. 
Ebaugh.  (JE 5, p. 79)  Dr. Ebaugh noted Zukaj appeared “uncomfortable in clinic today, 
I believe exclusively due to the back pain issue.  Nonetheless, I am sure he has 
vascular claudication as well, but this may predate his back injury.”  (JE 5, p. 79)  Dr. 
Ebaugh offered Zukaj Pletal, which Zukaj declined, and noted Zukaj would work on 
physical therapy for his back, he may undergo another VAC injection, and 
recommended an annual follow up for testing of his ankle-brachial indices and PVRs 
and a follow up every two years for his asymptomatic carotid disease.  (JE 5, p. 79)   
On November 27, 2019, Zukaj attended an appointment with Dr. Berg, 
complaining of back pain.  (JE 2, p. 32)  Dr. Berg noted he had received some of the 
records from a Dr. Hassan and Zukaj had four stents in place and had a fairly significant 
heart attack in June around the time he developed his right lower extremity symptoms.  
(JE 2, p. 32)  Dr. Berg noted vascular testing of Zukaj’s lower extremities indicated the 
mid portion of the right external iliac artery was totally occluded, a distal segment of the 
external iliac artery was also totally occluded, and Zukaj had fifty to seventy-five percent 
total stenosis in the vasculature of his right lower extremity and he had refused 
treatment for his condition.  (JE 2, p. 32)  Dr. Berg listed an impression of a low back 
strain with left lower extremity radiculopathy, resolved, significant right lower extremity 
vascular occlusions resulting in right lower extremity claudications that are not work 
related, and status post myocardial infarction with cardiac stenting.  (JE 2, p. 32)  Dr. 
Berg opined Zukaj’s low back pain from the April 17, 2019 work injury had completely 
resolved with no impairment or disability, he developed right lower extremity symptoms 
that were not the result of the April 2019 work injury, he continued to have some mild 
low back pain and mild degenerative changes to his lumbar spine that he believed were 
secondary to deconditioning, ordered physical therapy, and increased Zukaj’s lifting 
restriction to twenty pounds.  (JE 2, pp. 32-35) 
 
On December 5, 2019, counsel for EFCO and Sentry sent a letter to Dr. Berg, 
summarizing a telephone conversation.  (JE 2, p. 36; Ex. C)  Dr. Berg signed the 
summary without providing any comments.  Dr. Berg agreed he had reviewed records 
from Zukaj’s cardiologist and that the records containing the vascular studies showed 
vascular claudication/vessel disease of the right lower extremity, Zukaj’s left-sided 
symptoms from the April 2019 work injury resolved on June 28, 2019 with no permanent 
impairment or need for restrictions, Zukaj’s right-sided symptoms are not related to the 
April 17, 2019 work injury, Zukaj has vessel disease in his right lower extremity that is 
the likely cause of his right lower extremity symptoms, magnetic resonance imaging 
from May 15, 2019, showed only degenerative changes with no acute findings, and that 
he had recommended physical therapy “that should more accurately be classified as 
work hardening or a reconditioning to acclimate [Zukaj] back to full work duty.”  (JE 2, 
pp. 36-37; Ex. C, pp. 8-9)    

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
During an appointment with Dr. Berg on January 13, 2020, Zukaj and his brother 
insisted the epidural steroid injection administered by Dr. Ransdell caused Zukaj’s right 
lower extremity symptoms.  (JE 2, p. 38)  Dr. Berg recommended right lower extremity 
electromyography and noted if the testing was normal, he believed Zukaj did not have 
nerve impingement from his back causing his right lower extremity symptoms and that 
the symptoms were the result of his vascular claudication.  (JE 2, p. 38)  Dr. Berg 
documented he did not know if Zukaj could return to his regular job due to his right 
lower extremity vascular disease, noting Zukaj could only walk for five minutes.  (JE 2, 
p. 38)   
 
On January 23, 2020, Zukaj underwent electromyography with Donna Bahls, 
M.D.  (JE 6)  Dr. Bahls listed an impression of no evidence of peripheral neuropathy and 
no evidence of an acute right lower extremity radiculopathy.  (JE 6, p. 86)  Dr. Berg 
reviewed the electromyography studies, which he found were normal, and opined 
Zukaj’s low back pain with left radiculopathy from the April 2019 injury had resolved and 
he released Zukaj without restrictions.  (JE 2, pp. 41-42)   
 
On February 3, 2020, Dr. Berg conducted a fitness for duty evaluation of Zukaj 
for EFCO.  (JE 2, p. 43)  Dr. Berg assessed Zukaj with low back pain with left lower 
extremity radiculopathy, resolved as of June 28, 2019, and right lower extremity 
vascular compromise, resulting in symptomatic vascular and neurogenic claudication.  
(JE 2, p. 44)  Dr. Berg documented Zukaj told him he believed he could return to his 
welding job because he stands in one place and does not do a lot of walking, but Dr. 
Berg found the job description indicated he had to frequently walk, and based on this he 
did not believe Zukaj could perform the job duties as a welder for EFCO because he 
cannot walk for more than five minutes at a time.  (JE 2, p. 44, 46)   
On March 21, 2020, Francis Miller, M.D., a cardiologist, conducted a records-
review only independent medical examination for Zukaj.  (Ex. 2)  Dr. Miller’s report does 
not indicate Miller spoke with Zukaj.  (Ex. 2)  Dr. Miller diagnosed Zukaj with 
atherosclerotic coronary heart disease with an anterior myocardial infarction on June 
27, 2019, treated two days later with two drug-eluting stents.  (Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Miller 
noted Zukaj had preexisting atherosclerotic coronary heart disease and opined lifting 
and carrying fifty-three pound boxes on June 27, 2019, would be sufficient to cause an 
atherosclerotic plaque to rupture, resulting in the abrupt worsening of the disease in the 
area of the vessel.  (Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Miller opined if the vessel had completely 
occluded, Zukaj would not have survived, but since it was ninety-nine percent occluded, 
it allowed some blood flow down the artery, which caused very severe stenosis with 
stuttering and frequent angina, noting Zukaj continued to have stuttering chest pain and 
completed his normal work shift on June 28, 2019, and because of continued symptoms 
he went to the hospital on June 29, 2019.  (Ex. 2, pp. 14-15)   
 
Pursuant to an inquiry from Sentry, Dr. Berg provided an impairment rating for 
Zukaj on April 16, 2020.  (JE 2, p. 47)  Dr. Berg noted on April 17, 2019, Zukaj 
sustained a low back injury with left lower extremity radiculitis, which completely 
resolved following an epidural steroid injection in June 2019 with no impairment or 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
disability.  (JE 2, p. 47)  Dr. Berg documented approximately two months after the work 
injury Zukaj began complaining of right lower extremity radiculitis, which is not related to 
the initial injury and is most likely related to significant vascular disease of his lower 
extremities, noting magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine and 
electromyography of the lower extremities were both normal.  (JE 2, p. 47)   
 
Joseph Chen, M.D., a physiatrist, conducted an independent medical 
examination for Zukaj and issued his report on May 27, 2020.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Chen 
reviewed Zukaj’s medical records and examined him.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Chen diagnosed 
Zukaj with “chronic mechanical and myofascial back and bilateral buttock pain,” noting 
Zukaj’s magnetic resonance imaging showed evidence of three millimeters of 
retrolisthesis of L5 on S1, which became temporarily aggravated by the work injury and 
worsened during the prior year during periods when he was restricted from working until 
cleared by cardiovascular specialists.  (Ex. 1, p. 8)  
Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Berg that Zukaj initially presented with symptoms 
consistent with left lumbar radiculitis, and after receiving an epidural steroid injection, he 
reported right-sided radiculitis symptoms, explaining Zukaj’s right-sided nerve root 
narrowing seen on magnetic resonance imaging became temporarily exacerbated “as a 
result of the increased volume and pressure on the nerve roots as a result of the 
epidural steroid injection” and that his right-sided symptoms had completely resolved.  
(Ex. 1, p. 8)  Dr. Chen opined Zukaj’s work injury when lifting and hanging parts was a 
“substantial contributing factor that led to a permanent aggravation of his pre-existing 
grade 2 spondylolisthesis of L5 on S1,” which led to his need for treatment for left 
lumbar radiculitis with ongoing symptoms and explained the resolution of his temporary 
right lumbar radiculitis following the injection.  (Ex. 1, p. 8) 
 
Dr. Chen documented Zukaj had numerous misunderstandings about his spine 
and pain condition and whether his symptoms were due to vascular disease, which had 
led to fear avoidance behaviors and beliefs and a reluctance to engage in basic 
flexibility exercises or other therapeutic activities that could improve his overall chronic 
back condition.  (Ex. 1, p. 9)  Dr. Chen noted Zukaj understood his ongoing back pain 
“is not related to a ‘pinched nerve’ or ‘blocked’ blood vessels but rather tight, stiff, and 
short back and buttock muscles that he needs to work on gently stretching on his own 
over the next few weeks to months.”  (Ex. 1, p. 9)  Dr. Chen recommended a walking 
program for his heart attack and vascular claudication.  (Ex. 1, p. 9)  
Dr. Chen noted while Zukaj may have back pain with prolonged standing, “this 
back pain represents weakness and deconditioning of his low back and buttock 
muscles,” which could improve with a consistent home exercise program.  (Ex. 1, p. 10)  
Dr. Chen recommended a pain rehabilitation and pain education treatment program of 
ten to thirty hours to address Zukaj’s self-reported pain, pain interference, fear 
avoidance beliefs and behaviors, and pain catastrophization scores from pre to post-
treatment, and during the program, release Zukaj to return to work gradually, working 
two hours per shift for two weeks, four hours per shift for two weeks, six hours per shift 
for two weeks, and then to eight hours per shift.  (Ex. 1, p. 11)   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
Using the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Press, 5th 
Ed. 2001) (“AMA Guides”), Dr. Chen assigned Zukaj a “provisional impairment rating of 
5% impairment of the whole person due to his complaints of left lumbar radicular pain,” 
under Lumbar DRE Category II on page 384.  (Ex. 1, p. 9)  Dr. Chen did not 
recommend any work or activity restrictions.  (Ex. 1, p. 9)   
 
Paul Conte, M.D., a cardiovascular surgeon, conducted a records-review only 
independent medical examination for EFCO and Sentry and issued his report on May 
12, 2020.  (Ex. D)  There is no evidence Dr. Conte spoke with Zukaj.  In the history 
section of his report, Dr. Conte documented Zukaj reported he had lifted sixteen boxes 
weighing fifty-three pounds and carried them to a table approximately five to ten feet 
away, before taking a ten-minute break to smoke a cigarette.  (Ex. D, p. 13)  Dr. Conte 
further documented, after returning from the break Zukaj reported a sudden onset of 
cardiac symptoms, which were reported to his supervisor, the next day, June 28, 2019, 
Zukaj still felt chest tightness, but he reported to work and continued to experience 
stuttering chest pain, and on June 29, 2019, he awoke with severe chest pain and 
sought emergent care for a myocardial infarction and underwent stenting of his left 
anterior descending artery at the ostial position and proximal left anterior descending.  
(Ex. D, p. 13)   
Dr. Conte opined lifting and carrying a fifty pound box every half hour is 
occasional lifting and noted Zukaj did not claim to have symptoms while actually lifting 
and carrying any box, but rather his symptoms occurred late in his shift when he was 
walking back to his work station and not exerting himself, after resting during a cigarette 
break.  (Ex. D, p. 15)  Dr. Conte noted smoking and acute myocardial infarctions or 
unstable angina are frequent associations and that many studies note hyperlipidemia 
and cigarette smoking are the most important factors for the development of unstable 
angina and acute myocardial infarction and that studies show exertion of the level Zukaj 
engaged in would only be categorized as moderate activity.  (Ex. D, pp. 15-16)  Based 
on these findings, Dr. Conte opined Zukaj’s moderate intensity work did not have any 
significant contribution or cause an acute myocardial infarction and that smoking with 
untreated hyperlipidemia and hypertension provoked his symptoms, concluding he was 
equally as likely to have developed a myocardial infarction at home as he would have 
been at work, and while his first reported symptoms occurred while in the workplace, his 
symptoms were not directly related to his work and were not materially aggravated by 
his work.  (Ex. D, p. 16)  Dr. Conte then found while Zukaj sustained actual myocardial 
damage at some point after he developed unstable angina on June 27, 2017, his 
myocardium function was reported to be normal during a follow-up echocardiogram in 
November 2019, concluding Zukaj did not suffer any significant lasting myocardial 
damage or damage to his kidneys, lungs, or the rest of his body, and finding his 
vascular disease was preexisting.  (Ex. D, p. 16)  
On May 20, 2020, counsel for EFCO and Sentry sent a letter to Dr. Ghali, 
summarizing a telephone conversation.  (Ex. E, pp. 18-19)  Dr. Ghali signed the 
summary without providing any comments.  (Ex. E, pp. 18-19)  Dr. Ghali performed the 
stenting procedure Zukaj underwent after he was diagnosed with a myocardial 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
infarction.  As with Dr. Conte’s report, the letter notes Zukaj reported he lifted 
approximately fifteen boxes weighing approximately fifty pounds, he did not have any 
symptoms while lifting the boxes, and near the end of his shift, after a ten-minute 
cigarette break, he began experiencing cardiac symptoms while walking back to his 
work station.  (Ex. E, p. 18)  Dr. Ghali agreed the cause of Zukaj’s myocardial infarction 
is his genetics and smoking and not his work activities, and to be a precipitating event, 
his myocardial infarction would have had to have occurred right after or during his June 
27, 2019 work activities, as opposed to occurring two days later on June 29, 2019.  (Ex. 
E, p. 18)   
 
On June 11, 2020, Dr. Berg sent a letter to counsel for EFCO and Sentry noting 
he cared for Zukaj following a low back injury he sustained while working for EFCO.  Dr. 
Berg opined Zukaj’s injury resolved with no impairment, Zukaj had later sustained a 
myocardial infarction and medical professionals found he had significant vascular 
disease of his right lower extremity, he reviewed the records from Zukaj’s vascular 
surgeon describing the incident, and after reviewing the medical records and job 
description, he was of the opinion Zukaj was not capable of performing his regular job at 
EFCO secondary to his personal medical issues.  (JE 2, p. 48; Ex. C., p. 12)   
 
On June 17, 2020, EFCO sent Zukaj a letter, attaching Dr. Berg’s June 11, 2020 
letter, and informing him that while Dr. Berg had released him to full duty for his low 
back condition, he determined Zukaj could not return to his position due to his personal 
vascular disease.  (Ex. 7)  EFCO notified Zukaj it was terminating his employment 
because his condition was likely permanent and he could not work full duty.  (Ex. 7)  
 
On July 15, 2020, Dr. Berg signed a letter from counsel for EFCO and Sentry 
following a telephone conversation, agreeing with contention statements without 
providing any comments.  (Ex. B, pp. 10-11)  Dr. Berg agreed that if Dr. Chen’s 
diagnosis is accurate, the diagnosis and the rehabilitation program he recommended 
are not related to the April 2019 work injury.  (Ex. B, p. 10)  Dr. Berg further agreed Dr. 
Chen’s rating was based on non-verifiable radicular complaints, noting Zukaj’s radicular 
complaints subsided after he received the June 2019 epidural steroid injection, and if 
they returned, they would not be related to the April 2019 work injury, his right-sided 
complaints are due to vascular issues unrelated to the April 2019 work injury, and 
electromyography did not substantiate any radicular complaints coming from the spine.  
(Ex. C, pp. 10-11)   
 
On July 31, 2020, Dr. Iannone signed a letter from Zukaj’s counsel following a 
telephone conversation between Dr. Iannone and Zukaj’s counsel, agreeing with 
contention statements without providing any comments.  Dr. Iannone agreed while a 
spontaneous plaque rupture can occur, he believed that if Zukaj was lifting sixteen 
boxes weighing fifty-three pounds each on June 27, 2019, “it is more likely than not that 
his heavy lifting at work was a substantial aggravating and accelerating factor in causing 
the atherosclerotic plaque rupture, which in turn triggered” Zukaj’s myocardial infarction.  
(Ex. 3, p. 18)  Dr. Iannone further agreed: 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
[s]ymptoms of a myocardial infarction caused by plaque rupture are not 
always immediate.  Instead, plaque rupture begins the process of a 
myocardial infarction.  The symptoms from a myocardial infarction can be 
delayed.  Therefore, it is still your opinion that Skender’s lifting of heavy 
boxes at EFCO on June 27, 2019 was a substantial aggravating and 
accelerating factor in causing his myocardial infarction even though 
Skender first experienced symptoms of a heart attack at 11:10 pm after a 
short cigarette break. 
(Ex. 3, p. 19)   
Zukaj testified he has had low back pain in the same spot, the center, lower part 
of his spine, since the April 17, 2019 work injury.  (Tr., p. 17)  Zukaj reported his low 
back pain is worse when he walks, sits too long, or lies down too long.  (Tr., p. 17)  
Zukaj testified during the hearing he continues to have leg pain, but the pain in his right 
leg is much worse than the left.  (Tr., p. 18)  Zukaj testified the pain radiates from his 
back, through both of his hips into his legs, but the pain in his left leg is not that bad and 
the pain in his right leg is “terrible.”  (Tr., p. 19)  Zukaj noted he cannot climb more than 
one flight of stairs without taking a break and testified the muscles of his right leg feel 
like they are made of stone and he cannot lift his right leg.  (Tr., p. 19)  Zukaj testified he 
can walk a maximum of fifty feet before his right leg becomes stiff and painful and that 
he experiences cramps in his leg and feels like he is carrying a heavy load while 
walking.  (Tr., p. 37)  Zukaj stated he believed he would have difficulty with the lifting 
and bending forward required for his welding job at EFCO.  (Tr., p. 38)   
Zukaj reported since EFCO terminated his employment he has been looking for 
work.  (Tr., p. 35)  He testified he applied for a welding job, he tried the job, but he could 
not do it.  (Tr., p. 36)  Zukaj relayed he has applied for two jobs per week, but he has 
not received any job offers.  (Tr., p. 36)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Applicable Law 
This case involves several issues, including the nature and extent of disability, 
healing period benefits, permanency benefits, alternate medical care, recovery of costs, 
and interest under Iowa Code sections 85.27, 85.34, 86.40, and 535.3.  In 2017, the 
Iowa Legislature enacted changes to Iowa Code chapters 85, 86, and 535 effecting 
workers’ compensation cases.  2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 (amending Iowa Code 
sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 85.70, 85.71, 86.26, 
86.39, 86.42, and 535.3).  Under 2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 section 24, the changes to 
Iowa Code sections 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, and 
86.42 apply to injuries occurring on or after the effective date of the Act.  Zukaj’s alleged 
injuries occurred after July 1, 2017, therefore, the new provisions of the statute apply to 
this case.   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
The calculation of interest is governed by Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 5052008 
(Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re:  
Interest Rate Issue), which holds interest for all weekly benefits payable and not paid 
when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, is payable at the rate of ten percent; all 
interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, is 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.   
II. 
Credibility 
EFCO and Sentry aver Zukaj has not sustained a permanent impairment to his 
back and that he did not sustain a heart attack arising out of and in the course of his 
employment, attacking Zukaj’s credibility. 
During the hearing I assessed Zukaj’s credibility by considering whether his 
testimony was reasonable and consistent with other evidence I believe, whether he had 
made inconsistent statements, his “appearance, conduct, memory and knowledge of the 
facts,” and his interest in the case.  State v. Frake, 450 N.W.2d 817, 819 (Iowa 1990).   
Credibility determinations are more complicated when a witness or party relies on 
interpretation for communicating with medical providers and when testifying.  Even 
during the hearing, I observed the interpreter confused Zukaj’s right and left leg 
symptoms on one occasion.  Each officer of the judiciary or executive branch who 
makes credibility determinations in a case or contested case needs to consider his or 
her own predilections when making credibility determinations of a non-native English 
speaker.  It is also necessary to consider whether interpretation difficulties during a 
hearing or during medical treatment are the cause of conflicting statements, or whether 
a witness’s testimony is not truthful or credible. 
In addition to the communication difficulties present in this case, Zukaj is not a 
sophisticated litigant.  He completed elementary school in Bosnia and has worked in 
manual labor most of his adult life.  Zukaj also has a complicated medical history 
involving back and cardiovascular complaints, which further complicates the issues in 
this case.   
Zukaj has an obvious interest in the outcome of this case.  I had the opportunity 
to observe Zukaj testify under oath.  During his testimony he engaged in direct eye 
contact, his rate of speech was appropriate, and he did not engage in any furtive 
movements.  Zukaj is a poor historian and he seemed confused during the hearing 
about his health conditions.  Dr. Chen also noted this during his independent medical 
examination of Zukaj.  Poor historians, immigrants who do not speak English, and even 
dishonest workers sustain permanent injuries caused by their work activities.  Based on 
my physical observations of Zukaj, I generally found him to be credible at hearing.  I 
have addressed additional credibility findings below. 
 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
 
III. 
Myocardial Infarction 
Zukaj avers his employment with EFCO aggravated or accelerated his previous 
heart condition, causing him to sustain a heart attack when he was not at work.  EFCO 
avers Zukaj’s heart attack was caused by a personal condition unrelated to work. 
In Iowa, an employee with a preexisting heart condition or defect may recover 
workers’ compensation benefits upon a showing of legal and medical causation.  Riley 
v. Oscar Mayer Foods Corp., 532 N.W.2d 489, 492 (Iowa Ct. App. 1995).   
The legal test circumscribes the kind of work or exertion which must be 
present before the injury will be considered to have arisen out of the 
employment.  Arthur Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law § 38.83(a) 
(6th ed. 1994).  It supplies the necessary causation between the work 
performed and the injury.  The medical test requires medical evidence that 
the exertion or work in fact caused the heart attack.  Id. 
 
In Iowa, the legal causation component of the analysis has been 
satisfied under one of the three circumstances.  The first situation is when 
heavy exertions ordinarily required by the work are superimposed on a 
defective heart, aggravating or accelerating the pre-existing condition.  
Sondag, 220 N.W.2d at 905.  The second situation involves an instance of 
unusually strenuous employment exertion, imposed upon a pre-existing 
diseased condition.  Id.  The final situation supporting compensation is 
when the damage results from continued exertions required by the 
employment after the onset of the heart attack.  Id. at 906.  See Varied 
Enterprises, Inc. v. Sumner, 353 N.W.2d 407, 409 (Iowa 1984). 
 
Under the first situation, the contribution of the employment to the 
risk of heart attack must take the form of an exertion greater than that of 
nonemployment life.  Sondag, 220 N.W.2d 905 (citing Arthur Larson, 
Workmen’s Compensation § 38.83).  The comparison is not with the 
particular employee’s usual exertion in his or her employment but with 
exertions of normal nonemployment life of the particular employee or any 
other person.  Id.  In the second situation, the comparison is between the 
employee’s normal work exertion and the work performed just prior to the 
onset of symptoms.  See Guyon v. Swift & Co., 229 Iowa 625, 633-34, 295 
N.W.2d 185, 189 (Iowa 1940).  Under the final situation, the causal 
contribution of the employment to the heart attack exists when the 
employee, for some reason, feels impelled to continue with his or her 
duties after experiencing symptoms of a heart attack.  Sondag, 220 
N.W.2d 906. 
Id.  
 
The parties address medical causation in their post-hearing briefs.  I do 
not find Zukaj has met his burden of establishing medical and legal causation.   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 17 
 
 
On June 27, 2019, at 11:15 p.m., Zukaj was working in Bay 6 Assembly at EFCO 
when he experienced dizziness, light headedness, and a tight chest after his ten-minute 
break.  (Ex. 5, p. 22; Tr., p. 23)  Zukaj testified that evening he had lifted between ten to 
eleven boxes of bolts weighing between fifty and fifty-five pounds while he was working.  
(Tr., pp. 22, 24, 44)  Zukaj reported he did not feel any tightness in his chest until he 
actually came back from break and picked up the last box to move it.  (Tr., p. 24)  Zukaj 
testified he could not catch his breath or breathe and that he had never had those 
symptoms before or been diagnosed with a heart condition before.  (Tr., p. 25)  I do not 
find Zukaj was actually lifting any boxes when the symptoms commenced.  I find any 
statements to the contrary not credible and against the weight of the evidence.  I find 
Zukaj was walking back from a ten-minute smoking break when his cardiac symptoms 
commenced.  I do not find he engaged in any lifting on June 27, 2019, after his 
symptoms commenced. 
Crawford, Zukaj’s supervisor, testified an employee flagged him down at work 
and told him Zukaj was getting ready to pass out.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)  
Crawford went to the area and observed Zukaj looked flushed and he believed he was 
having issues with the heat.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)  Crawford took Zukaj on an 
electric cart from his work area to an air-conditioned office, sat him down in a chair, got 
him some water and a wet towel to wrap around his neck, and let Zukaj sit to cool off for 
a few minutes.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)  When Crawford returned to the office, 
Zukaj was complaining of chest tightness, so Crawford gave him an aspirin and told him 
he was going to call an ambulance.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 30)  Zukaj told 
Crawford not to call an ambulance because his daughter-in-law was coming to pick him 
up from work.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 29)   
The next day, Friday, June 28, 2019, Zukaj attended an appointment with Dr. 
Berg.  (JE 2, p. 21)  Dr. Berg’s notes do not reference any complaint from Zukaj or 
discussion regarding his chest tightness the day before or any ongoing symptoms or 
problems related to his cardiac function.  (JE 2, p. 21)  Zukaj denied attending an 
appointment with Dr. Berg on June 28, 2019.  I do not find this testimony credible.  I 
believe Zukaj attended an appointment with Dr. Berg on June 28, 2019, and that he did 
not report any cardiac symptoms to Dr. Berg. 
Zukaj returned to work on June 28, 2019.  (Ex. 10, Crawford Depo., p. 30)  
Crawford testified he asked Zukaj how he was feeling and whether he was okay and 
Zukaj “smiled and gave [him] a thumbs-up and started working.”  (Ex. 10, p. 30)  Based 
on Crawford’s testimony I do not find Zukaj complained of any cardiac symptoms at 
work on June 28, 2019, and he completed his normal work duties.  The next morning, 
on June 29, 2019, Zukaj awoke with chest pain, and he was ultimately transported to 
the hospital where he was diagnosed with a myocardial infarction and treated.  If his 
vessel was ninety-nine percent occluded or severely occluded on June 28, 2019, and if 
he was having ongoing symptoms, I would have expected Zukaj to report his symptoms 
to Dr. Berg and he would have complained of ongoing cardiac symptoms at work.    

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 18 
 
 
Four physicians have given causation opinions in this case, Dr. Ghali, a treating 
cardiologist who performed a procedure on Zukaj, Dr. Miller, a cardiologist who 
performed a records-review only independent medical examination for Zukaj, Dr. 
Iannone, a treating cardiologist, and Dr. Conte, a cardiovascular surgeon who 
conducted a records-review independent medical examination for EFCO and Sentry.  I 
find the opinion of Dr. Conte, as supported by the opinion of Dr. Ghali to be the most 
persuasive.   
Dr. Miller conducted a records-review independent medical examination for Zukaj 
and did not examine or speak with him.  (Ex. 2)  Dr. Miller diagnosed Zukaj with 
atherosclerotic coronary heart disease with an anterior myocardial infarction on June 
27, 2019, treated two days later with two drug-eluting stents.  (Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Miller 
noted Zukaj had preexisting atherosclerotic coronary heart disease and opined lifting 
and carrying fifty-three pound boxes on June 27, 2019, would be sufficient to cause an 
atherosclerotic plaque to rupture, resulting in the abrupt worsening of the disease in the 
area of the vessel.  (Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Miller opined if the vessel had completely 
occluded, Zukaj would not have survived, but since it was ninety-nine percent occluded, 
it allowed some blood flow down the artery, which caused very severe stenosis with 
stuttering and frequent angina, noting he continued to have chest pain at work on June 
28, 2019, and into June 29, 2019, when he went to the hospital.  (Ex. 2, pp. 14-15)   
Dr. Miller does not explain how he learned Zukaj continued to have chest pain on 
June 28, 2019, into June 29, 2019, when he went to the hospital.  At work Zukaj did not 
complain of chest pain, nor did he complain of cardiac symptoms that day when he 
attended an appointment with Dr. Berg.  Additionally, Dr. Miller does not state whether 
he considered how many boxes Zukaj lifted before he took his break, or whether lifting 
one box, as opposed to eleven boxes would have an impact on his opinion, or what 
literature he was relying on to connect the lifting of the boxes to the myocardial 
infarction Zukaj experienced on June 29, 2019.   
Dr. Iannone has given two opinions in this case, agreeing with contention 
statements by counsel for EFCO and Sentry and by Zukaj’s counsel.  In his opinion on 
November 4, 2019, Dr. Iannone agreed Zukaj had preexisting heart disease with plaque 
in his arteries before June 27, 2019, that plaque in arteries can cause a myocardial 
infarction, and that a plaque may rupture spontaneously.  (Ex. B, p. 6)  At that time 
EFCO and Sentry believed Zukaj was engaging in sedentary work on June 27, 2019.  
Dr. Iannone agreed given Zukaj was only performing sedentary work on June 27, 2019, 
when he first experienced chest pain, it was his opinion Zukaj’s myocardial infarction 
and/or chest pain was not caused by, aggravated, or accelerated by his work duties at 
EFCO, and that his employment duties at EFCO did not substantially or significantly 
contribute to the heart attack that occurred on June 27, 2019.  (Ex. B, p. 6)  
 
In his opinion from July 31, 2020, Dr. Iannone agreed with statement from 
Zukaj’s counsel that while a spontaneous plaque rupture can occur, he believed that if 
Zukaj was lifting sixteen boxes weighing fifty-three pounds each on June 27, 2019, “it is 
more likely than not that his heavy lifting at work was a substantial aggravating and 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 19 
 
accelerating factor in causing the atherosclerotic plaque rupture, which in turn triggered” 
Zukaj’s myocardial infarction.  (Ex. 3, p. 18)  Dr. Iannone further agreed: 
Symptoms of a myocardial infarction caused by plaque rupture are not 
always immediate.  Instead, plaque rupture begins the process of 
myocardial infarction.  The symptoms from a myocardial infarction can be 
delayed.  Therefore, it is still your opinion that Skender’s lifting of heavy 
boxes at EFCO on June 27, 2019 was a substantial aggravating and 
accelerating factor in causing his myocardial infarction even though 
Skender first experienced symptoms of a heart attack at 11:10 pm after a 
short cigarette break. 
(Ex. 3, p. 19)     
 
Unlike the opinions of Drs. Iannone and Ghali, Dr. Conte provided a detailed 
written opinion.  In his history section of his May 18, 2020, report, Dr. Conte 
documented Zukaj reported he had lifted sixteen boxes weighing fifty-three pounds and 
carried them to a table approximately five to ten feet away, before taking a ten-minute 
break to smoke a cigarette.  (Ex. D, p. 13)  Dr. Conte further documented, after 
returning from the break Zukaj reported a sudden onset of cardiac symptoms, which 
were reported to his supervisor.  (Ex. D, p. 13)  The next day, June 28, 2019, Zukaj 
reported he still felt chest tightness, but he reported to work and he continued to 
experience stuttering chest pain, and on June 29, 2019, he awoke with severe chest 
pain and sought emergent care for a myocardial infarction and underwent stenting of his 
left anterior descending artery at the ostial position and proximal left anterior 
descending.  (Ex. D, p. 13)  
Dr. Conte opined lifting and carrying a fifty pound box every half hour is 
occasional lifting and noted Zukaj did not claim to have symptoms while actually lifting 
and carrying any box, but rather his symptoms occurred late in his shift when he was 
walking back to his work station and not exerting himself, after resting during a cigarette 
break.  (Ex. D, p. 15)  Dr. Conte noted smoking and acute myocardial infarctions or 
unstable angina are frequent associations and that many studies note hyperlipidemia 
and cigarette smoking are the most important factors for the development of unstable 
angina and acute myocardial infarction and that studies show exertion of the level Zukaj 
engaged in, would only be categorized as moderate activity.  (Ex. D, pp. 15-16)  Based 
on these findings, Dr. Conte opined Zukaj’s moderate intensity work did not have any 
significant contribution or cause an acute myocardial infarction and that smoking with 
untreated hyperlipidemia and hypertension provoked his symptoms, concluding he was 
equally as likely to have developed a myocardial infarction at home as he would have 
been at work, and while his first reported symptoms occurred while in the workplace, his 
symptoms were not directly related to his work and were not materially aggravated by 
his work.  (Ex. D, p. 16)   
 
Dr. Ghali has given one opinion in this case, agreeing with contention statements 
by counsel for EFCO and Sentry.  (Ex. E, pp. 18-19)  Dr. Ghali performed the stenting 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 20 
 
procedure Zukaj underwent after he was diagnosed with a myocardial infarction.  As 
with Dr. Conte’s report, the letter notes Zukaj reported he lifted approximately fifteen 
boxes weighing approximately fifty pounds, he did not have any symptoms while lifting 
the boxes, and near the end of his shift, after a ten-minute cigarette break, he began 
experiencing cardiac symptoms while walking back to his work station.  (Ex. E, p. 18)  
Dr. Ghali agreed the cause of Zukaj’s myocardial infarction is his genetics and smoking 
and not his work activities, and to be a precipitating event, his myocardial infarction 
would have had to have occurred right after or during his June 27, 2019 work activities, 
as opposed to occurring two days later on June 29, 2019.  (Ex. E, p. 18)  This opinion is 
consistent with the fact that Zukaj did not complain of cardiac symptoms during his 
appointment with Dr. Berg or at work the next day.  If his vessel was ninety-nine percent 
occluded or very severely occluded on June 27, 2019, I would have expected Zukaj to 
have report his symptoms to Dr. Berg and to his employer when he returned to work.   
 
Dr. Iannone gave differing opinions in this case and did not prepare an opinion in 
his own words.  He signed off on two opinions penned by counsel for the parties.  Dr. 
Iannone does not reference any studies or other research he is familiar with that support 
his agreement with counsel’s opinions.  Dr. Conte’s opinion is the most thorough and 
explains his findings based on research he is familiar with.   
The evidence establishes Zukaj was a smoker with severe atherosclerosis and 
vascular disease, which caused his myocardial infarction.  I find Zukaj first experienced 
cardiac symptoms after resting for ten minutes while taking a smoke break.  He did not 
complain of cardiac symptoms to Dr. Berg or at work on June 28, 2019, and he did not 
seek medical attention until June 29, 2019.  I find Zukaj has failed to prove the exertion 
or work in fact caused his heart attack, under the medical test.   
I also find Zukaj has failed to meet the legal test.  The evidence does not support 
Zukaj was engaged in heavy exertion at work, which aggravated or accelerated his 
preexisting condition causing him to sustain a myocardial infarction, that he was 
engaged in unusually strenuous employment exertion causing him to experience a 
myocardial infarction, or that he was engaged in continued exertions required by the 
employment on June 27, 2019 or June 28, 2019, that caused damage after the onset of 
his cardiac symptoms.  Based on my findings, the issues of whether Zukaj is entitled to 
temporary benefits, payment of medical expenses, alternate medical care, and penalty 
benefits for File Number 19000172.01 are moot.   
IV. 
Low Back Injury 
 
A. 
Causation 
 
The parties agreed Zukaj sustained a work injury on April 2019.  Zukaj contends 
he sustained a permanent impairment to his low back caused by the April 2019 work 
injury.  EFCO and Sentry aver Zukaj sustained a temporary impairment only and that 
his current complaints are not related to the work injury.  This raises an issue of 
causation.   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 21 
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 
It is well-established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to 
finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment 
and the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the 
employment was a proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).   
 
Dr. Berg, a treating occupational medicine physician, opined Zukaj has not 
sustained a permanent impairment caused by the April 2019 work injury.  (JE 2)  Dr. 
Chen, a physiatrist who examined Zukaj on one occasion for purposes of an 
independent medical examination, opined Zukaj has sustained a permanent impairment 
caused by the work injury.  I find the opinion of Dr. Chen, as supported by Dr. Ebaugh, 
most persuasive.   
There is no evidence Zukaj complained of having low back pain or that he sought 
treatment for low back pain prior to the April 2019 work injury.  In fact, Zukaj underwent 
a fitness for duty examination for EFCO on February 8, 2019, which found he was 
medically qualified to perform the essential functions of all positions at EFCO, noting he 
was capable of performing “heavy work.”  (JE 7, pp. 87-88)   
 
Dr. Berg initially assessed Zukaj with a low back strain, left SI joint dysfunction, 
and left S1 radiculopathy.  (JE 2, p. 15)  Zukaj underwent lumbar spine magnetic 
resonance imaging and the reviewing radiologist listed an impression of: 
L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1 mild lumbar spondylosis, as detailed above, 
chronic three mm retrolisthesis of L5 on S1, chronic.  

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 22 
 
At L4-L5 there is a small broad-based disc bulge eccentric to the right 
contracting the exiting right L4 nerve root as well as the traversing right L5 
never root, age indeterminate.  Mild right neural foraminal narrowing.  No 
spinal canal or left foraminal compromise.    
(JE 1, p. 10)  Dr. Berg referred Zukaj to Dr. Ransdell for a lumbar spine epidural.  (JE 2)   
Following the injection, Zukaj continued to complain of back pain and reported 
his left-sided lower extremity symptoms had moved to his right lower extremity.  (JE 2, 
p. 21-22)  Dr. Berg documented he could not explain why Zukaj’s left-sided lower 
extremity complaints had moved to the right and he assessed Zukaj with a low back 
strain.  (JE 2, pp. 21, 23, 27)   
In November 2019, Dr. Berg opined Zukaj had not sustained a permanent 
impairment, his condition resolved as of June 28, 2019, and his right-sided lower 
extremity symptoms were not related to the April 2019 work injury.  (Ex. 2, p. 29)  In 
December 2019, Dr. Berg signed a letter prepared by the defendants’ counsel agreeing 
Zukaj’s left-sided symptoms resolved as of June 28, 2019, with no permanent 
impairment or need for restrictions, his right-sided lower extremity symptoms were 
unrelated to the April 2019 work injury, his imaging only showed degenerative changes 
with no acute findings, and his physical therapy recommendation “should more 
accurately be classified as work hardening or a reconditioning to acclimate him back to 
full work duty.”  (JE 2, pp. 36-37; Ex. C, pp. 8-9)  Following normal electromyography 
studies, Dr. Berg further opined Zukaj’s right-sided lower extremity complaints were 
more likely related to his vascular condition.  (JE 2, p. 47)   
Dr. Chen diagnosed Zukaj with “chronic mechanical and myofascial back and 
bilateral buttock pain,” noting Zukaj’s magnetic resonance imaging shows evidence of 
three millimeters of retrolisthesis of L5 on S1, which became temporarily aggravated by 
the work injury and worsened during the prior year during periods when he was 
restricted from working until cleared by cardiovascular specialists.  (Ex. 1, p. 8)  
Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Berg that Zukaj initially presented with symptoms 
consistent with left lumbar radiculitis, and after receiving an epidural steroid injection, he 
reported right-sided radiculitis symptoms, explaining Zukaj’s right-sided nerve root 
narrowing seen on magnetic resonance imaging became temporarily exacerbated “as a 
result of the increased volume and pressure on the nerve roots as a result of the 
epidural steroid injection” and that his right-sided symptoms had completely resolved.  
(Ex. 1, p. 8)  Dr. Berg documented at first he did not know what caused Zukaj’s right-
sided lower extremity symptoms, and later stated they were not caused by the work 
injury, and more likely caused by his vascular condition.  Only one vascular expert has 
examined Zukaj, Dr. Ebaugh, who documented Zukaj appeared “uncomfortable in clinic 
today, I believe exclusively due to the back pain issue.  Nonetheless, I am sure he has 
vascular claudication as well, but this may predate his back injury.”  (JE 5, p. 79)  Dr. 
Berg’s opinions and the form letters written by counsel for the defendants do not 
discuss or distinguish Dr. Ebaugh’s observations.   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 23 
 
Dr. Chen opined Zukaj’s work injury when lifting and hanging parts was a 
“substantial contributing factor that led to a permanent aggravation of his pre-existing 
grade 2 spondylolisthesis of L5 on S1,” which led to his need for treatment for left 
lumbar radiculitis with ongoing symptoms and explains the resolution of his temporary 
right lumbar radiculitis following the injection.  (Ex. 1, p. 8) 
As noted above, there is no evidence Zukaj complained of low back pain or that 
he received treatment for low back pain prior to the work injury.  On examination, Dr. 
Chen documented Zukaj had “diffuse tenderness to light tactile stimulation of the 
midline lower lumbar spine and paraspinal muscle mass bilaterally,” and limited side-
bending and extension due to reports of pain.  (Ex. 1, p. 5)  Dr. Berg also documented 
his physical examination findings, as follows:   
Date 
Observation 
4/22/19 
“He has a great deal of tenderness in the left SI joint area. . . .There 
is no right SI joint tenderness.” 
5/29/19 
“He continues to have some left SI joint tenderness.” 
6/28/19 
“There is tenderness in both the left and right SI joint . . . . Really, 
the epidural was helpful as all of his left-sided [lower extremity] 
symptoms are gone.  I am not sure what resulted in his right lower 
extremity symptoms.” 
7/12/19 
“Again, he has mostly SI joint pain bilaterally.” 
7/26/19 
“Again, there is tenderness in the right SI joint . . . . He has a 
positive FABER bilaterally, but has no left SI joint tenderness or 
pain.” 
10/7/19 
“He has some mild tenderness in the left SI joint.  However, 
FABERs is negative.” 
11/13/19 “There is no longer any left-sided SI joint tenderness [with no 
discussion of any right-sided observations].” 
11/27/19 “He continues to have some mild tenderness in the left SI joint, but 
FABERs is negative [with no discussion of any right-sided 
observations].” 
1/13/20 
O[bservations]:  “None.” 
2/3/20 
Fitness for Duty Evaluation.  “He has mild SI joint tenderness.”  [No 
discussion of whether it is right, left, or bilateral]. 
 
(JE 2, pp. 15, 18, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 32, 38, 44)  Both physicians documented Zukaj 
had low back pain on examination.  Dr. Berg noted this during examinations after Zukaj 
received the injection from Dr. Ransdell.  Dr. Berg has not explained the source of 
Zukaj’s ongoing back pain after he found his left lower extremity symptoms resolved in 
June 2019.  I do not find his opinion persuasive.  I find Zukaj has established the work 
injury aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or “lighted up” his preexisting back condition.   
 
 
 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 24 
 
B. 
Permanency and Alternate Care 
 
Zukaj seeks a running award of healing period benefits.  EFCO and Sentry aver 
he did not sustain a permanent impairment and that he is not entitled to any additional 
benefits.  Zukaj seeks alternate care, as recommended by Dr. Chen. 
Iowa Code section 85.33 governs temporary disability benefits, and Iowa Code 
section 85.34 governs healing period and permanent disability benefits.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).   
An employee has a temporary partial disability when because of the employee’s 
medical condition, “it is medically indicated that the employee is not capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee’s disability.”  Iowa Code § 85.33(2).  Temporary partial disability benefits are 
payable, in lieu of temporary total disability and healing period benefits, due to the 
reduction in earning ability as a result of the employee’s temporary partial disability, and 
“shall not be considered benefits payable to an employee, upon termination of 
temporary partial or temporary total disability, the healing period, or permanent partial 
disability, because the employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings 
equal to the employee’s weekly earnings at the time of the injury.”  Id.   
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 
696 N.W.2d 596, 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability benefits 
and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss of 
earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefit depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap, 
824 N.W.2d at 556. 
“[A] claim for permanent disability benefits is not ripe until maximum medical 
improvement has been achieved.”  Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 193, 201 (Iowa 2010).  “Stabilization of the employee’s condition ‘is the event 
that allows a physician to make the determination that a particular medical condition is 
permanent.’”  Dunlap, 824 N.W.2d at 556 (quoting Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning, 
779 N.W.2d at 200).  If the employee has a permanent disability, then payments made 
prior to permanency are healing period benefits.  Id.  If the injury has not resulted in a 
permanent disability, then the employee may be awarded temporary total benefits.  Id. 
at 556-57.   
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) governs healing period benefits, as follows: 
If an employee has suffered a personal injury causing permanent partial 
disability for which compensation is payable as provided in subsection 2 of 
this section, the employer shall pay to the employee compensation for a 
healing period, as provided in section 85.37, beginning on the first day of 
disability after the injury, and until the employee has returned to work or it 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 25 
 
is medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not 
anticipated or until the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the 
employee was engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first. 
Under Iowa Code section 85.33(6), “‘employment substantially similar to the 
employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of the injury’ includes, for 
purposes of an individual who was injured in the course of performing as a professional 
athlete, any employment the individual has previously performed.”   
 
Dr. Chen did not recommend any activity or work restrictions for Zukaj, finding 
Zukaj may have back pain with prolonged standing, noting “this back pain represents 
weakness and deconditioning of the low back and buttock muscles.”  (Ex. 1, p. 10)  Dr. 
Chen recommended a pain rehabilitation and pain education treatment program of ten 
to thirty hours to address Zukaj’s self-reported pain, pain interference, fear avoidance 
beliefs and behaviors, and pain catastrophization scores from pre to post treatment, and 
during the program to release Zukaj to return to work gradually.  (Ex. 1, p. 10)  In the 
alternative, Dr. Chen provided an impairment rating.  While I suspect some of Zukaj’s 
pain and general deconditioned status may be related to his underlying cardiovascular 
conditions and activity restrictions related to those conditions, as a superseding cause, 
EFCO and Sentry did not present any evidence at hearing supporting my suspicion.  Dr. 
Berg opined Dr. Chen’s diagnosis is not related to the April 2019 work injury or need for 
treatment by responding to a form letter, without providing any comments, which I 
rejected.  Dr. Chen opined Zukaj has not reached maximum medical improvement and 
that he needs additional treatment, a program lasting ten to thirty hours, with a gradual 
return to work.  Zukaj has been off work since January 27, 2020.  I find he is entitled to 
a running award of healing period benefits from January 27, 2020.  
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  Id.  “The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id. § 85.27(4).  If the 
employee is dissatisfied with the care, the employee should communicate the basis for 
the dissatisfaction to the employer.  Id.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on 
alternate care, the commissioner “may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Id.  The statute requires the employer to 
furnish reasonable medical care.  Id. § 85.27(4); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (noting “[t]he employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability”).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
the employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer 
has denied liability for the injury, or has abandoned care.  Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).   

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 26 
 
 
EFCO and Sentry refused to pay for the treatment recommended by Dr. Chen, 
relying on the opinion of Dr. Berg that recommended no care when EFCO terminated 
Zukaj’s employment.  Given my finding above, I also find Zukaj is entitled to alternate 
care as recommended by Dr. Chen under Iowa Code section 85.27. 
V. 
Costs 
Zukaj seeks to recover $200.00 for the filing fees for each date of injury, the 
$750.00 cost of Dr. Miller’s report, the $50.00 cost of Dr. Iannone’s report, and the 
$465.40 cost of the depositions of Crawford, Brice Harrelson, and Zukaj.  (Ex. 17)   
Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing before the 
commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33, provides costs may be taxed by the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner for:  (1) the attendance of a certificated shorthand reporter 
for hearings and depositions; (2) transcription costs; (3) the cost of service of the 
original notice and subpoenas; (4) witness fees and expenses; (5) the cost of doctors’ 
and practitioner’s deposition testimony; (6) the reasonable cost of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports; (7) filing fees; and (8) the cost of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
The administrative rule expressly allows for the recovery of the filing fees, 
deposition transcript, and the cost of the two reports.  Zukaj was not successful in 
proving his claims for File Number 19000172.01, regarding his myocardial infarction.  I 
do not find he is entitled to recover the filing fee for File Number 19000172.01, or the 
cost of Dr. Miller’s and Dr. Iannone’s reports.  I find Zukaj is entitled to recover the 
$100.00 for File Number 1663391.01 and the $465.40 cost of the depositions of 
Crawford, Brice Harrelson, and Zukaj. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
 
For File Number 19000172.01: 
Claimant shall take nothing.   
 
For File Number 1663391.01 
 
Defendants shall pay Claimant a running award of healing period benefits 
commencing on January 27, 2020, at the stipulated weekly rate of five hundred seventy-
six and 30/100 dollars ($576.30), until such time as benefits shall cease pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.34. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for all benefits paid to date. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 

ZUKAJ V. EFCO CORP WILIAN HOLDING CO/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 27 
 
 
Defendants are responsible for payment of the program recommended by Dr. 
Chen.  
Defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($100.00) for the filing fee and four hundred sixty-five and 40/100 dollars ($465.40) for 
the cost of the depositions. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _____17th ____ day of May, 2021. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 
Gregory Taylor (via WCES) 
 
Michael Roling (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
