Case Number: 5067136.04
Case Title:  DEMARIS, MERIDETH V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP D/B/A MERCY MEDICAL CENTER - NORTH IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Demaris Merideth-5067136.04d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MERIDETH DEMARIS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 5067136.04 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – 
  : 
NORTH IOWA, 
  : 
 
   
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :              Head Note No. 1803, 1108 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Merideth DeMaris, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Trinity Health Corporation, d/b/a Mercy Medical Center - 
North Iowa, a self-insured employer.  The claimant was represented by Gary Mattson.  
The self-insured defendant was represented by Lee Hook. 
The matter came on for hearing on November 14, 2023, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The 
voluminous record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 9; Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 19; and defense exhibits A through L and N.  The claimant testified live at 
hearing, as did Nathan Larsen.  The record was held open for a fairly extended time.  
Ann Killoran, M.D., testified via deposition on December 21, 2023.  (Defendant’s Exhibit 
N)  Sonya Wright served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on 
February 2, 2024. 
ISSUES AND STIPULATIONS 
The parties submitted the following stipulations and issues for determination: 
The parties agree there was an employer-employee relationship at the time of 
the alleged injury on May 10, 2017.  The defendant disputes that claimant sustained an 
injury which arose out of and in the course of employment.  Defendant further disputes 
that the alleged injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent disability.  Claimant is 
seeking healing period benefits from November 25, 2019 through January 10, 2022.  
Defendant disputes that it is liable for any temporary disability benefits, although it is 
stipulated that claimant was off work during this period of time.  The claimant is seeking 
permanent total disability benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Sep-19  11:02:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
The parties have stipulated to claimant’s gross earnings, marital status and 
exemptions and assert the correct rate of compensation is $385.76. Affirmative 
defenses have been waived.  Claimant seeks the medical expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibits 17 and 18.  Defendant asserts these expenses are not causally 
related to any work injury.  Claimant further seeks alternative medical care under 
Section 85.27 and has requested reimbursement for an IME under Section 85.39.  
Defendant denies responsibility for such expenses.  Claimant has requested the costs 
set forth in Claimant’s Exhibits 7 and 8. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Merideth DeMaris was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  She 
testified live and under oath.  I find her to be a credible witness.  She was not a 
sophisticated witness at all.  She obviously does not understand the intricate legal 
terminology of the workers’ compensation system.  Her demeanor, however, was 
straightforward, earnest and sincere.  Her testimony matched other credible portions of 
the record. 
Ms. DeMaris resides in Nora Springs, Iowa, with her husband.  She has three 
grown children.  She graduated from high school in 1993 with average grades and 
attended Kirkwood Community College for a year without receiving a degree.  She 
began working for Mercy Medical Center-North Iowa in June 2015. Prior to Mercy, she 
had worked in service sector positions such as restaurants and video stores.  Later she 
got into healthcare in various service positions, such as diet aide (assisting with 
feeding), scheduling and personal attendant.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 4)  She was hired at 
Mercy in the textile department (laundry). 
Ms. DeMaris described her job as rotating, fast-paced work.  She testified it was 
the most physically demanding work she had ever performed.  (Transcript, pages 32, 
36)  She testified that she was generally healthy, and she enjoyed her work.  Her job 
description is in evidence.  (Cl. Ex. 9)  This document describes rigorous work including 
continuous work with the arms at shoulder level including placing linen on the ironers.  It 
also describes continuous repetitive grasping, frequent floor to waist, waist to shoulder 
and shoulder to overhead lifting. Carrying, pull force, push force and overhead work is 
also described.   
On May 10, 2017, Ms. DeMaris had rotated into the ironer position.  She testified 
she lifted a sheet and felt a pop under her left collar bone.  She had pain which went up 
to her neck.  She testified she believed she had pulled a muscle.  (Tr., pp. 38-39) 
Ms. DeMaris testified that she immediately told her supervisor, Jesse Giere, 
about the injury.  (Cl. Ex. 5, DeMaris Depo, p. 15)  Her deposition testimony is 
consistent with her live hearing testimony.  The employer presented no direct evidence 
to dispute this.  For example, Mr. Giere was not called as a witness at all.  I find that the 
record is actually quite clear that Ms. DeMaris verbally reported this injury immediately.  
I further find that her account of the injury has been remarkably consistent as 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
documented in contemporaneous medical notes. 
The defendant presented a printout of an Incident Abstract from an online 
reporting system showing that the form itself was not filled out until June 2017.  
(Defendant’s Exhibit B, p. 10e)  This form describes the following: 
Felt a pain at work, 
working on the ironer at the time, thought I had pulled a muscle at tha [sic] 
time.  I kept working until 5/23/17 it gradually continued to get worse. I 
decided to go to my doctor on 5/23/2017. I have had two appointments 
with Dr. Stroup. 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 10e)  This narrative explanation is highly consistent with Ms. DeMaris’ 
sworn testimony, as well as the consistent history that she provided to the numerous 
medical providers. 
The defendant further secured testimony from Nate Larsen, Mercy’s health and 
safety manager.  (Tr., pp. 106-127)  He testified that the report itself states that she did 
not report it to her supervisor on the date of the incident.  (Tr., p. 111)  The report does 
set forth a “Date Rpt Employer” which listed the report date as May 24, 2017.  (Def. Ex. 
B, p. 10e)  This, however, certainly does not mean that Ms. DeMaris was untruthful 
when she testified that she told her supervisor.  This simply means that May 24, 2017, 
was the date that she intended to file this as a workers’ compensation claim.  Ms. 
DeMaris testified that she told her supervisor, Jesse Giere, shortly after the incident 
occurred and I believe her.  I further find that if Mr. Giere’s testimony contradicted her 
testimony, the defendant would have called him as a live witness. 
After Ms. DeMaris turned in this electronic written injury report, she was 
interviewed by an Employee Health nurse, named Jenean Wolterman.  Nurse 
Wolterman documented the following: 
She was putting clips on a sheet getting ready to feed it into the ironer.  
She said she lifted her arms up to face level when she noticed a pain in 
her left collarbone area.  It was just a “hurt feeling as if she had pulled a 
muscle.”  She had no difficulty moving her arms in any direction.  No sharp 
pains.  She had no difficulty putting clips on sheets and lifting her arms up 
to face level.… 
Merideth is not saying this is a work related injury.  She is not sure what 
caused her pain.  In fact, she told Jesse twice that she did not think this 
was a work related injury.  She told me there is nothing she did at work 
that day that she could identify as the cause of her pain.  The only reason 
she was reporting it to WC was that when she called the Hartford to report 
her claim they asked her where she was when she first experienced pain.  
She told them she was at work on the ironing machine.  They told her she 
needed to report her claim to work comp rather than Short Term Disability. 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 7)  Again, it is noted that the history she provided to Nurse Wolterman is 
remarkably consistent with what she testified to and what is documented in virtually all 
of the subsequent medical reports, including her attempts to reason through whether 
simply reaching to hang a sheet qualifies as a “work-related injury.” 
Ms. DeMaris first saw a physician for this condition on May 23, 2017, a couple 
weeks before she saw Nurse Wolterman.  (Joint Exhibit 1)  She saw her primary care 
provider, Chereen Stroup, M.D.  Dr. Stroup documented the following at this visit: 
Onset: on 05/10/2017; Severity level is moderate.  It occurs constantly and 
is worsening.  Location: left collarbone.  The pain radiates to the back, 
neck, jaw.  The pain is dull and sharp.  Context:  there is no injury.  The 
pain is aggravated by lifting, raising arms and direct pressure.  The pain is 
relieved by pain/RX meds and OTC medicines (acetaminophen), 
Associated symptoms [illegible] joint tenderness.  Pertinent negatives 
include bruising, crepitus, decreased mobility, difficulty initiating sleep, 
numbness, [illegible], tingling in the arms and weakness.  Additional 
information: Patient has pain in clavicle on left, where it attaches to the 
sternum.  She’s been taking Celebrex and Tylenol for the pain.  She does 
not remember any particular injury, but notes that the pain is worse when 
she has been working as she does a lot of lifting and repetitive motions at 
work. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1)1  She followed up with Dr. Stroup a week later and more diagnostic 
evaluations were ordered.  She was also taken off work.  The diagnosis was 
sternoclavicular joint pain, left, and neck pain on the left side.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 6, 9)   
In June 2017, she treated with Michael Crane, M.D., who diagnosed left shoulder 
impingement and provided an injection, which was unsuccessful.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 8)  He 
recorded the following history:  “She states she was at work and something popped or 
started hurting.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 5)  He noted that she kept working for about a week and it 
progressed to the point where her symptoms became too significant.  He recommended 
an MRI and documented a “radicular” type pain.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 9)  He referred her to 
                                                 
1 This record notes that Ms. DeMaris “does not remember any particular injury, …”  The next 
several medical notes, authored by several different medical providers, document the injury with a high 
degree of consistency.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 5; Jt. Ex. 4, p. 17; Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20; Jt. Ex. 6, p. 1; Jt. Ex. 8, p. 11; Jt. 
Ex. 8, p. 17; Jt. Ex. 9, p. 27)  Dr. Stroup then corrected her history later in August.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26)  Ms. 
DeMaris testified at hearing that she did tell Dr. Stroup about the injury.  (Tr., p. 80)  When confronted 
with Dr. Stroup’s note at hearing, Ms. DeMaris responded, “She asked me if I had fallen or if I had hit it or 
something like that, I remember, and I said no, I did not do any of those.”  (Tr., p. 81)  Having reviewed all 
of the evidence and placing it in proper context, I find that Ms. DeMaris did not know whether hanging a 
sheet on an ironer and feeling a pop was truly a “work-related injury” under the law.  It appears to me that, 
in her mind, she was simply doing her job when she felt pain.  This theme was expressed throughout her 
hearing and deposition testimony.  I find that this likely reflects a lack of understanding about the workers’ 
compensation law, rather than any deliberate attempt to defraud the system. 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
Timothy Gibbons, M.D.  Around this same time, Dr. Stroup filled out FMLA paperwork 
for Ms. DeMaris.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 10a-10d)  Dr. Gibbons diagnosed shoulder girdle pain 
and provided an injection in her acromioclavicular joint.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 18)  Dr. Gibbons 
also documented the injury.  “She felt like a pulled muscle in her shoulder region, more 
on the inferior clavicle, medial side.  The more she did, the more it became painful.”  (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 17)  Dr. Gibbons prescribed Tramadol and documented the pain was severe. 
Dr. Stroup authored a medical causation letter on July 28, 2017, stating the 
condition “could be an overuse injury related to repetitive motion.”  (Cl. Ex. 15, p. 1)  Ms. 
DeMaris continued to follow up with Dr. Stroup in August 2017.  Worsening left shoulder 
and scapula pain is documented in this office note.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 21)  Later in August, 
Dr. Stroup documented the mechanism of injury.  “May 10-first time patient noticed pain 
at work, she thought she pulled a muscle at work but she kept working.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
26) 
Dr. Gibbons authored an opinion letter dated August 30, 2017, wherein he 
opined the diagnosis was left shoulder pain associated with the acromioclavicular joint.  
“I believe this to be related to a preexistent personal problem and was not directly 
related to her alleged work injury on May 10, 2017.”  (Def. Ex. E, p. 14)  He went on to 
opine that she had temporarily agitated this preexisting condition.  He did not state what 
the preexisting condition was or why it only showed up after she experienced her work 
injury.  He declared her to be at maximum medical improvement from the temporary 
work injury with no restrictions or disability.  I do not find this opinion compelling.   
Ms. DeMaris thereafter continued to follow up with Dr. Stroup for mood disorders 
and headache.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 32-35)  On November 15, 2017, she was evaluated by 
Darron Jones, M.D.  He recorded the history of the injury, stating “… her pain started 
what she describes at work one day in May.  She felt a pulling or tearing sensation on 
the inferior medial portion of the clavicle.  She tried working with it for a couple of 
weeks.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20)  Dr. Jones noted that her symptoms had become severe to 
the point it was “dominating her life.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20)  Dr. Jones documented that she 
held her shoulder at a very tight and abnormal posture and documented range of motion 
issues.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 21-22)  He recommended further diagnostic testing and 
pontificated about the precise diagnosis and etiology.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 23)  She followed up 
with Dr. Jones after a negative CT scan and bone scan.  Dr. Jones ultimately 
recommended an interventional pain clinic and injections.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 32) 
Ms. DeMaris began seeing Ronald Kloc, D.O., in January 2018.  Dr. Kloc ordered 
a stellate ganglion block to determine whether complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) 
was a possible diagnosis.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 36)  The procedure was performed January 24, 
2018.  It did not help.  Dr. Kloc prescribed Tramadol and recommended evaluation by 
the University of Iowa or Mayo Clinic.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 40) 
Sandeep Bhangoo, M.D., a neurosurgeon, examined Ms. DeMaris in March 
2018.  He documented her May 10, 2017, work injury.  “She had a severe exacerbation 
in her shoulder and chest at that time.”  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 1)  He opined that her symptoms 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
were not likely stemming from C6 radiculopathy and opined surgery was not likely 
warranted.  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 3-4)  After reviewing the matter with the workers’ 
compensation nurse, he opined a referral to the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
was appropriate.   
In April 2018, Ms. DeMaris was finally seen at UIHC.  She underwent an EMG 
which was interpreted as an abnormal study due to the continuous motor unit activity in 
the left trapezius.  This finding, combined with the hypertrophy of the muscle, was 
interpreted as dystonia.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 12) 
James Nepola, M.D., took an accurate history of her injury on May 10, 2017.  (Jt. 
Ex. 8, p. 11)  Dr. Nepola opined her condition was not surgical and diagnosed “left 
shoulder pain, unspecified chronicity” and recommended evaluation for dystonia.  (Jt. 
Ex. 8, pp. 15-16)  Ms. DeMaris also saw Erin Peterson, M.D., in July 2018, for a 
physical medicine consultation.  “Dr. Peterson also documented a markedly abnormal 
physical examination, stating that Ms. DeMaris had probable posttraumatic left shoulder 
dystonia.”  (Def. Ex. E, p. 20) 
Ms. DeMaris was next evaluated in the Movement Disorders Clinic, Department 
of Neurology in August 2018.  Annie Killoran, M.D., again took a consistent history of 
the injury.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 17)  She became the authorized treating physician.  Dr. Killoran 
performed a thorough examination and ultimately diagnosed painful, post-traumatic 
focal dystonia affecting the muscles of the left shoulder girdle.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 20)  Dr. 
Killoran recommended Botox injections.  “Ideally the Botox is done asap to reduce the 
risk of permanent fixation, and I fear we area [sic] already too late.  She can try Lyrica 
for potential benefit to her pain.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 20) 
Ms. DeMaris continued to follow up with Dr. Killoran.  In November 2018, some 
progress was noted.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 31)  In March 2019, Dr. Killoran continued to 
diagnose dystonia.  “She also seems to have central pain syndrome given her 
sensitivity to touch."  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 34)  The Botox injections continued.  By June 2019, 
Ms. DeMaris requested a surgical consultation.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 59)  Botox injections 
continued. 
In June 2019, John Kuhnlein, D.O., performed a record review for this claim.  
(Def. Ex. E)  Dr. Kuhnlein is a highly qualified independent medical examiner, well 
known to this agency as an unbiased medical expert.  Dr. Kuhnlein performed a 
thorough review of the medical file and summarized the same in detail.  (Def. Ex. E, pp. 
15-22)  He also reviewed her job description.  Unfortunately, he never interviewed her 
or examined her.  Dr. Kuhnlein authored a detailed, albeit highly qualified, medical 
causation opinion on June 3, 2019.  He ultimately opined the following: 
With no evidence of a cumulative injury, no evidence of an acute injury, 
and nothing that would suggest that this was a pre-existing condition that 
was either exacerbated or aggravated, there is no evidence that her left 
shoulder complaints are related to her work for Mercy Medical Center – 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
North Iowa. 
(Def. Ex. E, p. 23)  A careful reading of Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion suggests he believed 
there was no acute injury.  “If this was an acute injury, it would have been reported to 
her own physician on May 23, 2017, and the record specifically indicates there was no 
acute injury.”  (Def. Ex. E, p. 23)  This appears to be a critical factor in Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
assessment. 
 
Dr. Jones also documented his phone call from defense counsel on September 
18, 2019.  He “spent 6 minutes reviewing her chart and 20 minutes on the phone” 
before he opined the following: 
Her history is well documented in multiple previous notes but basically, 
she began to have left shoulder pain in May 2017 without an injury.  She 
eventually saw Michael W. Crane, M.D., the end of June 2017.  It was not 
even Worker’s Compensation at that point.  It ended up becoming 
Worker’s Compensation so she saw Timothy A. Gibbons, MD. She 
subsequently saw me. This is all well documented.  She is now seeing 
James Nepola, MD, and they are doing some type of Botox injections into 
the shoulder for a dystonia diagnosis. 
The question is two-fold to me, one was what my diagnosis was.  I told 
him I just had chronic shoulder pain, there was no acute etiology from my 
standpoint or reason why she would have shoulder pain.  The second 
question was whether her job doing overhead work and carrying things 
would cause pain that began along the clavicle and sternoclavicular joint 
and my feeling was that it would not. 
(Def. Ex. F, p. 25)  Interestingly, Dr. Jones had clearly documented the injury in his own 
notes in November 2017.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20)  He apparently overlooked this when 
documenting his opinion.  He then signed off on defense counsel’s summary of his 
opinion.  (Def. Ex. F, pp. 26-27) 
In October 2019, Ms. DeMaris had another Botox injection.  Dr. Peterson then 
authored a medical causation opinion letter stating the following: 
…. I do not have any reason to doubt Merideth’s telling of her history and 
in review of the records I have available this appears to be a consistent 
history.  I would also note that it can be difficult early on to diagnose 
dystonia because the physical exam findings and the prominence of 
postural abnormality and range of motion is insidious.  Therefore, I would 
argue it is not out of the realm of possibility that Merideth’s physical exam 
findings lagged her pain complaints.  It is also possible that earlier on she 
did have a more overuse or musculoskeletal pain that ultimately 
developed into dystonia. 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 54)  In February 2020, Dr. Nepola responded to a letter from defense 
counsel which was requested after a meeting in November 2019.  Dr. Nepola signed off 
on defense counsel’s rendition of his opinions, which included the following:  “Ms. 
DeMaris did not sustain any injury to her shoulder, either traumatic, or repetitive in 
nature.”  (Def. Ex. G, p. 29) 
It is noted that defendant apparently paid workers’ compensation benefits to Ms. 
DeMaris from approximately September 2017 through November 2019.  (Def. Ex. A)  
There is reference in the record to the fact that the claim was eventually denied; 
however, the denial letter is not in evidence.  Piecing the timeline together, along with 
the defense expert opinions, it appears that the claim was denied around the November 
2019 timeframe, or possibly October 2019, assuming the defendant provided an Auxier 
notice. 
In February 2020, Ms. DeMaris underwent another Botox injection.  It is noted in 
this record that the workers’ compensation claim had been denied.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 85)  Dr. 
Killoran responded to claimant’s counsel in April 2020, confirming that the May 10, 
2017, work injury caused the dystonia.  (Cl. Ex. 19, p. 1)  This opinion is a simple “check 
box report.”  Ms. DeMaris was referred to the Mayo Clinic in June 2020. 
J. Eric Ahlskog, M.D., Ph.D., evaluated Ms. DeMaris on June 5, 2020, at the 
Mayo Clinic.  He recited the correct history of the injury.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 1)  He discussed 
the following in his medical note: 
Different physicians have had different thoughts about this but Dr. Killoran 
at the University of Iowa recognized findings suggestive of dystonia and 
administered Botox in mid February.  Mrs. DeMaris had substantial benefit 
but still was left with much distortion of her neck but clearly improved.  Her 
husband commented that before the Botox, her head was positioned on 
her left shoulder. 
… 
On my examination, I noted a relatively constant position of her neck 
which was tilted about 40 degrees to the left with elevation and forward 
protrusion of her left shoulder.  This was all tonic and there were no phasic 
movements.  She tended to keep her left arm abducted and flexed at the 
elbow which she said minimized the pain. 
(Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 1-2)  He diagnosed segmental cervical dystonia with a fixed posture of the 
left shoulder and neck.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 2) 
Ms. DeMaris went on to have further diagnostic testing through Mayo, and 
eventually was examined by a surgeon, Robert Spinner, M.D.  Dr. Spinner reviewed the 
medical file including the special movement EMG which showed increased activity of 
several muscle groups including both sternomastoids as well as both paraspinal regions 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
and the left trapezius and levator.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 13)  Dr. Spinner agreed with the 
diagnosis of segmental dystonia.  He ultimately, however, advised against surgery.  
“Her degree of shoulder dysfunction would not be amenable to a typical denervation 
procedure.”  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 13)  In September 2020, Ms. DeMaris underwent evaluation 
with Kendall Lee, M.D., at Mayo.  He concurred with the diagnosis of cervical dystonia.  
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 15)  He agreed that a denervation procedure would not be recommended.  
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 15) 
In February 2021, Ms. DeMaris underwent a comprehensive evaluation in the 
Department of Neurology at Mayo.  Bryan Klassen, M.D., recited the correct history of 
the injury.   
One day she felt a bit of a pop above her left clavicle and had some pain 
there.  Initially she thought this was just a pulled muscle.  She continued to 
work.  However over time her muscles became stiffer and stiffer around 
the left shoulder.  She developed progressive anterior displacement as 
well as elevation of the shoulder.  This became associated with some left-
sided neck tilt.   
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 27)  Dr. Klassen noted the initial confusion regarding the correct diagnosis.  
Following examination he ultimately diagnosed segmental dystonia.   
Mrs. DeMaris appears to have dystonic positioning of the neck and left 
shoulder which developed over time after a minor shoulder girdle trauma.  
An alternative explanation would be that this developed as a result of a 
highly repetitive tasks [sic] she was doing at work.  Regardless, she 
certainly has a fixed position which has only partially responded to 
Botulinum toxin injections.  
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 28)  On June 2, 2021, Ms. DeMaris underwent the placement of deep brain 
stimulating electrodes.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 52) 
Ms. DeMaris continued to follow up with Dr. Klassen thereafter.  In June 2021, 
Dr. Klassen provided additional analysis on diagnosis and causation. 
I had a long discussion with the patient regarding posttraumatic fixed 
dystonia, including the controversy regarding whether this is actually 
involving the same circuit dysfunction seen in idiopathic or other 
dystonias.  There were some features about the history including a 
contributing repetitive task as well as gradual onset of the difficulties after 
the ultimate injury that were perhaps consistent with a more classic 
dystonia; however, the fixed positioning itself was a stark feature.  We 
decided to go forward with GPi deep brain stimulation with the 
understanding that we would hope for good benefit, but the chance of this 
was somewhat less than expected in a standard dystonia patient.  She did 
undergo review by the DBS committee and ultimately was approved for 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
bilateral GPI deep brain stimulation. 
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 73)  At that time, Dr. Klassen also noted that Ms. DeMaris was starting to 
have some back pain, based upon abnormal positioning.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 73)  He also 
documented her history of migraines which were now slightly worse.  In July 2021, Dr. 
Lee documented that her condition had improved, including the pain.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 84) 
In September 2021, Ms. DeMaris was evaluated by Shirlene Sampson, M.D., in 
the Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, for her mental health.  Dr. Sampson 
diagnosed mood disorder secondary to general medical condition-resolved.  (Jt. Ex. 9, 
p. 86)  She did not recommend any further treatment.  “Overall, she is pleased with her 
progress with respect to her mood improvement.”  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 86)  She continued to 
follow up with Dr. Klassen and received ongoing Botox injection through 2022 and 2023.  
(Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 112-195)  She was also seen during this period for left hip and lumbar 
pain.  (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 161-162)  Her medications were adjusted during this timeframe and 
injections other than Botox were also attempted with little relief.  In November 2022, Dr. 
Klassen noted in his report that with the benefit of hindsight, she only had a modest 
benefit from the deep brain stimulation.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 180)  The Botox injections, 
however, had been beneficial, relieving about 50 percent of her symptoms at least 
temporarily.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 180)  On December 19, 2022, she underwent a procedure for 
implantable pulse generator replacement.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 195) 
Since the beginning of 2023, Ms. DeMaris has continued to treat with Mayo 
Clinic, receiving ongoing Botox injections.  She has also had further trigger point 
injections in her cervical, thoracic and lumbar back.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 213) 
In March 2023, David Segal, M.D., performed an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Section 85.39 for the claimant. He performed a thorough 
review of her relevant medical records, took a detailed history using a transcriptionist 
and performed a thorough examination.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-23)  He diagnosed post- 
traumatic cervical and shoulder dystonia, as well as other conditions in the cervical 
area, left shoulder and back.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 24)  He opined that this condition is, in fact, 
related to the May 10, 2017, work injury, and provided a detailed explanation of his 
opinion.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 24-25)  Dr. Segal further cited to all of the available records 
which support his expert opinion.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 31-36)  He opined January 10, 2022, is 
the appropriate date for MMI for her cervical dystonia.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 38)  He then 
assigned an impairment rating of 40 percent of the whole body, using Chapter 13.  (Cl. 
Ex. 1, pp. 38-39)  It is noted that Dr. Segal provided opinions regarding a number of 
other conditions, including mental health.  I find that Ms. DeMaris may have other 
ratable physical conditions; however, clearly her primary disabling physical problem is 
the dystonia.  Dr. Segal also assigned ratings for her mental health condition. 
In August 2023, Joseph Chen, M.D., performed a defense IME.  He reviewed 
appropriate records and took history directly from Ms. DeMaris.  “She reported to me 
that she believes that she had a work injury while hanging laundry … She denied that 
she ever disputed that she did not have a work injury.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 41)  Dr. Chen 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
provided a thorough summary of the medical file.  (Def. Ex. H, pp. 32-41)  At the time of 
this evaluation, her medications included sertraline, tramadol and baclofen.  (Def. Ex. H, 
p. 41)  Dr. Chen performed a thorough evaluation.  “Neck was notable for obvious 
torticollis with neck flexed and rotated to the left.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 42)  Dr. Chen 
diagnosed “cervical dystonia or torticollis which is a neuromuscular disorder that initially 
presented mild subtle/mild symptoms in May of 2017 with spasm and tenderness over 
the left sternocleidomastoid muscle.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 44)  He noted that in the six years 
since then the condition has progressed to involve additional muscle groups.   
Regarding causation, Dr. Chen stated:  “It is my medical opinion that Ms. 
DeMaris’ cervical dystonia is not at all related to her work activities or any injury from 
performing her assigned work duties.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 44)  Dr. Chen opined that 
dystonia can develop idiopathically.  Like Dr. Kuhnlein, Dr. Chen then focused on 
whether Ms. DeMaris had an injury at work at all.  “Ms. DeMaris’ own First Report of 
Injury indicated she did not think she had a work injury.  Unfortunately, she was told by 
her long-term disability carrier to complete a First Report of Injury.”  (Def. Ex. H, pp. 44-
45)  Dr. Chen also commented on the diagnosis from the Mayo Clinic. 
Ms. DeMaris’ husband insists that the doctors at the Mayo Clinic 
diagnosed her with Post-Traumatic Cervical Dystonia.  I reviewed those 
records that indicate that the neurologists in the Mayo Clinic Movement 
Disorders Laboratory and they listed diagnoses of cervical dystonia 
without specification of trauma.  I also conducted an online search of post-
traumatic cervical dystonia and there appear to be only 6 cases in 
recorded medical history of cervical dystonia occurring following trauma. 
(Def. Ex. H, p. 45)  Dr. Chen went on to opine that the physicians who did diagnose 
“post-traumatic” torticollis did not understand that she was never really injured in the first 
place. 
Ms. DeMaris’ medical history has included some references of “post-
traumatic” torticollis but this is best explained by physicians who rely solely 
on the patient’ [sic] recall of events and history.  Unfortunately incorrect 
patient-reported history often gets propagated in medical records.  These 
records indicate that Dr. Erin Peterson, whom is also a graduate of the 
Mayo Clinic Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department as am I, 
recorded that Ms. DeMaris had “post-traumatic torticollis” based upon Ms. 
DeMaris’ report that she had a work injury.  I do not believe that Dr. 
Peterson had access to Ms. DeMaris’ First Report of Injury prior to her 
preparation of her office note as such documents are not commonly 
available for physicians in a treating role.  I believe that Ms. DeMaris’ 
treating neurologists at the Mayo Clinic can help to clarify that post-
traumatic cervical dystonia is not a recognized clinical entity especially 
since there was no trauma.  It is my medical opinion that Ms. DeMaris 
would have developed cervical dystonia/torticollis even if she had not 
started employment with the Mercy Medical Center in June 2015. 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 12 
 
 
(Def. Ex. H, p. 46)  Dr. Chen opined that traumatic dystonia is extremely rare suggesting 
that there are only a handful of documented cases. 
Dr. Segal prepared a rebuttal report on August 25, 2023.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  In this 
rebuttal report, Dr. Segal contradicts a number of Dr. Chen’s expert opinions.  (Cl. Ex. 2, 
pp. 1-8)  Much of the analysis in this report is argumentative; however, it demonstrates 
that he understood the underlying factual disputes.  For example, he addressed whether 
Ms. DeMaris had sustained “an injury.”   
When Dr. Chen (or Dr. Kuhnlein) contends that Ms. DeMaris did not 
recognize a specific injury, this is playing semantics with the term injury.  
Ms. DeMaris was injured while lifting at work.  This is considered a work 
injury.  Ms. DeMaris thought of the definition of injury as impact trauma, 
such as falling or getting hit by a car.  The event that happened to Ms. 
DeMaris is a regularly accepted mechanism of injury for work injuries.  
Lifting is a known and accepted work injury. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 6; emphasis in original) 
Ms. DeMaris was also evaluated by a neuropsychologist, Robert Arias, Ph.D., in 
September 2023. (Def. Ex. I)  He performed neuropsychological testing.  Dr. Arias 
opined that Ms. DeMaris does not have any mental health condition.  (Def. Ex. I, pp. 70-
71) 
Deposition testimony of Dr. Killoran was taken on December 21, 2023.  (Def. Ex. 
N)  Dr. Killoran is a neurologist who specializes in movement disorders.  (Def. Ex. N, 
depo p. 2)  Dr. Killoran had signed off on a report for claimant’s prior attorney asserting 
that her injury was a substantial cause of the dystonia.  (Cl. Ex. 19, p. 1)  Dr. Killoran 
defended her opinion throughout her testimony.  She acknowledged that “traumatic 
dystonia” is relatively rare.  She specifically testified, however, that Ms. DeMaris’ 
condition was clinically consistent with “traumatic dystonia.”  (Def. Ex. N, depo., pp. 24-
25)  I find her testimony to be credible. 
Barbara Laughlin, M.A., prepared expert vocational opinions for the claimant on 
October 12, 2023.  She opined that Ms. DeMaris has lost access to 100 percent of the 
job market.  (Cl. Ex. 3) 
The two primary factual disputes in this case are whether Ms. DeMaris sustained 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of her employment on May 10, 2017.  
Second, if she did sustain an injury, whether it led to her development of cervical 
dystonia. 
I find that Ms. DeMaris did sustain an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of her employment on May 10, 2017, for the reasons set forth above.  I further find that 
a greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that this injury led to her 
development of cervical dystonia. 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
At the outset it is noted that claimant’s alleged injury occurred on May 10, 2017, 
prior to the rather significant 2017 amendments to the statute.   
The first question submitted is whether Ms. DeMaris sustained an injury which 
arose out of and in the course of her employment for Mercy Medical Center. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 14 
 
 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that there is little doubt that 
Ms. DeMaris sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment on May 10, 2017. 
The real fighting issue in this case is whether this injury is a substantial causal or 
aggravating factor in her development of cervical dystonia. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1961). While a claimant must show that the injury 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 15 
 
 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
Dystonia is a relatively rare condition.  Traumatic dystonia is an even less 
common form of dystonia.  For these reasons, this is a closer issue.  Ms. DeMaris had 
the burden to prove at hearing that she (1) has dystonia, (2) and that her relatively 
minor work injury is a substantial contributing factor to her development of this 
condition.  In this case, this rare diagnosis in a work injury case was not diagnosed until 
later in claimant’s treatment.   
First, I have little doubt that Ms. DeMaris has the condition of dystonia.  All of her 
qualified treating physicians, including the physicians at the University of Iowa and the 
Mayo Clinic, have diagnosed this condition.  The defendants, in fact, did not argue that 
she does not have dystonia, either that it is actually something else or that she is faking 
it altogether. 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Ms. DeMaris has met her burden of 
proof.  In reaching this finding, I have primarily relied upon the medical opinions of Dr. 
Killoran and Dr. Segal, which are strongly supported by the treatment records from 
several physicians at the Mayo Clinic and the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  
In addition, the claimant’s own credible testimony supports this finding. 
I reject the opinions of Dr. Chen, Dr. Kuhnlein, Dr. Nepola and Dr. Jones.  In a 
nutshell, each of these physicians was essentially told by the defendants that Ms. 
DeMaris did not sustain a traumatic injury.  Ms. DeMaris, of course, is partially 
responsible for this in her early description of the injury.  Nevertheless, I have already 
found that she did in fact sustain a work injury on May 10, 2017.  In fact, having 
reviewed all of the evidence in the record, I have very little doubt that this injury 
happened exactly the way she described.  Therefore, I reject these physicians’ opinions 
primarily because they were relying on an inaccurate history. 
Dr. Chen is undoubtedly defendants’ most qualified defense expert who opined 
that the condition of dystonia was not caused by the work injury.  I read his expert 
opinion to state that even if she had an injury, it likely had no relationship to her 
development of the condition of dystonia.  He summarized his opinion as follows:  “It is 
my medical opinion that Ms. DeMaris would have developed cervical dystonia/torticollis 
even if she had not started employment with the Mercy Medical Center in June 2015.”  
(Def. Ex. H, p. 46)  This is, of course, the fighting issue in the case.  In reaching this 
opinion, Dr. Chen reasoned that dystonia most commonly is idiopathic and affects 
middle aged women.  In fact, in his opinion, traumatic dystonia is almost a unicorn.  He 
suggested that it would be only one of a handful of documented cases in the history of 
the world.  Dr. Killoran disagreed with this assessment.  While she acknowledged that 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 16 
 
 
traumatic dystonia is uncommon, she testified that, at the time of her testimony, she had 
three cases of traumatic dystonia.  (Def. Ex. N, depo p. 24)  She further distinguished 
the clinical symptoms of traumatic dystonia with idiopathic dystonia and opined that Ms. 
DeMaris’ symptoms matched traumatic dystonia.  (Def. Ex. N, depo pp. 24-25)  I find 
her opinions to be highly compelling.  I find Dr. Killoran to be a more qualified expert to 
render an opinion regarding dystonia in general and Ms. DeMaris’ condition in 
particular. 
The next issue is the nature and extent of disability. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Ms. DeMaris is permanently and 
totally disabled.  Ms. DeMaris was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  She is a high 
school graduate with a service sector manual labor history.  She has always been a 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 17 
 
 
hard worker.  As a result of her work injury, she has the condition of cervical dystonia 
which has resulted in severe permanent impairment to her body as a whole, estimated 
at 40 percent by Dr. Segal.  Her symptoms are significantly disabling and prevent her 
from working.  (Tr., pp. 62-63)  She sleeps in a recliner most of the time.  She does not 
drive.  She is unable to walk for long distances.  While she has not looked for work, her 
vocational assessment suggests that it would be futile to do so, and I agree.  Dr. Segal 
has recommended significantly prohibitive restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 42-43) 
I conclude that she is entitled to benefits from the date she went off work through 
the date of hearing and continuing until such time she is no longer permanently and 
totally disabled.  The defendant paid benefits through November 25, 2019, and is 
entitled to a credit for all the benefits paid.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) 
The next issue is past medical expenses and future medical care. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
I have thoroughly reviewed all of claimant’s medical expenses as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 12.  These expenses are related to her condition of cervical dystonia.  
The defendant is responsible for all such expenses, including the mileage set forth 
therein.  The claimant has also requested alternate medical care or ongoing treatment 
with Mayo Clinic.  I find this is appropriate. 
The next issue is whether Ms. DeMaris is entitled to IME expenses and other 
case expenses. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 18 
 
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Iowa Code section 10A.3282 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
                                                 
2 Iowa Code section 10A.328 was previously codified as Iowa Code section 86.40.  No substantive 
changes were made to the statute when it was transferred from section 86.40 to section 10A.328.  
 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 19 
 
 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section  
10A.328. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
I find that claimant is entitled to IME expenses of Dr. Segal as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6.  Claimant is entitled to all discretionary costs set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 7 and 8. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
All benefits shall be paid at the rate of three hundred eighty-five and 76/100 
dollars ($385.76) per week. 
Defendant shall pay the claimant permanent total disability from the date 
claimant was taken off work, forward through the date of hearing and continuing until 
she is no longer permanently and totally disabled. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendant is responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
12, including mileage consistent with this decision. 
Defendant is responsible for reimbursement of IME expenses in the amount of 
five thousand two hundred and 00/100 dollars ($5,200.00) for Dr. Segal. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendant in the amount of three thousand two hundred 
thirteen and 25/100 dollars ($3,213.25). 
 

DEMARIS V. TRINITY HEALTH CORP. d/b/a MERCY MEDICAL CENTER – NORTH 
IOWA 
Page 20 
 
 
 
Signed and filed this __19th __ day of September, 2024. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Gary Mattson (via WCES) 
Lee Hook (via WCES) 
Morgan Borron (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
