Case Number: 1616431.01
Case Title:  CARLSON, MATTHEW V. AGRIUM U.S., INC. D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Carlson Matthew-1616431.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MATTHEW CARLSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
         File No. 1616431.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
AGRIUM US, d/b/a NUTRIEN AG 
  : 
SOLUTIONS, INC., 
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes:  1402.40, 1803, 2502, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Matthew Carlson filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Agrium U.S., d/b/a Nutrien Ag Solutions, Inc., employer, 
and Ace American Insurance Company, insurance carrier, for a stipulated work injury 
date of May 5, 2016. The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on January 15, 2025. The case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all 
participants appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 18, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through K. Defendants filed a motion to exclude 
claimant’s exhibits 2 and 6 prior to hearing, which was denied. Claimant filed a motion 
to exclude defendants’ exhibit J prior to hearing as well. Exhibit J is an employability 
report that was served only eight days prior to hearing. After discussion on the record, 
the motion to exclude exhibit J was denied. However, the record was left open in order 
to allow time for claimant to obtain a rebuttal to the late report. 
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Lucas Crawford testified on behalf of the 
defendants. The evidentiary record was left open after hearing until January 29, 2025, 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Aug-26  15:02:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 2 
for receipt of the aforementioned rebuttal report, which is claimant’s exhibit 18. The 
parties submitted post-hearing briefs on February 28, 2025, and the case was 
considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
The extent of claimant’s industrial disability; 
2. 
Payment of certain medical expenses and mileage; 
3. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care;  
4. 
Reimbursement for claimant’s independent medical examinations; and 
5. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 49-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
16) He has an associate’s degree in agribusiness management, which he received in 
2014. (Tr., pp. 16-17) Prior to that, in 2008, he obtained a welding certificate. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 6, p. 138) He has also had a commercial drivers’ license (CDL) since 
2010.  
 
Claimant’s past job experience includes general farm labor, milking cows, 
machinist work, welding, general construction and labor, locating underground wires, 
general maintenance, driving a feed truck, and agricultural spraying. (Tr., p. 55; 
Defendants’ Exhibit C, pp. 24-26) 
 
Claimant started working for Nutrien, the defendant employer, in 2013. (Tr., p. 
19) At the time, he was a part-time employee. Nutrien is a retail agribusiness company. 
In late 2014 or early 2015, claimant became a full-time employee, and testified that he 
worked a lot of overtime. He testified that he worked the most overtime in the spring and 
fall seasons, as spring is when he was spraying and fall was when he applied 
anhydrous ammonia. (Tr., pp. 19-20) Prior to the work injury, claimant did not have any 
mental or physical restrictions on his activities. (Tr., p. 20) 
 
Claimant testified that prior to the work injury, his job at Nutrien was in 
operations, so he did “a little bit of everything.” (Tr., p. 34) His job duties included 
welding, operating equipment, general labor, moving seed, and servicing trucks, which 
included oil changes, filter changes, tire checks, and cleaning. He also worked in the 
fields, running a sprayer and driving a tractor that pulled an anhydrous bar – both large 
pieces of equipment. (Tr., p. 35) He also drove a tender truck, which was used to make 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 3 
both liquid and dry deliveries. The tender truck he drove prior to his work injury was a 
ten-speed manual transmission. (Tr., pp. 37-38) Claimant’s job prior to the work injury 
also involved regular lifting, including bags of seed, pieces of streel and moving tires 
around. (Tr., p. 36) Claimant testified that he regularly had to lift up to 70-pounds.  
Claimant testified that prior to the work injury, he enjoyed his job and he did not have 
any difficulties performing his job duties.  
 
Claimant sustained a work injury on May 5, 2016. (Tr., p. 18) Claimant has no 
independent recollection of the accident. (Tr., p. 19) Claimant was driving a John Deere 
agricultural sprayer when he was hit by a train. (See Cl. Ex. 2, p. 52; Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 151-
154) Photographs show a great deal of damage to the sprayer on the left side, as well 
as the windshield. (Cl. Ex. 7) First responders on scene noted that claimant was 
approximately 25 meters from the sprayer and 20 feet from the train upon arrival. (Joint 
Exhibit 2, p. 35) He was unresponsive and his pupils were reactive but uneven in size. 
He had several lacerations to the top of his head, and was having trouble breathing. 
Once the air crew arrived, they had to secure an airway prior to loading him into the 
helicopter. He was taken by AirCare to University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics (UIHC) 
shortly after the accident. 
 
Upon admission to (UIHC), claimant’s injuries were identified as: 
 
1. Head and scalp lacerations 
2. Diffuse axonal injury (MRI 5/6) 
3. IVH – small. Occipital horn of left lateral ventricle 
4. Subgaleal hematoma 
5. Thoracic spinous process fractures (T1, T3-T10) 
6. Bilateral rib fractures: Right: 3-7, 11, 12; Left: 6-11  
7. T7 vertebral body fracture 
8. L1-L4 right transverse process fractures 
9. Right tension pneumothorax (status-post chest tube placement) 
10. Bilateral lung contusions 
11. Left clavicle fracture 
12. Right scapula fracture 
13. Transverse process C7 fracture 
14. Right segmental radius fracture 
15. Left radius fracture. 
 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 39) Claimant remained at UIHC until May 20, 2016. His discharge 
summary provides a brief overview of the treatment he received over the course of his 
hospital stay. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 39-40) There is also a summary of the 
operations/procedures performed during his stay, which include right thoracostomy tube 
insertion on May 5, 2016; intracranial pressure monitor placement on May 6, 2016; 
modified percutaneous tracheostomy tube placement and PEG tube on May 12, 2016; 
and open reduction radius/ulna fracture, mid-shaft, on May 16, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 39) 
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Upon discharge from UIHC, claimant was to be admitted to a long-term acute 
care facility. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 67) He was admitted at Madonna Rehabilitation Hospital on 
May 20, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) Claimant testified that Madonna helped him learn to 
function correctly. (Tr., p. 40) He had to work hard on his right arm to get it to function, 
and he also had to undergo speech therapy.  
 
 
 
Records from Madonna indicate that after claimant’s first week there, he 
developed swelling and a hematoma in his right forearm, raising concerns for underlying 
compartment syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) As such, on May 29, 2016, he was transferred 
to Saint Elizabeth Regional Medical Center for evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 152) After 
evaluation, he was assessed as having probable compartment syndrome in the right 
arm, and was taken for surgery. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 153) The operative note indicates that 
claimant underwent a decompression fasciotomy of the right forearm and wrist, flexor 
compartment, with debridement of nonviable muscle; right carpal tunnel release; and 
right forearm hematoma evacuation. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 154) Due to swelling, the surgical site 
was incompletely closed, with the intention of secondary wound closure in the next 
couple of days. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 154) 
 
 
Claimant remained at Saint Elizabeth, and on May 31, 2016, underwent irrigation 
and debridement of the skin, soft tissue, and muscle of his right forearm, along with 
secondary closure of his surgical wound. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 156-157) Claimant was 
discharged from Saint Elizabeth and readmitted to Madonna on June 1, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
pp. 158-160; Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
 
 
Claimant remained in the long-term acute care unit at Madonna until June 30, 
2016. (Jt. Ex 1, p. 3) Records indicate he made steady progress, and eventually he was 
felt to be a good candidate for the acute rehab unit. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) As such, he was 
admitted to the inpatient rehabilitation unit for aggressive inpatient rehabilitation on June 
30, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) The attending physician there was Morgan LaHolt, M.D. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 6) Records from the rehabilitation unit note that upon admission, claimant had 
difficulties with motor restlessness and decreased safety awareness, as well as 
decreased alertness. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) Records also note he had a premorbid history of 
anger issues, so psychiatry was consulted and did not recommend any further 
treatment.  
 
 
Claimant had an EMG/NCV due to right hand weakness and numbness on 
August 10, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) The study demonstrated electrodiagnostic evidence on 
severe right median neuropathy, and suggested a lesion in the forearm. There were 
also findings that could indicate ongoing axonal reinnervation/repair, or alternatively, 
more than one site of injury with a more severe injury occurring distal to the wrist. There 
was no other focal neuropathy, brachial plexopathy, or cervical radiculopathy in the right 
upper limb. Dr. LaHolt authored a progress note dated August 25, 2016, which noted 
claimant to be awake and alert upon questioning. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) At that time, he felt he 
was tolerating his pain well and making good gains in therapy. Dr. LaHolt continued his 
current rehabilitation care plan, as claimant continued to need full-team interdisciplinary 
inpatient rehabilitation at that time.  

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
Claimant was discharged from inpatient rehabilitation on September 12, 2016, to 
a transitional living apartment and the outpatient rehabilitation day program. (Jt. Ex. 1, 
pp. 5-6) By that time, he had been weaned from his fentanyl patch and reported minimal 
pain. He reported persistent numbness and tingling in his right arm, however. He made 
steady gains throughout his hospitalization, and upon discharge, he was noted to be 
independent with ambulation, transfers, dressing, and medication management. He was 
to continue with outpatient rehabilitation, including physical therapy, occupational 
therapy, speech therapy, and neuropsychology. He was also restricted from driving, 
climbing, alcohol, and tobacco.  
 
 
On September 14, 2016, claimant had an outpatient neuropsychological 
evaluation with Ryan Ernst, Psy.D. (Def. Ex. G, p. 95) Dr. Ernst noted that claimant’s 
initial workup after the accident was notable for traumatic brain injury with multiple head 
and scalp lacerations, among other injuries. His evaluation was for the purposes of 
assessing claimant’s current neuropsychological status in order to assist with treatment 
planning and recommendations for return to usual life activities.  
 
 
Dr. Ernst noted claimant had a history of mild anxiety and depression prior to the 
accident. (Def. Ex. G, p. 96) He noted that claimant was engaged with conversation and 
the testing process, and appeared to put forth a good faith effort. He opined that the 
results of the evaluation “likely represent his true neuropsychological status” at the time 
of the evaluation. The embedded validity indices supported that opinion, as claimant 
failed zero of three. (Def. Ex. G, p. 96) 
 
 
Dr. Ernst administered a battery of tests, and evaluated the results. (Def. Ex. G, 
pp. 96-100) In summary, claimant was found to be in the low-average range for overall 
functional disability for day to day tasks. (Def. Ex. G, p. 98) He was found to have 
impaired general cognition, verbal reasoning, visual reasoning, and verbal memory. Dr. 
Ernst noted that based on a predictive algorithm that considered certain demographic 
factors, claimant was estimated to be in the average range with respect to most 
premorbid abilities. With respect to his psychological status, testing reflected minimal 
depression, and a minimal level of anxiety. (Def. Ex. G, p. 100)  
 
 
Dr. Ernst also spoke with claimant’s parents in order to better ascertain 
claimant’s premorbid cognitive abilities. He concluded that claimant demonstrated 
borderline impaired to impaired cognitive function, but noted that it was difficult to 
determine what was related to his recent injury versus preexisting characteristics. (Def. 
Ex. G, pp. 100-101) He noted that his profile reflected both impairment of cognitive 
function due to traumatic brain injury, as well as preexisting developmental difficulties. 
(Def. Ex. G, p. 101) He recommended that treatment efforts should focus on the areas 
in which claimant demonstrated the most impairment, and continue until he no longer 
appeared to be benefiting from therapy. 
 
 
Dr. Ernst’s diagnostic impressions were late-effect, severe diffuse traumatic brain 
injury, and probable preexisting cognitive/learning difficulties. He recommended 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 6 
claimant not return to driving until passing a medical driving exam at Madonna, due to 
his slowed reaction times, vulnerability to errors, and double vision. (Def. Ex. G, p. 102) 
He opined that when claimant returned to work, he would likely be able to work full 
days, but recommended he engage in tasks that minimize risk of physical injury. For 
example, he did not believe claimant should be operating farm equipment at that time. 
He felt that when claimant returned home, he would not need 24-hour supervision; 
rather safety checks every three to four hours would be adequate. 
 
 
With respect to his cognitive difficulties, Dr. Ernst again stated they were the 
result of a combination of premorbid and injury-related factors. He also felt claimant’s 
visual difficulties may have been a factor. He recommended a follow-up 
neuropsychological evaluation in 12 to 14 months. He also supported claimant’s request 
for an outpatient counselor or psychologist upon his return home. 
 
 
Claimant followed up with Dr. LaHolt on September 26, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
He continued to make gains in the rehab day program. He reported doing well overall, 
and denied problems with his mood, asking to discontinue his Zoloft. He felt he was 
getting more movement in his hand, and felt he was getting stronger. He reported some 
difficulties with stairs due to his vision. Dr. LaHolt noted that he had some significant 
word finding difficulties throughout their visit, but he was able to get his point across with 
“minimal difficulty.” Overall, claimant was continuing to improve, so Dr. LaHolt continued 
his current rehabilitation plan. After speaking with nursing and rehab staff, Dr. LaHolt 
also noted claimant did not appear to be having anger or mood issues, so he ordered a 
trial decrease of his Zoloft for two weeks until his next follow up. He was to continue his 
ocular treatments as well.  
 
 
There was a patient/family team meeting on October 4, 2016, in which claimant’s 
discharge from rehabilitation and return to his own home was discussed. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 
12-13) Concerns were noted and addressed, and claimant was scheduled for discharge 
on October 21, 2016, to be supervised at home by his parents. He then followed up with 
Dr. LaHolt on October 10, 2016, and reported no changes in his mood since lowering 
his dose of Zoloft. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 14) He reported that both he and his mother were 
comfortable with the plan for him to transition home with her on the 21st. He reported 
slow improvements in strength in his right upper extremity, and continued improvements 
cognitively. On examination, Dr. LaHolt noted no change to slight improvement with 
claimant’s right upper extremity, and less word-finding difficulties than previously.  
 
 
Dr. LaHolt discontinued claimant’s Zoloft, and recommended claimant establish 
with a neuro-optometrist once he was closer to home. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 15) He did not report 
any pain issues, so Dr. LaHolt said he could continue with over-the-counter ibuprofen. 
He noted that claimant could consider Gabapentin if he has any increase in neuropathic 
pain in his right upper extremity. Finally, Dr. LaHolt noted claimant would be seen on an 
as-needed basis as he was transitioning closer to home.  
 
 
Claimant saw Tanner Gates, O.D., for a vision follow-up on October 11, 2016. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 16) He reported still having double vision, but felt he was making some 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 7 
progress. Dr. Gates’s diagnosis was posttraumatic left hyper exotropia with diplopia, as 
well as oculomotor dysfunction of pursuit and saccadic eye movements. He wrote a 
prescription for claimant to obtain a pair of prisms, given the magnitude of his 
misalignment and that it had not changed much since his last visit. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 17) He 
explained that the prisms would need to be gradually reduced over time, and they would 
help facilitate binocular fusion. He noted the prisms would have claimant’s 
compensatory prescription as well as his progressive lenses in addition to the fusional 
prisms. Dr. Gates recommended claimant see Dr. Fitzgerald for vision rehabilitation in  
Cedar Rapids after his discharge home, and stated that office would be “ideal” for 
adjusting claimant’s prismatic prescription in the future, and could also recommend and 
perform further vision rehabilitation.  
 
 
There is a prescription in the record signed by Dr. LaHolt, dated October 14, 
2016. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 18) It states “Counseling to eval and treat Dx: TBI” but there is no 
corresponding medical record.  
 
 
Claimant was discharged from the outpatient day rehabilitation program on 
October 21, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 25) Each of the primary providers of claimant’s 
occupational, physical, and speech therapy provided a detailed discharge summary with 
recommendations for ongoing care. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 19-24) Overall, claimant made 
significant progress since starting the program. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 25) He was still not 
released to drive at that point, and it was recommended he continue with physical, 
occupational, and speech therapy.  
 
 
After his discharge from Madonna, claimant’s care was transferred to Robert 
Chesser, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 162) His first visit with Dr. Chesser was October 24, 2016. 
At that time, he was doing reasonably well. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 164) He continued to report 
problems with decreased short-term memory, decreased balance, residual numbness in 
the median distribution of the right arm, as well as some mild pain in the upper back and 
shoulder region. Dr. Chesser ordered resumption of physical, occupational, and speech 
therapy, as well as cognitive retraining to co-treat with speech therapy. He also noted 
claimant had an increase in pain when his Zoloft was completely stopped, so he was 
back on the lower dose of 25 mg at that time.  
 
 
On November 10, 2016, claimant saw Swetha Narayana, M.D., to establish care. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 173) Dr. Narayana briefly reviewed claimant’s injuries and treatment 
resulting from the work injury, and noted he continued with speech, physical, and 
occupational therapy at that time. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 174) Claimant reported that while in 
rehab, his sertraline (Zoloft) was reduced, and he felt better, but since returning home 
he felt more depressed. As such, he asked for an increase back to 50 mg. Dr. Narayana 
noted the reason for his depression was that he was not able to carry on his daily 
activities as before, and thoughts of the accident were coming back to him. Dr. 
Narayana increased the prescription, and also referred claimant to behavioral health. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 176) 
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Claimant saw DeAnn Fitzgerald, O.D., on November 18, 2016, for a vision 
examination. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 182) Dr. Fitzgerald noted claimant had ongoing double vision 
and tunnel vision, and her plan included multi-systems therapy to help integrate and get 
the two eyes working better together, and to improve concentration, attention, balance, 
and multi-tasking. 
 
 
On December 27, 2016, Dr. Chesser recommended that claimant have a 
personal care attendant from 8:00 a.m. until 1:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 165) Claimant continued with physical and occupational therapy. (See Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
35) He also had regular follow up visits with Dr. Fitzgerald. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 183-186) 
 
 
On September 8, 2017, Dr. Fitzgerald approved claimant for unlimited driving 
and discontinued home care. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 187) She also said he could return to work 
two days per week, four hours per day, and she wanted him to continue therapy twice 
per week. On September 14, 2017, the nurse case manager emailed Dr. Chesser 
regarding Dr. Fitzgerald’s recent release. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 166) She noted that claimant had 
completed his formal speech and occupational therapy and recently reduced his 
psychology counseling sessions to once per month. Dr. Chesser responded that he 
would support a trial of claimant returning to work. 
 
 
On October 3, 2017, claimant had his follow-up neuropsychological evaluation at 
Madonna, performed by Dr. Ernst and Todd Caze, M.Ed., M.A. (Def. Ex. F, p. 86) At 
that time, he reported he continued to have days where he felt stiff and had back pain. 
He also reported headaches if he had to think a lot, and fatigue if he tried to work too 
much. He reported avoiding television shows that have ambulances in them, and 
avoiding the sound of trains braking. He reported sweating for up to two hours if he 
hears train brakes. With respect to his psychological history, claimant reported a history 
of mild anxiety and depression prior to the accident, including medication for 
depression. (Def. Ex. F, p. 87) He reported he was currently taking medication for 
depression prescribed by his primary care provider. 
 
 
Claimant was again administered several cognitive and psychological tests. (Def. 
Ex. F, pp. 87-88) His performance was deemed to be valid. The results of each test 
were analyzed, and it was concluded that claimant showed significant improvement in 
most areas. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 89-93) He showed decline in some areas, but his 
decreased performance appeared “unrelated to his neurological health.” (Def. Ex. F, p. 
93) Overall, it was concluded that his cognitive function had improved more than 90 
percent of expected improvement. The most significant gains in the future would likely 
be the result of improvement in his visual perceptual ability, if possible.  
 
 
Caze and Ernst recommended that claimant reduce his caffeine consumption, 
and continue his vision therapy. They also felt it would be reasonable for claimant to 
begin to increase the number of hours and days he worked, as long as he is able to 
tolerate the activity level with no exacerbation of symptoms or significant fatigue. They 
recommended his occupational tasks be kept fairly routine, and without demand for 
independent problem solving. They recommended his supervisors continue to monitor 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 9 
his safety awareness and decision-making ability on the job prior to placing him back 
into the use of large equipment or other situations where the risk of physical harm is 
elevated. 
 
 
Claimant also saw Dr. LaHolt on October 3, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26) After 
discussion with Dr. Ernst, Dr. LaHolt noted that claimant had made significant 
improvements across most domains of cognitive functioning, and Dr. Ernst felt he was 
near his premorbid performance level. He did not have any neuropsychologically related 
restrictions. Dr. LaHolt noted that claimant was continuing to work with neuro-optometry, 
and had been allowed to return to work for four hours, two days per week. He reported 
feeling fairly fatigued at that point, and his family agreed. Overall, he felt his pain had 
improved. He reported some persistent right-hand weakness, and right upper extremity 
decrease in sensation and hand dexterity. He also reported some mood issues, for 
which he was back on 50 mg of Zoloft.  
 
 
With respect to his right upper extremity, claimant saw Adam Kafka, M.D., at 
Madonna, who ordered EMG and NCV testing. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 28) The testing showed 
chronic right median mononeuropathy, which showed some improvement since his prior 
exam. Dr. LaHolt felt he was making good progress in that regard, and recommended 
he continue to try to use his hand as normally as possible. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 27) He 
recommended claimant continue with Zoloft for his mood, and continue to perform 
activity as tolerated with respect to his pain levels. He recommended slowly increasing 
his work activities over time, given his fatigue. With respect to his right hand, he 
recommended a functional capacity evaluation once he was closer to maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) for his vision.  
  
 
On October 10, 2017, Dr. Fitzgerald allowed claimant to work for four hours, 
three days per week. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 188) On November 7, 2017, Dr. Chesser released 
claimant to return to work 8-hours per day, three days per week. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 168) He 
noted that claimant was allowed to drive a tractor in the fields only. On November 10, 
2017, Dr. Fitzgerald stated that claimant could work three days per week for four hours 
until December 1, 2017, after which he could work three days per week for five hours, 
and then she would reassess. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 189-190) She also reduced his therapy to 
one day per week. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 190)  
 
 
On February 14, 2018, Dr. Fitzgerald noted that claimant had continued to 
demonstrate improved vision and cognitive skills. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 191) However, due to the 
travel and increase in work hours, he would be continuing his therapy at home. As such, 
she requested a therapy training tool for claimant to use at home.  
 
 
On February 27, 2018, claimant saw Dr. Chesser, and advised that he had been 
driving without difficulty, but was not recommended to return to heavy equipment 
operation after an evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 170) He reported no difficulty working 3 days 
per week, so Dr. Chesser felt he could return to full-time. He recommended a functional 
capacity evaluation (FCE) to determine specific physical limitations. Dr. Chesser 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 10 
provided a note indicating that claimant could work fulltime, but should avoid operating 
heavy equipment until he demonstrated safety. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 169) 
 
 
On April 10, 2018, claimant had an FCE at E3 Work Therapy Services, 
performed by Jim Ruggeberg, OT. (Def. Ex. H, p. 103) Claimant’s effort was found to be 
valid, as claimant performed consistently throughout. Results of testing placed claimant 
in the heavy material demand category, with the ability to safely perform the following 
activities: 
 
o Bilateral lift up to 62 pounds, occasionally 
o Right unilateral lift up to 30 pounds, occasionally 
o Left unilateral lift up to 32 pounds, occasionally 
o Bilateral overhead lift up to 28 pounds, occasionally 
o Bilateral carry up to 50 pounds, occasionally 
o Right unilateral carry up to 47 pounds, occasionally 
o Sit, stand, walk – constantly 
o Negotiate stairs on a constant basis, with use of handrail on one side 
descending 
o Squat frequently 
o Forward bend and kneel occasionally 
 
(Def. Ex. H, pp. 103-104) 
 
 
On May 30, 2018, Dr. Chesser opined that claimant had reached MMI and was 
capable of full duty work. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 172) 
 
 
On June 26, 2018, claimant saw Michael Maharry, M.D., to establish care. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 70) He told Dr. Maharry that he needed a refill of his blood pressure 
medication, which was prescribed because his depression medication was causing his 
blood pressure to run high. He advised he was placed on depression medication (Zoloft) 
due to the traumatic brain injury. After examination, Dr. Maharry advised that his blood 
pressure and cholesterol were under control, but he wanted to check his mental health 
again in 90 days. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 73)  
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Maharry on September 26, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 74) At 
that time, he wanted to decrease his Zoloft, as he had been getting angry and irritated 
more recently at work, and felt he lacked motivation and energy because of the 
medication. He also reported visual disturbances while driving and a decreased reaction 
time. Dr. Maharry discontinued a blood pressure medication to see if that would help his 
energy level, and recommended he discuss his driving status with his employer. (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 77) At his next visit on October 29, 2018, he reported his energy levels had 
improved, his sleep had improved, and he had excellent results from stopping the blood 
pressure medication. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15)  
 
 
On November 8, 2018, Dr. LaHolt performed a final examination and provided a 
detailed impairment rating. (Def. Ex. I, p. 118-129) At that time, claimant reported 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 11 
ongoing persistent right upper extremity pain distal to his elbow, as well as persistent 
numbness and tingling in his first, second, and third digits of the right hand. He reported 
a complete lack of pain sensation, and noted he had burned his hand on multiple 
occasions. He reported diminished hand grip and decreased hand dexterity, and 
reported some difficulties with writing. With respect to his spine, he reported some 
ongoing pain made worse by sitting or standing for too long. He reported some left wrist 
pain, made worse with activity, especially heavy lifting.  
 
 
 
With respect to his traumatic brain injury, he reported persistent headaches, 
about once every two weeks. He reported some persistent visual difficulties and 
continued double vision on his right side, which affected his balance. He was still 
working with his optometrist to adjust his glasses. He reported some ongoing difficulties 
with his memory, including forgetting to take his medications and forgetting to complete 
tasks. He felt his return to work had been going well, but he said his mood had become 
more irritable and his family felt he had been quicker to raise his voice. He remained on 
Zoloft, but was considering transitioning off the medication. 
 
 
Additional ongoing symptoms included some soreness in his shoulders, and 
some fatigue that was better as long as he slept 9 to 10 hours per night. He was 
otherwise independent in activities of daily living, was not using an assistive device for 
ambulation, and was able to drive. 
 
 
After physical examination, Dr. LaHolt provided an impairment rating using the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 6th Edition. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 
122-129) For the traumatic brain injury, he provided a 5 percent impairment rating, 
primarily due to his alteration in mental status and cognitive function and his ongoing 
difficulties with depressed mood and occasional irritability. (Def. Ex. I, p. 123) He 
assigned 3 percent impairment for his ongoing migraine headaches. For his thoracic 
spine fractures, he assigned 3 percent impairment, and he assigned 6 percent for his 
lumbar spine fractures. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 124-125) He assigned 3 percent of the upper 
extremity, which converts to 2 percent of the body as a whole, for the left clavicle 
fracture. (Def. Ex. I, p. 125) For the left radius fracture, he assigned 2 percent of the 
upper extremity, which is 1 percent of the whole person. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 125-126) For 
the right radius fracture, his rating was the same; 2 percent upper extremity or 1 percent 
of the whole person. (Def. Ex. I, p. 126) He assigned another 2 percent upper extremity 
for the right scapula fracture, which again converts to 1 percent of the whole person. 
(Def. Ex. I, p. 127)  
 
 
For the peripheral nerve injury in claimant’s right upper extremity, which resulted 
from compartment syndrome, Dr. LaHolt provided a 23 percent upper extremity rating 
as a result of the sensory component of the median nerve injury. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 127-
128) He provided an additional 3 percent impairment of the upper extremity due to the 
motor component of the injury. (Def. Ex. I, p. 128) Combined, the overall rating for the 
peripheral nerve injury was 25 percent of the upper extremity, which is equivalent to 15 
percent of the whole person. (Def. Ex. I, p. 129) 
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Using the combined values chart, Dr. LaHolt combined all ratings and assigned a 
total overall rating of 32 percent of the whole person. There is no indication in his report 
regarding whether he felt any permanent restrictions would be appropriate. 
 
 
Claimant continued treating with Dr. Maharry, and on January 29, 2019, he 
reported wanting to see a psychologist. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 78) He reported being more solitary 
and not wanting to be around people, which was new since his traumatic brain injury. 
He wanted to see a psychologist with some understanding of the issue. Dr. Maharry 
referred him to psychology. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 81) When claimant returned to Dr. Maharry on 
April 30, 2019, nothing had been scheduled, and he reported that he was not getting 
better. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 82) He reported experiencing more post-traumatic stress symptoms, 
and becoming fearful of driving his tractor. Dr. Maharry again referred him to 
psychology, and increased his Zoloft to 75 mg. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 84) 
 
 
Claimant was seen at the Robert Young Center on June 4, 2019, to establish 
mental health services. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 220-224) The diagnoses at that time were 
generalized anxiety disorder; social phobia, unspecified; and major depressive disorder, 
recurrent, moderate. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 224) It was recommended that he attend counseling 
for the next six months on an as-needed basis.  
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Maharry on July 30, 2019, and reported seeing a 
counselor. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 85) He reported he would be seeing a mental health prescriber 
in October of 2019 as well. With respect to his physical condition, he continued to have 
paresthesia of his right hand in the second, third, and fourth digits. Dr. Maharry offered 
gabapentin, but claimant declined at that time. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 87) 
 
 
Claimant had a follow-up with Dr. LaHolt on August 16, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 30) At 
that time, he was back at work full duty, but reported frustrating that it was taking him 
longer to perform tasks. He reported persistent vision problems, as well as persistent 
fatigue, which caused him to often leave work early. He reported significant difficulty 
with irritability, as well as persistent numbness in his right upper extremity. He reported 
difficulties with writing. He complained of increased balance and his legs feeling 
“wobbly,” but denied any falls. He reported persistent low back pain, and occasional 
numbness in his right lower extremity. He reported that he was going to see a 
psychiatrist in October, and he was frustrated that he had to increase his Zoloft to 75 
mg.  
 
 
Dr. LaHolt recommended a trial of gabapentin for his low back and lower 
extremity pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 31) He also ordered physical therapy and an orthopedic 
spine referral. For his right upper extremity, he recommended a follow-up EMG to 
ensure stability. He noted that neuro-optometry was pending, and recommended he 
continue with counseling as well as a referral to psychiatry.  
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Maharry on August 20, 2019, to discuss Dr. LaHolt’s 
recommendations. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 88) Dr. Maharry prescribed the gabapentin per Dr. 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 13 
LaHolt’s recommendation, and ordered the EMG, orthopedic consultation, and physical 
therapy as well. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 90-91)  
 
 
Claimant saw Beth Colon, ARNP, in psychiatry at Robert Young Center on 
October 3, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 225) He reported that since the work accident, he had 
been feeling not as happy with his job, more irritable, depressed, and anxious. He noted 
that he had started taken gabapentin for his right upper extremity neuropathy, which 
was helping with sleep. He reported he had a tendency to isolate himself, and felt a loss 
of energy, loss of motivation, and loss of interest in things he once enjoyed. He also 
noted some memory loss and forgetfulness. ARNP Colon increased his Zoloft to 100 
mg daily, and added Wellbutrin 150 mg. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 226)  
 
Claimant had an EMG on October 10, 2019, which showed right median 
neuropathy. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 92-95) He followed up with Dr. Maharry on October 30, 2019, 
and reported his mental health treatment was going well. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 96) They 
discussed the EMG results, and claimant reported the gabapentin was working 
satisfactorily. Claimant continued to follow up with Dr. Maharry on a regular basis, and 
saw ARNP Colon again in December of 2019. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 16-17; Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 227-
228) 
 
By May of 2020, claimant had been taken off work by his mental health providers 
due to increased irritability. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 99) He reported to Dr. Maharry that the 
gabapentin was working well. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 99-102)  
 
On May 22, 2020, claimant saw Dr. Ernst, who was at Clarinda Regional Health 
Center at that time. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 229) Dr. Ernst’s record states that claimant sought him 
out due to their prior treatment relationship at Madonna. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 230) His main 
complaint at that time involved anger problems, which had increased to the point that he 
felt he could no longer walk away from small irritants and was losing his temper easily. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 229) Claimant reported he had gotten into an argument with his boss’s son 
at work, and ended up assaulting him. He left work that day and had not been back 
since. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 229-230) He told Dr. Ernst that he wanted to salvage his 
employment. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 230) Dr. Ernst’s diagnoses included intermittent explosive 
disorder, secondary to history of anxiety and depression. He also wanted to rule out 
ADHD. He decreased claimant’s Wellbutrin, and recommended claimant continue 
weekly psychotherapy with a psychologist from his town.  
 
On June 4, 2020, claimant had a telephone session with Dr. Ernst. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 
232) He noted no increase of symptoms with the first taper of Wellbutrin. He reported 
that he did not believe he needed to see the other psychologist as long as he was able 
to see Dr. Ernst biweekly – once per month in person and once over Zoom. Dr. Ernst 
discontinued the Wellbutrin, reduced the Zoloft, and added fluoxetine. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 233) 
He planned to see claimant every other week for therapy. Dr. Ernst also wrote a letter 
indicating that claimant was unable to work at that time, due to anxiety, poor anger and 
impulse control, and residual cognitive deficits secondary to his traumatic brain injury. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 231) His plan of care included psychiatric medication management, 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 14 
cognitive behavioral therapy, consultation with his primary psychologist, and 
coordination with his employer for a suitable plan to return to work. He felt claimant’s 
prognosis for returning to work was good.  
 
At claimant’s next appointment with Dr. Ernst on June 19, 2020, they discussed 
his job in detail. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 234) Dr. Ernst noted that claimant’s verbal communication 
was often not well organized, but he typically responded well to redirection and he was 
positive and optimistic about his course of treatment and returning to work. He was no 
longer taking Zoloft, only fluoxetine. He reported decreased irritability. At his next 
appointment on July 2, 2020, he reported significant improvement of his mood overall, 
with more optimism and less irritability. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 236) He said he felt better than he 
had in a long time, and was spending more time being engaged with his family. He 
admitted that he still often pushed himself too hard, which leads to irritability. 
 
At his visit on July 17, 2020, he again expressed significant improvement, and 
stated his confidence in being able to return to work had increased. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 239) 
He reported being happy again, in the way he was when he left Madonna. They 
discussed his possible return to work later the following month. Dr. Ernst also started 
him on a two week trial of Concerta. 
 
At his next visit on July 31, 2020, claimant reported some benefit from the 
addition of Concerta. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 241) He continued to show improvement and 
stabilization of his mood. He reported feeling ready to return to work as soon as a plan 
was in place. Dr. Ernst noted claimant demonstrated improved insight into the things he 
needed to work on, such as singular focus and making the right decision regarding 
over-extending himself versus quitting for the day when it is time to quit. At his next visit 
on August 14, 2020, they reviewed the accommodations he wanted to request at work 
to be sure they were still appropriate. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 244) Dr. Ernst noted that claimant’s 
thought processes and verbal communication was somewhat better organized at that 
visit.  
 
On August 17, 2020, Dr. Ernst wrote to Kate White, in human resources for 
Nutrien, regarding claimant’s return to work. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 247) He indicated claimant 
could work three 8-hour days per week for the first two weeks, and then progress to four 
8-hour days during the next two weeks if there were no concerns from his supervisor. 
After week 4, assuming no concerns, he could return to a full-time schedule. The only 
restrictions would be not to work any more than 10 hours on any given day, and no 
more than 5 days per week. He did not have any restrictions as to claimant’s activities. 
 
On August 28, 2020, claimant reported continued improvement. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 
248) He had met with his boss and thought he would be starting back the week after 
Labor Day. Dr. Ernst noted his thought processes and verbal communication were 
better organized than the prior session and much better than months prior. At his next 
visit on September 11, 2020, he had not yet started back to work, as his employer was 
trying to find placement and a plan for him that would help ensure his long-term 
success. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 252)  

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
On September 21, 2020, claimant reported to Dr. Ernst that he had his first day 
back at work that day. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 255) He was very happy to be working again and 
was positive and optimistic. He denied symptom exacerbation and denied any concerns 
about the current plan of returning to fulltime work after a few weeks of reintroduction. 
Dr. Ernst noted that his thought processes were well organized, and he was engaged 
and actively participated in discussion and planning for the immediate future.  
 
On October 9, 2020, claimant reported that he had been back to work for three 
weeks, working 5 days per week. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 258) He said he had fought to go back 
fulltime despite Dr. Ernst’s recommendation that he start with just three days per week. 
He said he was frustrated, fatigued, and sore, and not content with his situation. He also 
reported a perception of a general fear others had about him returning to operating 
equipment, given the history with his accident. They discussed how claimant overly-
extended himself, and the multiple ways that negatively impacts him, both 
psychologically and physiologically. They also discussed understanding his limitations 
and working smarter not harder. Dr. Ernst noted he appeared exasperated at the start, 
but after their session, his affect and outlook improved significantly. 
 
At his next appointment on October 23, 2020, claimant was doing better, and he 
reported pressuring himself less to prove how long and hard he could work and focusing 
more on consistency and reliability. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 261) At his next visit on November 3, 
2020, he reported improved focus, and noted he had been realizing his physical 
limitations. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 265) He reported limitations with endurance and mobility, and 
those issues making it difficult for him to navigate running large equipment. He said that 
he drove two hours on a tractor to strip till 800 acres, and was surprised how difficult it 
was for him. He had been setting boundaries and not over extending himself physically, 
and was also considering pursuing sales or another less physically demanding position 
within his company.  
 
On November 17, 2020, Dr. Maharry increased claimant’s gabapentin, as it was 
not working as well. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 105) On January 12, 2021, claimant reported he was 
still having pain in his right shoulder and right upper rhomboid, as well as decreased 
strength in his right upper extremity, and burning and tingling in his right hand. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 107) He was prescribed a muscle relaxer and taken off work for a couple of days. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, pp. 109-110) 
 
On January 14, 2021, claimant told Dr. Ernst he would be meeting with his 
supervisor regarding the long-term continuation of his employment. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 268) 
He reported being in much more pain than he anticipated with his current work 
responsibilities, which had caused some anxiety and frustration. At his next visit on 
February 5, 2021, he reported that his employer had been receptive to his desire not to 
be a mechanic and not to operate certain equipment. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 270-271) He 
reported being agreeable to the plans his employer had for him in the future, which 
subsequently improved his mood due to decreased stress.  
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 16 
Claimant continued to have regular appointments with Dr. Maharry, Dr. Ernst, 
and Dr. Fitzgerald over 2021 and 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 111-120; Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 203-212; 
Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 274-299) Dr. Maharry continued to monitor his physical condition and 
prescription medications. With Dr. Ernst, claimant frequently expressed frustration with 
his employer as he wanted to seek a management position, but was denied. He had 
ups and downs as well, but by February 21, 2023, he reported he had been doing well 
driving a truck sometimes and he was looking forward to the mowing season as he had 
enjoyed mowing the prior year. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 303) Dr. Fitzgerald continued to monitor his 
progress with his vision rehabilitation. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 203-212) 
 
On March 9, 2023, claimant told Dr. Ernst he had purchased a puppy, who was 
being trained as a service dog. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 305) He said that had been a positive 
impact in his life. He also reported having a meeting with a division manager at his 
employer, in which he requested a specific salary, no furlough, no work in the shop, 
mowing during the season and driving a truck the rest of the year. He had not head 
back yet. On April 7, 2023, he reported he had received a small raise, but not what he 
asked for. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 307) He was focused on his disability and noted that he could do 
things he used to be able to do, but became worn out easily and did not have the 
stamina that he used to have. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 307) He reported having a service dog had 
been a significant help, as caring for something else had been a positive experience. He 
reported that he had been providing care for his mother for quite some time as well.  
 
On May 2, 2023, claimant reported that he heard from a supervisor who seemed 
to be speaking for all of the supervisors, who told him that he was “not worth what he 
was asking for.” (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 308-309) Dr. Ernst discussed “cognitive restructuring” the 
issues, and noted claimant saw his value as a potential liability to the company because 
he could sue them, so they should pay him more. On the other hand, the employer likely 
saw him as an employee that drives a truck and mows, which is likely what was meant 
by the statement he “was not worth” the salary he requested.   
 
On June 8, 2023, they discussed caregiver burden and options available to him. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 310) He was doing well at work, although he was told he no longer needed 
to drive a delivery truck, just mow. He was not sure why his responsibilities changed. He 
noted he continued to work with training his dog to be a service dog and said he found 
the companionship to be instrumental for his mental health. He continued with regular 
visits with Dr. Ernst over the remainder of 2023. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 311-314) 
 
On December 13, 2023, Dr. Maharry authored a letter “to whom it may concern” 
indicating his medical opinion that it would be in claimant’s best interest to have an 
emotional support animal “in all areas of his life where it is allowed.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 125) 
 
On January 5, 2024, claimant reported an improved mood and outlook on life 
since having his dog. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 315) He reported he wanted the dog to be a full-time 
service dog so he could bring him to work, but for now the dog was staying home with 
his mother, who had dementia. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 315-316) He discussed previously having 
passive thoughts of wanting to be “done with life” before the dog, as opposed to his 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 17 
improved outlook since getting the dog. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 316) He noted he had drafted a 
plan for the company to buy him a semi-truck to drive, but it happened simultaneously 
with him filing his lawsuit, so he was told things were going to “get complicated.” 
 
On February 12, 2024, claimant had an unscheduled visit with Dr. Maharry due 
to right shoulder and neck pain. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 126) Dr. Maharry opined it was more likely 
than not a result of his work injury from 2016, and recommended physical therapy. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 128) Claimant had another unscheduled visit on March 25, 2024, at which time 
he reported right forearm pain that developed over the prior 10 days. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 129) 
Dr. Maharry opined he likely had a musculoskeletal strain from his job, which probably 
would not have occurred had he not had his prior work injury. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 131) He 
recommended not working and using a sling for one week. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 131-132)  
 
At his follow up on April 1, 2024, claimant reported ongoing problems with lifting, 
pushing, and pulling. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 133) He asked for a muscle relaxer because 
“everything hurts,” including his shoulder, arms, legs, and back. He related it all to the 
work accident and said the pain had never really gone away. Dr. Maharry increased his 
gabapentin, and altered his lifting restriction to 10 pounds. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 135-136) He 
noted claimant would be seeing his “pain doctor” in the next month, meaning Dr. LaHolt, 
and he could discuss his ongoing pain at that time. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 135) 
 
At his visit with Dr. Ernst on April 25, 2024, claimant expressed he had been 
overwhelmed, which led to suicidal thoughts recently. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 317) He reported 
stressors of taking care of his mother, who has progressive dementia; increased pain 
due to activity at work; difficulties with multi-tasking at work; being involved in a lawsuit; 
and being pulled in too many different directions while feeling an increased sense of 
overall disability. He said the most significant stressor had to do with providing care for 
his mother. They discussed the need to bring his siblings in to sharing the responsibility 
for care of their mother. They also discussed he needed to clearly communicate with his 
supervisor regarding his capabilities. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Maharry on May 1, 2024.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 137) He had not 
been to see his “rehabilitation expert” about his right upper extremity. Dr. Maharry noted 
he was taking 600 mg of gabapentin in the morning and in the evening, with another 
200 mg before bed. He reported continuing pain that “comes and goes.” He also noted 
worse pain when he “overdoes it.” Dr. Maharry did not believe there was much more he 
could do as claimant did not want to increase his gabapentin again. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 139) 
He noted it was possible claimant would need a permanent weight restriction, and 
wanted to follow up with him in 30 days.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Maharry on June 4, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 140) At that time 
he reported his arm pain was slightly improving, and said he could occasionally lift up to 
20 pounds. Dr. Maharry made the 10-pound lifting restriction permanent, and advised 
claimant to follow up in two months. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 142-144) At his next follow-up on 
August 28, 2024, claimant advised his right arm was getting better, and he asked to 
review his weight restrictions as he felt he could lift more. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 145) He reported 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 18 
a dull, achy  pain in the arm. Dr. Maharry kept the 10-pound lifting restriction in place. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 147) 
 
On September 3, 2024, Jason Carstens, D.C., medically certified claimant for his 
commercial drivers’ license for one year. (Def. Ex. K, pp. 135-139) On October 16, 
2024, claimant emailed Dr. Maharry’s office asking for a letter indicating he would be 
able to operate a stick-shift vehicle for limited periods. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 149) Dr. Maharry 
provided a letter stating that claimant was able to operate a manual (stick-shift) vehicle 
up to 20-hours per week. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 151) 
 
Claimant also started seeing a chiropractor, Erin Lagone, D.C., in 2025. (Cl. Ex. 
13, pp. 233-249) His primary complaints involved back pain with radiating pain into his 
right leg and foot, but he also complained of neck and mid back pain on occasion.  
 
Claimant continued to treat with Dr. Ernst over the remainder of 2024. (Jt. Ex. 8, 
pp. 318-321) At the time of hearing, claimant was still receiving mental health treatment 
from Dr. Ernst. (Tr., p. 20) Claimant also testified at hearing that while his mother lives 
with him, he does not consider himself to be her caregiver, and Dr. Ernst has that 
information wrong. (Tr., p. 57) He testified that there are stressful times with his mother 
due to her forgetfulness, but he does not have to do much to help her, as she is usually 
able to figure things out herself. (Tr., pp. 58-59) Claimant’s sister, Michelle Carlson, 
provided deposition testimony and also stated that their mother mostly takes care of 
herself. (Cl. Ex. 16, p. 256; Deposition Transcript, pp. 8-9) Claimant’s other sister, 
Rebecca Escalante, also provided deposition testimony, and said that claimant provides 
their mother with companionship and daily tasks like shopping. (Cl. Ex. 17, p. 266; 
Depo. Tr., pp. 8-9) She also noted the family had not yet made a final decision as to 
who will care for their mother as her condition declines. (Cl. Ex. 17, p. 267; Depo. Tr., 
pp. 11-12) 
 
On November 23, 2024, claimant attended an FCE at WorkWell, performed by 
Daryl Short, DPT. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 117) At that time, claimant reported he was able to stand 
or walk for 45 to 60 minutes before needing to sit due to back pain. He reported that 
activities involving bending, lifting, twisting, and/or carrying cause increased pain, as 
well as walking or standing for longer periods. He complained of constant pain in his 
right arm, and mid to low back pain, which increased with increased activity.  
 
Mr. Short opined that claimant gave consistent effort and demonstrated 
consistent performance during testing. (Cl. Ex. 5, p., 124) He concluded that the test 
results were a valid representation of claimant’s safe maximal performance and residual 
functional capacity. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 125) He recommended that due to his decreased 
functional strength and endurance of his mid to low back, claimant’s capabilities are in 
the mid-medium category of physical demand, up to 30 to 35 pounds on an occasional 
basis at waist level. He also recommended that claimant limit elevated work and/or 
reaching to shoulder height or higher to an occasional basis.  
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 19 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Sunil Bansal, M.D., 
on November 25, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal reviewed extensive medical records 
and interviewed claimant about the injury and his treatment history. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 2-37) 
At the time of Dr. Bansal’s IME, claimant reported ongoing headaches, which could be 
severe. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 37) He noted that they were less frequent than immediately after 
the accident, however. He reported ongoing deficits with his short-term memory, and 
said it takes him longer to process information than before the injury. He reported 
intermittent balance issues, and double vision since the injury, which requires him to 
use the prism in his glasses. He continued to complain of occasional neck discomfort 
and occasional soreness in his left shoulder. With respect to his right upper extremity, 
he complained of numbness in his right hand and markedly decreased grip strength. He 
also complained of his right shoulder being painful, and having limited range of motion 
with reaching overhead and behind his back.  
 
Claimant’s most severe complaint at the time of Dr. Bansal’s IME was his low 
back pain, which was radiating down his right leg into his toes, along with tingling. He 
was continuing to see a chiropractor at that time, which provided some relief. He 
reported difficulty with prolonged sitting or standing over 35 to 40 minutes, and difficulty 
descending stairs. He also reported difficulty lifting anything from the floor, and even a 
gallon of milk was challenging.  
 
At the time of the IME, claimant continued to work at Nutrien, and his modified 
job duties included local truck driving using a truck with an automatic transmission, and 
hauling fertilizer. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 38) He told Dr. Bansal his employer had been good with 
adhering to his restrictions.  
 
 
Dr. Bansal performed a thorough physical examination, and provided an 
impairment rating using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 38-50) He also answered several questions posed by 
claimant’s attorney. With respect to diagnoses, Dr. Bansal provided a long list of 
diagnoses with respect to the injuries claimant sustained on May 5, 2016, including 
injuries to claimant’s head and neurological injuries; chest and rib injuries; injuries to 
claimant’s neck, thoracic spine, and lumbar spine; injuries to his right shoulder/scapula; 
left shoulder/clavicle; right wrist/forearm; and left wrist/forearm. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 41-43) 
 
 
Dr. Bansal opined that all of the diagnoses he provided were causally related to 
the work accident on May 5, 2016. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 43-45) This included the neurological 
sequela, which Dr. Bansal explained in detail. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 44-45) He concluded that 
claimant’s cognitive deficits, particularly affecting short-term memory and information 
processing speed, were directly attributable to the diffuse nature of his brain injury. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 45) 
 
 
Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Chesser that claimant reached MMI on May 30, 2018. 
He noted claimant would need ongoing medical treatment related to his vision, his 
mental health, his chronic pain, and his right median nerve symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 
45-46) 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 20 
 
 
Dr. Bansal provided the following impairment ratings: 
 
o Head/Neurologic: total neurological impairment calculated at 10 percent of 
the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 46-47) 
o Neck: 4 percent whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 47) 
o Thoracic Back: 5 percent body as a whole related to the T7 vertebral body 
fracture, and 8 percent total for the four separate thoracic spinous process 
fractures at T1-T3 and T10. 
o Lumbar back: 5 percent for each lumbar transverse process fracture, for a 
total of 19 percent whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 47-48) 
o Right shoulder/scapula: 7 percent upper extremity, which equals 4 percent 
of the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 48) 
o Left shoulder/clavicle: 3 percent upper extremity, which equals 2 percent 
of the whole person. 
o Right wrist/forearm: 11 percent upper extremity for range of motion 
deficits, which is equal to 7 percent whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 48-49) 
An additional 5 percent upper extremity or 3 percent whole person related 
to the right median nerve component. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 49) 
o Left wrist/forearm: 3 percent upper extremity, which is equal to 2 percent 
whole person.  
 
Using the combined values chart, Dr. Bansal’s total whole person impairment rating 
comes to 49 percent. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 115) 
 
 
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Bansal agreed with the WorkWell FCE on 
November 23, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 49) In addition, he recommended neurological based 
restrictions of no sitting/standing/walking more than one hour at a time; no lifting more 
than 10-pounds with the right hand; no safety-sensitive work requiring rapid decision 
making or emergency responses; no work requiring sustained concentration beyond two 
hours without a 15-minute break; no complex multi-tasking responsibilities; no work in 
environments with strobe lights or rapidly changing visual stimuli; and no work requiring 
rapid head movements or tracking of fast-moving objects. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 50) Dr. Bansal 
also opined that claimant’s reports of pain and limitations were credible and consistent 
with the medical evidence, and were likely to continue at the same level. Finally, he 
noted that the cost of his evaluation and report was a reasonable and typical fee 
charged by medical providers in his local area. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 51) 
 
 
On December 2, 2024, claimant had an independent psychiatric evaluation with 
Kunal Patra, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 52) Dr. Patra also reviewed extensive medical records, 
and outlined the pertinent findings in his report. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 53-68) Dr. Patra provided 
his clinical findings, and noted that prior to the accident, claimant loved his job as an 
equipment operator and took pride in his work. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 68) Claimant advised that it 
bothered him that he could no longer work as an equipment operator, because he 
forgets things and gets tired easily. He also noted his service dog helps remind him to 
take his medications and helps his mental health as well. 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 21 
 
 
Claimant and Dr. Patra discussed the accident and claimant’s lack of memory 
until about one month after the accident. They discussed his treatment and 
rehabilitation, and his challenges since his return to work. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 68-69) 
Claimant expressed that since the accident, he had come to prefer solitude and working 
alone, because he becomes frustrated and angry more easily, especially if he has to 
deal with the same person day after day. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 69) He also noted that before the 
accident, he would work ten to twelve hours, and still have enough energy to engage in 
projects at home after work. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 70) However, since the accident, he can only 
make it about eight hours, and then his “brain and body are ready to call it quits.” He 
said he is ready for bed by 8:00 p.m. He also noted that he lacks organization and is 
easily distracted since the accident, making it difficult to sustain attention long enough to 
finish projects. 
 
 
Claimant told Dr. Patra that since his traumatic brain injury, he had been unable 
to concentrate, he is easily distracted, is forgetful, has difficulty tracking conversations 
when too much is going on around him, has difficulty staying on task when interrupted, 
and requires help to remember appointments and other tasks. With respect to his mood, 
claimant said that before the accident, his mood was on average a ten out of ten, with 
ten being happy and content. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 71) He loved his job, and he was more 
relaxed and confident. He also said he could focus on projects he enjoyed and did not 
have to rely on others to help him remember things. Since the accident, his mood is on 
average five out of ten, He does not have the same interest and motivation he had 
before, and gets tired and wants to go to sleep early. He also noted he has had 
thoughts of self-harm but had not planned or acted on those thoughts. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 72)  
 
 
Claimant and Dr. Patra discussed claimant’s difficulties at work and in his daily 
life in detail. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 72-73) With respect to past mental health treatment, claimant 
noted he had seen a mental health therapist for a couple of visits when he was going 
through a divorce in 2006 or 2007. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 73) After a couple of months, he moved 
on and did not have any additional treatment until after the work accident. He also noted 
that when his father passed away three years prior, it was emotionally difficult, but it did 
not cause his depression. Dr. Patra also spoke to two of claimant’s sisters, who agreed 
with much of what claimant said about his symptoms and the changes in his mood and 
abilities. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 73-75)  
 
With respect to his mental status examination, Dr. Patra noted that claimant 
looked tired, especially as the session progressed. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 76) He was generally 
cooperative, but Dr. Patra noted he became animated and upset when discussing his 
struggles since the work accident. He noted claimant’s thought process was overly 
elaborate, extremely tangential, and circumstantial, and it often veered into being 
disorganized. He described his mood as down, depressed, and hopeless on more than 
half of days, and his affect was mood-congruent and stoic, although he would get 
animated and upset when speaking about his persistent issues from the work injury.  
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 22 
Dr. Patra administered two tests/self-rating questionnaires. The results indicated 
the presence of mild clinical depression. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 76-77) Dr. Patra also 
administered two tests to assess validity, and the results indicated claimant was “an 
individual with a genuine disorder who is making no effort to overstate their symptoms.” 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 77-78) Results of additional testing showed that claimant likely did not 
attempt to embellish or exaggerate his clinical presentation, and he very likely was not 
feigning his symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 78)  
 
Dr. Patra provided opinions in response to questions from claimant’s attorney. 
His diagnostic assessment was that claimant suffered from the following psychiatric 
conditions related to the traumatic brain injury: 
 
o Depressive disorder due to another medical condition (traumatic brain 
injury) with major depressive-like episode; 
o Mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies; and 
o Personality change due to a medical condition (traumatic brain injury ), 
combined type. 
 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 80) He opined that the severe traumatic brain injury sustained during the 
work accident was a substantial causal, contributing, or aggravating factor in the 
development of claimant’s current major depressive episode. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 82) With 
respect to the neurocognitive disorder, Dr. Patra opined that it arose from multiple 
etiologies, including the direct sequelae of the traumatic brain injury. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 85) 
He noted that the traumatic brain injury was a substantial causal, contributing, or 
aggravating factor in claimant developing neurocognitive disorder, but that it was further 
aggravated by his depression and anxiety, environmental stimulation, fatigue, emotional 
lability, and persistent post-concussive symptoms. Finally, with respect to the 
personality change, Dr. Patra explained the clinical literature supporting that individuals 
with traumatic brain injury from frontal lobe impact, like claimant, are prone to develop 
executive functioning dysfunction, including prominent personality changes. (Cl. Ex. 2, 
pp. 86-87)  
 
 
Dr. Patra assigned claimant a GAF (Global Assessment of Functioning) score of 
55. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 88) He noted that GAF of 60 to 51 indicates moderate symptoms or 
moderate difficulty in social, occupational, or school functioning. With respect to 
preexisting conditions, Dr. Patra noted that claimant had a previous diagnosis of clinical 
depression. However, he noted that claimant was not experiencing any active clinical 
depression at the time he suffered the traumatic brain injury, and there is nothing to 
indicate he had any cognitive complaints or personality changes prior to the work injury. 
He opined that the traumatic brain injury sustained during the work accident was a 
substantial causal, contributing, or aggravating factor in the development of each of 
claimant’s three diagnosed psychiatric conditions.  
 
 
Dr. Patra opined that claimant’s mental health diagnoses would have a negative 
impact on his ability to work in a competitive and dynamic work environment. (Cl. Ex. 2, 
pp. 89-90) He stated claimant had suffered permanent injury pertaining to his mood, 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 23 
cognition, somatic, and behavioral areas arising from the work injury, and 
recommended ongoing and future counseling and psychiatric treatment. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
91) He recommended claimant continue with his current psychiatric provider with the 
goal of symptom management and preventing further decompensation in the future. 
Due to the chronic nature of his conditions, Dr. Patra said it was likely that they will 
persist at their present intensity or flare up. He noted the conditions are permanent and 
recalcitrant to treatment.  
 
 
Dr. Patra provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 91) He assigned an overall moderate level of impairment related to his mental 
health diagnoses of depressive disorder and personality change. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 92) He 
noted that the fifth edition of the Guides does not provide numerical impairment for 
mental health injuries, but looking at the second edition of the Guides, the 
corresponding impairment rating for moderate impairment would fall between 25 and 50 
percent. Looking at his current symptomology, Dr. Patra assigned claimant 50 percent 
of the whole person related to these two diagnoses. With respect to his diagnosis of 
mild neurocognitive disorder, Dr. Patra assigned an additional 15 percent of the whole 
person, based on his current level of cognitive difficulties. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 92-93). Using 
the combined values table, he provided a total rating of 58 percent of the whole person 
for claimant’s psychiatric injuries related to the work accident. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 93) 
 
 
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Patra recommended claimant’s occupational 
tasks be kept fairly routine, and without demand for independent problem-solving. He 
noted that putting claimant back into large equipment or machinery would elevate his 
risk of being physically harmed because of his neurocognitive deficits. As such, he 
stated that claimant cannot work in any environment where he operates heavy 
machinery or equipment, including warehouses, industrial settings, construction sites, 
excavation sites, etc. In his conclusions, Dr. Patra also noted that while there were 
some reports in claimant’s medical records pointing to him having a preexisting problem 
with irritability, it was not until after the traumatic brain injury that claimant and his family 
members began to complain of significant problems with irritability, anger, outbursts, 
arguments, assault at the workplace, raising his voice, or using profanities. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
94) Likewise, with respect to preexisting cognitive deficits, Dr. Patra noted that prior to 
the traumatic brain injury, neither claimant nor his family had complaints regarding any 
cognitive deficits, and he previously obtained an associate’s degree in agribusiness with 
a 3.0 grade point average.  
 
 
Vocational specialist Barbara Laughlin, M.A., provided an employability 
assessment, dated December 16, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 126) She reviewed medical 
records, discovery responses, deposition testimony, and conferenced with claimant. (Cl. 
Ex. 6, pp. 126-127) She considered his education and training, computer skills, and 
age, noting he is considered a younger worker. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 137-138) She also 
considered his current and past employment history. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 138-140)  
 
 
Ms. Laughlin also noted claimant’s perception of his capabilities and limitations, 
but noted his own perceptions were not included in her assessment of loss. (Cl. Ex. 6, 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 24 
pp. 140-141) For her vocational analysis, she utilized the OASYS computerized 
transferable analysis program, which she described as a vocational tool that addresses 
only occupational loss due to a decrement in functional capacity from medically 
imposed restrictions. (CL. Ex. 6, p. 141) It does not address factors such as age, 
education, training, injury, pain, or other factors.  
 
 
Based on all factors considered, Ms. Laughlin provided three separate scenarios. 
Scenario one used the restrictions of the Short FCE. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 143) In that scenario, 
claimant had a 100 percent occupational loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations 
in the closest match and good match categories, and a 99.7 percent loss of unskilled 
occupations. Scenario two used the restrictions of the Short FCE and Dr. Bansal’s 
restrictions. In that scenario, claimant again had a 100 percent loss of all semi-skilled 
and skilled occupations in the good match and closest match categories, and 99.7 
percent loss of unskilled occupations. Ms. Laughlin noted that his current job did not fall 
within the seven occupational titles available to him post-injury. She also noted that 
when occupational titles that are not in his geographic labor market are eliminated, his 
loss in unskilled occupations jumped to 99.9 percent. Finally, she noted that Dr. Bansal 
also recommended restrictions that could not be input into the computerized 
transferrable skills analysis. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 144) She also noted the difficulty with the 
recommendation that claimant change positions on an hourly basis, as his need to 
change position exceeds breaks and lunch. It is also a problem because he is not 
capable of doing the prolonged sitting of sedentary work, or the prolonged 
standing/walking contemplated for most light duty work.  
 
 
The third scenario used the restrictions from the Short FCE, Dr. Bansal’s IME, 
and Dr. Patra’s report. Claimant again had a 100 percent loss of all semi-skilled and 
skilled occupations in the good match and closest match categories. In unskilled 
occupations, he had 99.8 percent loss. However, Ms. Laughlin noted that like Dr. 
Bansal, Dr. Patra also recommended restrictions that cannot be input into the 
computerized analysis, but that would require accommodation. She noted those 
restrictions would make it more difficult for claimant to learn new material in the 
workplace, and would greatly hinder him from maintaining employment with a new 
employer, as he would be considered an unreliable worker who may not come to work 
on time, has difficulty working with others, and cannot maintain a consistent pace of 
work. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 144-145) Finally, Dr. Patra’s restrictions indicate claimant would 
have difficulty interacting with people and with decision making, and would have trouble 
with precise work or meeting production needs. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 145) 
 
 
Ms. Laughlin’s labor market research found only one potential job for claimant 
within the appropriate geographical area. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 145-146) In conclusion, she 
stated that claimant is fortunate to maintain his current employment, as it is unlikely 
another employer would be able to offer the needed accommodations. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 
147) She opined that claimant will be unable to obtain and maintain work outside his 
current employer, and that he is receiving significant accommodation. She concluded 
there are no jobs in any quality, quantity, or dependability available to him in the general 
labor market without highly significant accommodation.  

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 25 
 
 
On January 7, 2025, vocational consultant Ted Stricklett, M.S., provided a 
rebuttal to Ms. Laughlin’s report. (Def. Ex. J, p. 130) It is unclear whether Mr. Stricklett 
reviewed any documents other than Ms. Laughlin’s report. Mr. Stricklett noted that 
claimant has performed unskilled, semi-skilled, and skilled work in the past when 
considering his work history. (Def. Ex. J, p. 131) He stated that claimant’s past relevant 
jobs would fall into the medium and heavy work categories. (Def. Ex. J, p. 132) 
 
 
Mr. Stricklett stated that based on claimant’s wages at the time of injury versus 
the time of his report, claimant’s lost wages were approximately 11 percent. Using the 
most recent valid FCE, which was Mr. Short’s FCE, he noted claimant was placed in the 
mid-medium category, with restrictions of lifting 30 to 35 pounds on an occasional basis, 
and his ability to work 8 hours per day, 40 hours per week. He also noted Dr. Patra 
recommended claimant refrain from operating heavy machinery. Using those 
restrictions and OASYS, version 3.96, Mr. Stricklett determined that claimant’s loss of 
access to jobs in his geographic area was approximately 65 percent. He noted that 
when placed in the light duty category, claimant’s loss of access was 80 percent, and 
when placed in the medium category, it was 49 percent. (Def. Ex. J, p. 133) 
 
 
Mr. Stricklett opined that Ms. Laughlin’s finding of 100 percent loss of access was 
not accurate, as Mr. Short’s FCE states that claimant is fully capable of sitting, standing, 
and walking without limitation, and can lift in the mid-medium physical demand 
category. With respect to his ability to earn wages, Mr. Stricklett opined that were 
claimant to seek alternate employment in the open labor market, he could expect to 
sustain an initial loss of wage in the range of 29 to 37 percent. Some examples of jobs 
he felt would be appropriate for claimant include lot porter, auto detailer, courier, 
office/building cleaner, and security gate/guard.  
 
 
Mr. Stricklett opined that on the basis of the Short FCE and Dr. Patra’s 
restrictions, claimant is precluded from returning to all of his past relevant work in the 
medium and heavy physical demand category unless accommodation is made. Based 
on those factors, he opined that claimant’s loss of earning capacity was approximately 
40 percent. (Def. Ex. J, p. 134) If Nutrien could no longer accommodate claimant’s 
restrictions, he opined the loss of earning capacity would then be 50 percent.  
 
 
Ms. Laughlin provided a response to Mr. Stricklett’s report, dated January 28, 
2025. (Cl. Ex. 18, p. 275) First, she pointed out that Mr. Stricklett ignored Dr. Bansal’s 
restrictions in his report. She also noted that from the results of the Short FCE, claimant 
clearly cannot perform the full range of medium level work. She also notes that when 
outlining the restrictions of the Short FCE, Mr. Stricklett omitted several restrictions, and 
failed to mention claimant’s grip strength decrement or constant pain with increased 
activity. (Cl. Ex. 18, pp. 275-276) She points out that Mr. Stricklett only mentioned one 
of Dr. Patra’s restrictions, and ignored others, which would have an impact on 
claimant’s ability to function in the workplace. (Cl. Ex. 18, p. 276) She also took issue 
with Mr. Stricklett failing to mention Dr. Bansal’s restriction of no sitting/standing/walking 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 26 
greater than one hour at a time, and claimant’s current accommodations including 
taking rest periods when he needs.  
 
 
Ms. Laughlin also takes issue with Mr. Stricklett’s statement that her percentages 
were incorrect, as she notes that her percentages were based on all of the restrictions 
of the Short FCE, while Mr. Stricklett only included some of them. She also takes issue 
with Mr. Stricklett’s statement that he utilized OASYS to determine claimant’s loss of 
access to jobs “in the Durant/Muscatine/Davenport IA area” because OASYS does not 
have that particular search area. (Cl. Ex. 18, p. 277) Also, with respect to the version of 
OASYS he stated in his report, Ms. Laughlin notes that he provided an incomplete 
series of numbers, and could have been using an older version of the program.   
 
Finally, Ms. Laughlin takes issue with Mr. Stricklett’s wage analysis, as he 
provided no documentation, wages, or employers for the types of positions he listed, 
and, more importantly, he chose jobs that are not appropriate given claimant’s 
restrictions. She then provided the physical demands for each of the jobs Mr. Stricklett 
listed, as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor, and noted whether claimant would 
be able to perform each. (Cl. Ex. 18, pp. 277-281) For each job title Mr. Stricklett listed, 
Ms. Laughlin determined he would not be able to perform the job duties based on the 
restrictions provided by the Short FCE, Dr. Bansal, and/or Dr. Patra.  
 
Another important discrepancy Ms. Laughlin points out is Mr. Stricklett’s 
statement that the short FCE found claimant could sit, stand, and walk without limitation. 
Ms. Laughlin notes this statement is not true, as the Short FCE said claimant could sit, 
stand, and walk frequently, which is defined by the FCE as 34 to 66 percent of the 
time. (Cl. Ex. 18, p. 282) Additionally, Mr. Stricklett did not take into consideration Dr. 
Bansal’s recommendation of no sitting/standing/walking greater than one hour at a time.  
 
Ms. Laughlin stated that she attempted to replicate Mr. Stricklett’s OASYS results 
and was unable to do so, even when using the occupational titles he used in his report. 
(Cl. Ex. 18, p. 283) She stated that her results were far different when using the 
limitations of the Short FCE, even when not including limitations in handling. She stated 
that using the restrictions from the Short FCE at the light level and medium levels, 
claimant still had occupational loss across all skill levels in the 99 to 100 percent range. 
(Cl. Ex. 18, pp. 283-284)  
 
In conclusion, Ms. Laughlin stated that her opinion was unchanged. (Cl. Ex. 18, 
p. 285) She confirmed that she ran OASYS correctly and obtained her occupational 
losses correctly. She noted that Mr. Stricklett did not include all of Dr. Patra’s 
recommended restrictions, and included none of Dr. Bansal’s recommendations. She 
demonstrated that she was unable to replicate Mr. Stricklett’s results using OASYS 
regardless of what she tried, and she also explained why the job titles he recommended 
were inappropriate for claimant’s restrictions. 
 
I find Ms. Laughlin’s vocational assessment to be more accurate and reliable 
when considered in conjunction with the medical records and claimant’s credible 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 27 
testimony. Ms. Laughlin provided a detailed report and listed all of the materials she 
reviewed, and also conferenced with the claimant directly. It is unclear what materials 
Mr. Stricklett reviewed aside from Ms. Laughlin’s report, and he did not include all of the 
recommended restrictions when completing his analysis. Ms. Laughlin’s report is more 
detailed and thorough, and includes various scenarios considering all of the 
recommended restrictions. As such, I find her opinions with respect to claimant’s 
occupational loss to be the most convincing.  
 
With respect to the impairment ratings and restrictions, both Dr. Bansal and Dr. 
Patra provided detailed and thorough impairment ratings. Dr. LaHolt also provided a 
fairly detailed report, but unfortunately Dr. LaHolt used the sixth edition of the AMA 
Guides. Additionally, Dr. LaHolt’s impairment rating was completed in 2018. Both Dr. 
Bansal and Dr. Patra saw claimant for IMEs in 2024, after claimant had time to 
complete additional treatment, and work at his job, helping him gain a better 
understanding of his long-term capabilities and limitations. They both had the advantage 
of the more recent Short FCE as well, which is the most recent reflection of claimant’s 
current physical abilities. As such, I find the ratings authored by Dr. Bansal and Dr. 
Patra are entitled to greater weight than Dr. LaHolt’s rating. 
 
Claimant testified regarding his current symptoms and issues. He continues to 
have occasional headaches. (Tr., p. 21) His back and neck get stiff and achy. He still 
has some residual pain in his left arm. His right hand and arm are the worst, as he 
testified he cannot feel half of his right hand. He has a lot of numbness and tingling in 
his right hand and arm, as well as some pain. He also has some occasional 
“horrendous” pain on the right side of his ribcage, which he calls ribcage cramps. (Tr., p. 
22) On a scale of zero to ten, he rated his pain at about an average of five, with eight 
being the worst and 3 being a good day. He continues to take several prescription 
medications for his pain and mental conditions, as well as over-the-counter medications 
such as Advil and Tylenol. (Tr., pp. 22-23)  
 
Claimant testified he has difficulty with standing and walking, and has to take a 
break after about 30 minutes. (Tr., pp. 23-24) He also has difficulty with sitting for long 
periods of time, and has to shift around and adjust himself. (Tr., pp. 24-25) The 
undersigned noted during the hearing that after about 40 minutes, claimant began 
shifting and adjusting in his seat and appeared uncomfortable. All of these issues lead 
to claimant becoming fatigued more easily. (Tr., pp. 26-27) Prior to the work accident, 
claimant did not have any of these difficulties, and was able to do all of his prior jobs. 
(Tr., p. 36) When he was released to return to work, he attempted to go back to his old 
job duties, but had much difficulty doing so. (Tr., p. 37) He has also tried to weld, and 
tried doing mechanic work on vehicles, but found he was not able to do these tasks as 
before, primarily due to his right arm. (Tr., pp. 40-41)  
 
Claimant also testified as to his mental capacity since the accident. Prior to the 
injuries, he had an applicator’s license, which enabled him to apply product to fields with 
the sprayer. (Tr., p. 46) That license has since lapsed, as he was unable to complete his 
continuing education requirements. Claimant testified that he does not believe he would 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 28 
be able to get the license back now, as there is a lot to know for the test, and he does 
not believe he has the ability to pass the test given his current cognitive state. He also 
noted that even if he had his license, he would not be able to operate the sprayer due to 
his right hand. (Tr., pp. 48-49) He also has more difficulty working with other people 
now, and does better with fewer people or by himself. (Tr., p. 52) 
 
Lucas Crawford testified on behalf of the employer. (Tr., p. 81) Mr. Crawford is 
the facility manager at the New Boston and Viola Nutrien facilities, and his job involves 
overseeing daily activities and managing employees. (Tr., pp. 81-82) He provided 
credible testimony that claimant is a good employee who gives 100 percent most of the 
time. (Tr., pp. 84-85) On occasion he will try “too hard” and lift something he should not, 
and he tries to help and make sure claimant is following his restrictions. (Tr., p. 85) 
There was not a specific employee who did the work claimant does now before his 
injury; rather, it was handled by “whoever was around.” (Tr., p. 86) He testified that 
since the New Boston and Viola facilities have merged under his management, they 
likely would have to outsource the work if they did not have claimant performing it. He 
testified that he has not met Oliver, claimant’s dog, and he does not believe claimant 
has ever asked him if he could bring the dog to work. (Tr., p. 86) He stated that claimant 
is punctual, takes pride in his work, and is reliable. (Tr., pp. 87-88) Finally, he has not 
had any discussions with anyone at Nutrien about needing to let claimant go. (Tr., p. 89) 
 
Based on the evidence in the record, including the medical records, testimony, 
and vocational evidence, and considering all of the appropriate factors of industrial 
disability, I find claimant has an 80 percent loss of earning capacity.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
This case involves several issues, including the extent of permanent disability 
(Iowa Code section 85.34), recovery of medical expenses and alternate medical care 
(Iowa Code section 85.27), payment of claimant’s IME (Iowa Code section 85.39), and 
interest (Iowa Code section 535.3). In March 2017, the legislature enacted changes 
relating to workers’ compensation in Iowa. 2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 (amending Iowa 
Code sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 85.70, 85.71, 
86.26, 86.39, 86.42, and 535.3). Under 2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 section 24, the 
changes to Iowa Code section 85.34 and 85.39 apply to injuries occurring on or after 
the effective date of the Act.   
 
 
This case involves an injury date occurring before July 1, 2017. As such, the 
changes in Iowa Code sections 85.34 and 85.39 do not apply to this case. Additionally, 
the calculation of interest is governed by Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 5052008 (Ruling 
on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re: Interest 
Rate Issue), which holds interest for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, is payable at the rate of ten percent; all interest on 
past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, is payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 29 
The first issue to determine is the extent of claimant’s permanent partial 
disability. The parties stipulated that the injury is a cause of permanent disability, and 
the disability is an industrial disability (See Hearing Report, pp. 1-2) Industrial disability 
was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 
902 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the Legislature intended the term 
'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and not a mere 
'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and 
mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability, which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). The focus is not 
solely on what the worker can and cannot do; the focus is on the ability of the worker to 
be gainfully employed. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 NW2d 143, 157 (Iowa 1996) 
(quoting Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 266 (Iowa 1995)). 
Three physicians have provided functional impairment ratings in this case; Dr. 
LaHolt, Dr. Bansal, and Dr. Patra. Dr. LaHolt, as noted above, used the sixth edition of 
the AMA Guides in reaching his conclusions. The Commissioner has adopted the fifth 
edition for evaluating disability. 876 IAC 2.4. For this reason, I do not find Dr. LaHolt’s 
rating to have merit. Rather, I find the opinions of Dr. Bansal and Dr. Patra are entitled 
to greater weight. Dr. Bansal’s combined total impairment rating was 49 percent of the 
whole person. Dr. Patra’s combined total impairment rating, which only related to the 
mental health/traumatic brain injury portion of the claim, was 58 percent of the whole 
person. Both are substantial permanent functional impairment ratings. 
In addition to the functional impairment ratings, the parties submitted vocational 
evaluations. I found the opinions of Claimant’s expert, Barbara Laughlin, to be more 
accurate and credible than those of defendant’s expert, Ted Stricklett. Ms. Laughlin 
concluded that claimant’s occupational loss across all skill levels was in the range of 99 
to 100 percent.  
Defendants essentially argue that the first FCE, completed in 2018, is more 
representative of claimant’s abilities following the injury, as it was completed only two 
years after the injury. Likewise, defendant’s argue that Dr. LaHolt’s rating and 
recommended restrictions are more accurate, as are Mr. Stricklett’s opinions based on 
the same. Defendants argue that because the Short FCE was done eight years after the 
injury, and six years after claimant was placed at MMI, “many aspects” could have 
altered claimant’s abilities, and Short’s report and likewise Dr. Bansal’s opinions should 
not be weighed as heavily.  

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 30 
Defendants’ argument fails to recognize a long-standing tenant of workers’ 
compensation law in Iowa: a claimant’s industrial disability is measured as the 
claimant’s condition stands at the time of the hearing. Vogt v. XPO Logistics, File No. 
5064694.01 (App. Dec., June 11, 2021) (see also Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 
N.W.2d 387, 392 (Iowa 2009), stating that a claimant’s loss of earning capacity is 
determined by the commissioner as of the time of the hearing based on the factors 
bearing on industrial disability then prevailing, not based on what the claimant’s physical 
condition and economic realities might be at some future time). Injured workers often 
return to work for a period of time following an injury before a condition worsens or 
before undergoing surgery. Restrictions often fluctuate over the course of a claimant’s 
treatment. And in many cases, such as this one, a claimant returns to work for some 
time in a job that causes too much pain or fatigue, and later has to accept 
accommodated work or leave the job altogether. Measuring claimant’s industrial 
disability based on his initial return to work or date of MMI could lead to unfair and 
illogical results. See Janson v. Fulton, 162 N.W.2d 438, 442 (Iowa 1968) (“It is a 
familiar, fundamental rule of statutory construction that, if fairly possible, a construction 
resulting in unreasonableness as well as absurd consequences will be avoided.”); see 
also Sherwin–Williams Co. v. Iowa Department of Revenue, 789 N.W.2d 417, 427 (Iowa 
2010) (“‘[E]ven in the absence of statutory ambiguity, departure from literal construction 
is justified when such construction would produce an absurd and unjust result and the 
literal construction in the particular action is clearly inconsistent with the purposes and 
policies of the act.’” (quoting Pac. Ins. Co. v. Or. Auto. Ins. Co., 490 P.2d 899, 901 
(1971)).   
Claimant was clearly motivated to return to the job he enjoyed, and made a good 
faith effort to do so. Unfortunately, he had to accept his limitations since the work 
accident, and is no longer able to function at the levels demonstrated by the 2018 FCE. 
The most recent accurate reflection of claimant’s earning capacity at the time of hearing 
comes from the most recent reports, including the Short FCE, the IME reports of Dr. 
Bansal and Dr. Patra, and Ms. Laughlin’s vocational evaluation. 
The employer has provided claimant with an accommodated position so that he 
is able to continue working. Claimant’s supervisor testified that prior to claimant, the 
work he does now, especially the mowing, was just done by “whoever was around.” (Tr., 
p. 86) In other words, there was not a full-time employee in claimant’s current position. 
While it would likely not be considered “make-work,” it is a modified job that he was 
given in order to accommodate his disability. However, an employer’s efforts to 
accommodate an injured worker are not determinative of that worker’s industrial 
disability. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 157-158 (quoting Thilges v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 528 
N.W.2d 614, 617 (Iowa 1995): “[W]e are satisfied that the commissioner was correct in 
viewing loss of earning capacity in terms of the injured worker’s present ability to earn in 
the competitive job market without regard to the accommodation furnished by one’s 
present employer.”).  
Claimant is unable to perform the work he performed prior to the work injury. 
Physically, he has limitations and restrictions on his abilities with respect to lifting, 
reaching, bending, crouching, sitting, standing, walking, and decrements in his grip 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 31 
strength. He has chronic pain, which is made worse with increased activity. He is more 
easily fatigued. Mentally, he has some cognitive impairment that will make it difficult for 
him to learn new things in the workplace, and may have difficulty with sustained 
concentration and social interactions. He is a high school graduate and has an 
associate’s degree in agribusiness management. He has minimal computer skills. His 
past work has all been in the medium to heavy physical demand category. While he is 
motivated to work, his current job is heavily accommodated by the employer. It is 
unlikely he would find replacement work in the competitive job market.  
Considering all the factors of industrial disability, the evidence supports an award 
of 80 percent industrial disability. This entitles claimant to 400 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the stipulated rate of $553.33. The parties stipulated to the 
commencement date of February 27, 2018. 
The next issue to determine is alternate medical care and payment of medical 
bills and mileage. Under Iowa law, the employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, 
medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, 
ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the 
workers' compensation law. Iowa Code section 85.27. The employer shall also allow 
reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services. Id. The 
employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer has 
denied liability for the injury. Id.; Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second 
Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
The right to choose the care means the right to choose the provider, not the 
treatment modalities recommended by the provider. The employer must provide the 
treatment, testing, imaging or other treatment modalities recommended by its own 
authorized treating physician, even if another consulting physician disagrees with those 
recommendations. Haack v. Von Hoffman Graphics, File No. 1268172, p. 9 (App. July 
31, 2002) [MRI and x-rays]; Cahill v. S & H Fabricating & Engineering, (Alt Care, File 
No. 1138063, May 30, 1997) (work hardening program); Hawxby v. Hallett Materials, 
File No. 1112821, (Alt Care, February 20, 1996); Leitzen v. Collis, Inc. File No. 
1084677, (Alt Care, September 9, 1996). The right to choose the care does not 
authorize the employer to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Boggs v Cargill, Inc. File No. 1050396, (Alt Care, January 31, 1994).  
Claimant seeks payment for bills related to his prescription glasses, prescribed 
by Dr. Fitzgerald, an authorized treating physician. (Cl. Ex. 11, pp. 203-204) Defendants 
made no argument regarding these expenses. As Dr. Fitzgerald is an authorized 
treating physician, defendants are responsible for all treatment she recommends that is 
causally related to the accepted work injury. As such, defendants shall pay the 
outstanding balance to Vision Center, PC.  
Claimant also seeks unpaid mileage for visits to Dr. Ernst. (Cl. Ex. 15, pp. 252-
253) Dr. Ernst is an authorized treating physician, and there is no argument from 
defendants regarding the mileage expenses. As such, defendants are responsible for all 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 32 
mileage claimant has incurred for visits to Dr. Ernst, as well as mileage for future visits 
as long as Dr. Ernst remains authorized. 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement for expenses related to Oliver, his service 
dog. Defendants do provide argument related to these medical expenses. Claimant 
argues that Dr. Maharry, an authorized treating provider, said that it would be in 
claimant’s best interest to have an emotional support animal in all areas of his life where 
it is allowed. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 125) Claimant also argues that claimant finds the dog 
beneficial, as he reminds claimant to take his medications, and provides him with 
beneficial companionship. 
Defendants argue that no medical provider has ever explicitly recommended a 
service dog for claimant as a result of the work injury. Dr. Ernst, claimant’s authorized 
treating psychiatrist, only mentions the dog when he notes that claimant reported he got 
a new puppy and was planning to train it as a service dog. (Jt. Ex. 8, p 305) Defendant 
further notes that Dr. Maharry, the only provider who recommended an emotional 
support animal, is not the treating physician for claimant’s mental health conditions. 
Finally, defendants argue that the reasons claimant finds the dog beneficial do not meet 
the standard under Iowa law, as no provider has ever recommended a service dog for 
medication reminders, and there are cheaper alternatives, such as an alarm, that would 
have the same effect. With respect to companionship, defendants argue there is no 
medical necessity with respect to the dog, as claimant does not take him to work, and 
the dog spends a majority of the time with claimant’s mother. 
In order to recover the reasonable expenses of unauthorized medical care, the 
claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the unauthorized care 
was reasonable and beneficial. Bell Bros. Heating and Air Cond. v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 205 (Iowa 2010). The Iowa Supreme Court has stated that unauthorized care is 
beneficial if it provides a “more favorable outcome than would likely have been achieved 
by the care authorized by the employer.” Id. 
In this case, claimant has not met his burden to prove the unauthorized 
treatment, his emotional support dog, was reasonable and beneficial such that 
defendants should be liable for the associated costs. Claimant obtained the dog on his 
own, and decided on his own to train it as an emotional support or service animal. He 
got the dog and began training it as a service animal in 2023. (Def. Ex. D, p. 71; Depo. 
Tr., p. 38; Cl. Ex. 11, pp. 207-208) 1 He testified that Dr. Ernst mentioned getting a dog 
to him once, but there is no indication in Dr. Ernst’s records that he suggested or 
recommended claimant obtain a dog. (Tr., p. 63) The only medical record that indicates 
claimant should have a dog is the December 13, 2023 letter from Dr. Maharry, which 
states it would be in claimant’s best interest to have an emotional support animal in all 
areas of his life where it is allowed. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 125) Dr. Maharry’s letter came nine to 
                                                 
1 Claimant testified at hearing that he got the dog in 2019; however, looking at his deposition and the 
depositions of both of his sisters, it appears he actually got the dog in late 2022 or early 2023. (Tr., pp. 
64-65; Def. Ex. D, p. 71; Depo. Tr., p. 38; Cl. Ex. 16, p. 258; Depo Tr., p. 15; Cl. Ex. 17, p. 270; Depo. Tr., 
p. 22) See also Dr. Ernst’s record dated March 9, 2023, in which claimant indicates he got a new puppy 
that is being trained as a service dog. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 305) 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 33 
twelve months after claimant got the dog, and after his training was complete. 
Additionally, Dr. Maharry was not claimant’s primary physician related to claimant’s 
mental health treatment. 
While there are mentions in Dr. Ernst’s records that claimant found the dog to be 
beneficial to his mental health, as well as claimant’s own testimony, the preponderance 
of the evidence does not indicate that it is more likely than not that the dog has provided 
a more favorable outcome for claimant’s condition than the authorized treatment alone. 
Claimant was also participating in counseling and was on medications, which were 
authorized. Based on the record, I cannot find the unauthorized care reasonable and 
beneficial such that the defendants are required to reimburse claimant for the expenses 
related to the dog.  
 
 
With respect to alternate medical care, it is unclear from the briefing what 
alternate care claimant is requesting. He continues to receive authorized treatment from 
Dr. Maharry for his physical conditions, Dr. Ernst for his mental health, and Dr. 
Fitzgerald for his vision. (Tr., p. 20) Claimant is entitled to ongoing medical care for 
conditions that are causally related to the work injury under Iowa Code section 85.27. If 
a situation arises in which claimant finds himself dissatisfied with the care being 
provided by defendants, he can avail himself of the alternate medical care process 
under Iowa Code section 85.27(4). At this time, however, it does not appear that any 
award of alternate care is appropriate. 
 
 
The final issues for determination are payment of claimant’s IMEs under Iowa 
Code section 85.39 and costs. The version of section 85.39 that was in effect on 
claimant’s date of injury and thus applies in this case states, in relevant part: 
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination. The physician chosen by the employee has the right to 
confer with and obtain from the employer-retained physician sufficient 
history of the injury to make a proper examination. 
 
Iowa Code § 85.39 (effective to June 30, 2017) The old version of the statute did not 
include the current requirement that a determination of reasonableness shall be based 
on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the 
local area where the examination was conducted. 
 
 
In this case, defendants obtained an impairment rating from Dr. LaHolt on 
November 8, 2018. (Def. Ex. I, p. 117) Claimant’s IME with Dr. Bansal took place later, 
on November 25, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal’s total fee for his IME, which 
included his examination and report, totaled $7,984.00. (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 222) Dr. Bansal’s 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 34 
report is 51 pages long, and he specifically indicated that the cost of his evaluation and 
report was a reasonable and typical fee charged by medical providers in his local area. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 51) He further stated that his charges include his review of medical 
records, claimant’s history, causation analysis, physical examination, measurements, 
testing, impairment calculations, assessment of MMI, restrictions, and future medical 
care, and time to actually draft the report. (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 222) Given the nature of this 
case, the number of injuries claimant sustained, and the volume of medical records, I 
find Dr. Bansal’s fees to be reasonable. Defendants are responsible to reimburse the 
entirety of Dr. Bansal’s IME fee in the amount of $7,984.00. 
 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that a claimant is only entitled to one IME 
under section 85.39. Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009). As 
such, the cost of Dr. Patra’s psychiatric evaluation cannot be reimbursed to claimant 
under Iowa Code section 85.39. However, in Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015), the Supreme Court noted that a claimant can 
still be reimbursed expenses associated with the preparation of a written report as a 
cost under administrative rule 876 IAC 4.33 because the report is being used as 
evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony. Id. at 846-47. However, only the cost of the 
report can be assessed, not the underlying exam or treatment. Id. 
 
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commissioner.” Iowa Code § 10A.328(2023). Iowa Administrative Rule 
876—4.33(86) outlines what costs may be assessed at hearing. Given that claimant 
was generally successful in his claim, I use my discretion to award the cost of Dr. 
Patra’s report. Dr. Patra provided an itemized statement for his report preparation. (Cl. 
Ex. 12, p. 224) The portion related to the report came to $3,462.50. As such, claimant is 
entitled to reimbursement in that amount for the cost of Dr. Patra’s report. 
 
With respect to the remainder of claimant’s requested costs, he is also seeking 
reimbursement for the vocational report of Barbara Laughlin. Under 876 IAC 4.33(6), 
claimant is allowed the reasonable costs of obtaining not more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports. A report or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert 
constitutes a practitioner report under our administrative rules. 876 IAC 4.17; Stallman 
v. Rockwell Collins, File No. 5027023 (Arb., Dec. 16, 2009). Ms. Laughlin also provided 
an itemized bill, which indicates she spent 4.5 hours on the report portion of her 
evaluation at a rate of $130.00 per hour. (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 228) As such, claimant is 
entitled to $585.00 for reimbursement of Ms. Laughlin’s report. 
 
The remaining costs claimant seeks are for the petition filing fee (and 
convenience fee) in the amount of $128.75; the service fee in the amount of $17.06; 
and the deposition transcript fee in the amount of $606.00. (Cl. Ex. 12, pp. 229-232). 
Each of those items are allowed as costs under 876 IAC 4.33. As such, I use my 
discretion and award claimant these costs as well. In total, claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement in the amount of $4,799.31 for costs.  
 
 
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 35 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant four hundred (400) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing February 27, 2018, at the stipulated rate of five hundred 
fifty-three and 33/100 dollars ($553.33). 
 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. Deciga-Sanchez v. 
Tyson, File No. 5052008 (Apr. 23, 2018 Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, 
Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re: Interest Rate Issue). 
 
Defendants are responsible for payment to Vision Center, P.C., for expenses 
related to claimant’s prescription eyeglasses, as outlined in the decision. 
 
 
 
Defendants are responsible for payment of claimant’s medical mileage related to 
his past and future medical treatment with Dr. Ernst, as outlined in the decision. 
 
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, defendants shall reimburse claimant for 
the expenses of Dr. Bansal’s IME, in the amount of seven thousand nine hundred 
eighty-four and 00/100 dollars ($7,984.00). 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of four thousand 
seven hundred ninety-nine and 31/100 dollars ($4,799.31) as outlined in the decision. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ___26TH ___ day of August, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

CARLSON V. AGRIUM US D/B/A NUTRIEN AG SOLUTIONS, INC. 
Page 36 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James Neal   
(via WCES) 
Jessica Voelker  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be rece ived 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
