Case Number: 21701301.01
Case Title:  WALL, JEFFREY V. CITY OF DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Wall Jeffrey-21701301.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JEFFREY WALL, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
          File No. 21701301.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :              ARBITRATION DECISION         
CITY OF DES MOINES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                
 
Employer, 
  :  Head Note Nos:  1108, 1402.30, 1403.30, 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
 
 2206, 2209, 2401, 2402 
 
Defendant. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Jeffrey Wall, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against the City of Des Moines (“City”), a self-insured employer, 
as defendant.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner, the hearing was held on January 12, 2023, via Zoom. The case was 
considered fully submitted on January 27, 2023, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-7, Defendant’s 
Exhibits A-F, along with the testimony of claimant, Kevin Buttrey and Caleb Adams-
Brown.  
ISSUES 
1. The appropriate date of injury;  
 
2. Whether claimant gave proper notice under Iowa Code Section 85.23; 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits due to defendant’s denial of 
the claim;  
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to future medical care.  
STIPULATIONS 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-May-03  09:58:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 2 
 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The parties stipulate claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course 
of his employment, that the injury was the cause of some temporary disability, and 
permanent disability resulting in a 37 percent functional loss.  
 
At the time of the injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $1,203.21 per week. He 
was married and entitled to two exemptions. Based on the foregoing the weekly benefit 
rate is $773.68.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant, Jeffrey Wall, was a 63-year-old employee at the time of the hearing. At 
all relevant times hereto, claimant was married with three children. He attended high 
school and obtained a GED. Following high school, claimant obtained a water 
distribution grade 2 license.  
 
Claimant was an employee of the public works department of defendant 
employer. He began working for defendant in September 1999 in the forestry 
department. The undisputed consensus of the individuals who testified was that work for 
the forestry department was physically taxing. Claimant testified that he had developed 
knee pain over time as a result of the work he performed for the City, but he did not 
share this with defendant employer initially.  
 
Claimant’s past medical history includes a work injury to his eye in or around 
2000. He reported the injury, filled out paperwork, and was off work for a few days to 
recuperate. (See Defendant’s Exhibit D:10) 
 
At the time of his left knee injury, he was working the street cleaning position. Per 
the job description and claimant’s own testimony he hauled materials, cut trees, lifted 
logs, dragged brush, cleaned culverts, collected and hauled refuse, spread gravel, salt, 
sand and other materials for road safety. (See e.g. A:1) He climbed in and out of his 
truck several times during his eight to twelve hour shifts. Some days he would plow for 
12 hours and others he would be lifting materials weighing 50-100 pounds.  
 
Caleb Adams-Brown testified on behalf of the defendant. He has known claimant 
for approximately 13 years and was his immediate supervisor since 2014. Mr. Adams-
Brown testified that claimant was a great worker and an honest man, but that he was 
not aware of claimant sustaining an injury at work. However, he did see claimant limping 
in the summer of 2021, prior to claimant’s retirement. Mr. Adams-Brown did not connect 
claimant’s limping to his work duties since an injury could have occurred at claimant’s 
home.  
Mr. Adams-Brown testified that his first knowledge of claimant’s work-related 
injury was when the petition was filed. Shortly after, he made contact with a 
representative of the City’s workers’ compensation claims administrator on December 
17, 2021. 
 
Mr. Adams-Brown further testified that the forestry department work was more 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 3 
 
physically demanding than the street cleaning work and recommended claimant move 
to street cleaning as it would be easier for claimant physically. 
  
Around April 2021, the left knee began to hurt, and the pain did not abate. He 
testified that the pain became more noticeable after he moved from forestry to street 
cleaning, and he had to climb up and down into and out of his truck frequently. This time 
claimant testified that he did share this with Mr. Adams-Brown. Mr. Adams-Brown does 
not remember this, nor does he recall referring claimant to a clinic.  
 
Co-worker Kevin Buttrey was called to testify by claimant. Mr. Buttrey testified 
without rebuttal that he served as a fill-in supervisor from August 2021 to December 
2021 and directed injured employees to the City Clinic. He testified that he observed 
claimant struggle at work due to the limp. He advised claimant to seek care at the City 
Clinic.  
 
Claimant testified that in late August or early September he reached out to the 
City Clinic for care but that the City Clinic told him that they would not x-ray his knee. As 
a result, claimant sought out care with his own family physician.  
 
On August 10, 2021, claimant was seen by William F. Maher, D.O., for left knee 
pain. (Joint Exhibit 1:2) Claimant reported instability, and that the pain was fairly diffuse, 
but more prominent in the medial compartment. Id. He relayed that there was no 
significant injury, nor had he had significant knee problems in the past. Id. On 
examination there appeared to be an effusion in the left knee along with medial joint line 
tenderness. The x-ray showed some degenerative changes in the medial compartment 
and the patellofemoral compartment. (JE 1:3) Dr. Maher recommended that claimant 
stop taking ibuprofen and try a course of prednisone and Naprosyn. Id.  
 
On October 2, 2021, claimant voluntarily resigned. (DE B:2) This was a planned 
retirement that he had been thinking about for some time; however, at the time he left 
employment of defendant, he was in unbearable pain due to his left knee problems.  
Prior to this, claimant had not missed work due to his knee pain.  
 
After a series of failed conservative treatments, claimant was referred to Barron 
Bremner, D.O., at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons. (JE 2:6)  In reviewing the MRI, 
which showed severe arthritis in the medial compartment, severe bone-on-bone arthritis 
in the patellofemoral compartment, a large effusion, a Baker’s cyst and complex tear of 
the medial meniscus, Dr. Bremner recommended a left total knee arthroplasty. (JE 2:6)  
 
Claimant consented to this, and surgery took place on December 6, 2021. (JE 
3:16)   
 
He returned to DMOS for follow up on December 21, 2021. (JE 2:10) He was 
weaning himself from pain medication, and less reliant on assistive walking devices. (JE 
2:10) On January 18, 2022, claimant was six weeks status post his surgery. (JE 2:12) At 
his follow-up visit, he reported pain which Dr. Bremner said was normal. Claimant would 
take a full year to recover. Id.  
 
Claimant was seen on December 8, 2022 by Dr. Bremner for the one-year follow 
up. He was doing well but reported some clicking in the left knee, some occasional 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 4 
 
numbness and was unable to do squats as deep as he would like to. (JE 2:14) Claimant 
was released and instructed to return in five years. Id.  
 
On March 29, 2022, Dr. Bremner opined that the work claimant performed was a 
material aggravating factor in the symptoms that claimant developed which led to his left 
total knee arthroplasty that Dr. Bremner performed on December 6, 2021. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1:1-2) 
 
Todd Peterson, D.O., performed an independent medical examination on or 
about November 22, 2022. (JE 4) In the report he agreed with the opinion of Dr. 
Bremner.  
 
Dr. Peterson’s examination of claimant revealed near full extension and flexion, 
mild laxity to anterior drawer, mild clicking, mild distress getting up onto the exam table, 
difficulty fully squatting and kneeling. (JE 4:21) Dr. Peterson concluded that to a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty claimant’s job had a significant effect on his 
degenerative changes in the knee. Degenerative changes were multifactorial, as there 
is a genetic component, as well as nutrition, mechanics, and activity or trauma. Id. Dr. 
Peterson did not believe that claimant’s job was the only cause for arthritis and need for 
total knee replacement. Id. He did agree that the job partially caused claimant’s 
degeneration and arthritis in the knee, leading to the left knee replacement. (JE 4:21)  
 
Dr. Peterson further opined claimant reached MMI around six months postop and 
assigned a 37 percent lower extremity impairment with no work restrictions. (JE 4:22) 
Currently claimant still has pain when he twists or bends. He does no heavy lifting. He 
does not take any prescription medication but does take a simple aspirin once in a 
while. He uses an exercise bike at home. 
 
On September 6, 2022, claimant’s counsel wrote to defendant’s counsel 
wondering why the defendant continued to deny the claim despite the opinion from 
claimant’s authorized treating physician, Dr. Bremner. (CE 2:4)  
 
Claimant’s counsel wrote again on December 1, 2022, noting that the IME of Dr. 
Peterson agreed that the claimant’s 22 years of employment with the defendant 
employer represented a material aggravating factor in his knee symptoms leading to 
total knee arthroplasty. (CE 2:5)  
 
Claimant seeks reimbursement of $769.80 for filing fees, the impairment rating 
from Dr. Bremner, and $250.00 for the conference with Dr. Bremner, as well as the 
court reporter fee. (CE 3:6)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Claimant alleges he has sustained a compensable workers’ compensation injury 
to his left knee which resulted in a total knee arthroplasty. Defendant argues that while 
claimant did sustain a work injury, claimant failed to give timely notice of his injury and 
thus is not entitled to benefits.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3) 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 5 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant testified that his left knee began hurting him years prior to the late 
summer and fall of 2021 due to the work he performed while in the forestry department. 
He testified that knee pain would cause him to limp from time to time. His supervisor, 
Mr. Adams-Brown, testified that he recommended claimant spend the last years of 
working for the City in the street cleaning position as it was less physically taxing than 
the forestry department.  
“[W]hen a disability develops over a period of time, the compensable injury is 
held to occur when the employee, ‘because of pain or physical inability,’ can no longer 
work.”  Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287 (Iowa 2001) (quoting McKeever 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 6 
 
Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985)). The court went on to 
refine the test, now called the “manifestation test.” Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 287. The 
court held an injury manifests when “both ‘the fact of the injury and the causal 
relationship of the injury to the claimant's employment would have become plainly 
apparent to a reasonable person.’” Id. (quoting Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 
N.W.2d 824, 829 (Iowa 1992)). Thus, a cumulative injury manifests when the employee 
knows they are injured and that the injury is related to their employment. 
Defendant argues that claimant knew his left knee pain was the result of his work 
in the forestry department and opted not to share this with defendant as he did not want 
to be put on light duty. Defendants point to claimant’s consumption of over-the-counter 
pain medication as he continued to work without any periods of unemployment. Further, 
claimant had sustained a work injury in the past and knew the process of reporting and 
receiving care authorized by defendant employer as a result of that work injury. Thus, 
defendant argues claimant was familiar with the workers’ compensation procedures with 
his employer.   
On the other hand, claimant asserts that he did not realize the nature and 
seriousness of his work-related knee injury until consulting with Dr. Bremner on October 
5, 2021. At that visit, claimant was diagnosed with severe arthritis and a left total knee 
replacement was recommended.  
The manifestation date is thus sometime prior to 2014 when claimant was moved 
from forestry to street cleaning because it was less physically taxing. Claimant testified 
that he had left knee pain from the work performed on the job.  
The analysis does not end here, however.   
Although the date of injury is relevant to notice and statute-of-limitations issues, 
the cumulative injury rule is not to be applied in lieu of the discovery rule.” Herrera, 633 
N.W.2d at 287. The two rules, “while related, are distinct.” Id. at 288. It is the discovery 
rule, not the cumulative injury rule, which dictates statute-of-limitations questions. Id. An 
employee is held to have discovered their injury for statute-of-limitations purposes 
when, “acting as a reasonable person,” the employee recognizes the injury “is serious 
enough to have a permanent adverse impact” on their employment. Id. at 287-88. An 
employee is deemed to have knowledge of the permanent adverse impact of an injury 
when they recognize “its nature, seriousness and probable compensable character.’” Id. 
at 288 (quoting Orr v. Lewis Cent. Sch. Dist., 298 N.W.2d 256, 257 (Iowa 1980)). 
To summarize, a cumulative injury is manifested when the claimant, as a 
reasonable person, would be plainly aware (1) that he or she suffers from a condition or 
injury, and (2) that this condition or injury was caused by the claimant's employment. 
Upon the occurrence of these two circumstances, the injury is deemed to have 
occurred. Nonetheless, by virtue of the discovery rule, the statute-of-limitations will not 
begin to run until the employee also knows that the physical condition is serious enough 
to have a permanent adverse impact on the claimant's employment or employability, 
i.e., the claimant knows or should know the “nature, seriousness, and probable 
compensable character” of his injury or condition.  Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 288 (citation 
omitted). Tilton v. H.J. Heinz Co., No. 21-1777, 2022 WL 2824290, at *3 (Iowa Ct. App. 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 7 
 
July 20, 2022) 
In Tilton, the appellate court determined that because the doctor had not given 
the injured worker permanent work restrictions, the claimant did not know or should not 
have known that the work injury had permanent adverse impact on her employment. In 
Myers v. R.R. Donnelly & Sons Co., 2017 WL 4050335, (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 13, 2017), 
the injured worker’s injury date was deemed to be at the appointment where claimant 
was placed on restrictions for six months as a result of the injury. Id. at *3. Claimant was 
further noted to have increasing pain and found work to be intolerable. Id.   
 
In Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, the Supreme Court of Iowa stated:  
Just as not every ache, pain, or symptom is immediately known to be 
compensable, not every ache, pain, or symptom will satisfy the 
seriousness component of the discovery rule. See id. at 650. Consistent 
with our more recent decision in Herrera, not every ache, pain, or 
symptom will be understood as possibly suggesting a *683 permanent 
adverse impact on a claimant's health or physical capacity for 
employment.  Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 288. 
Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 672, 682–83 (Iowa 2015) 
Claimant did have knee pain in the years leading up to October 2021, but the 
pain was not constant, and it did not lead to him missing any work. The pain became 
intolerable somewhere around October 2, 2021, when claimant retired. It was at that 
time when claimant recognized that his work injury had a permanent adverse impact on 
his employability.  
Defendant argues even if October 2, 2021, was the date of injury, claimant did 
not provide notice to defendant either actual or implied. Mr. Adams-Brown testified that 
he was not aware of claimant’s injury, that had he known of the injury, he would have 
helped claimant obtain care. He testified that while he did see claimant limping, he 
thought it might have been an injury claimant sustained at home.  
Claimant testified that he shared with Mr. Adams-Brown that he had knee pain 
because of his work, and he also shared his pain with his co-worker, Kevin Buttrey. 
Defendant states that claimant is not credible because his testimony varied.  
At his deposition, claimant stated his knee pain began around April 2021. When 
asked when he reported the injury to his supervisor, claimant testified that it was shortly 
after his pain stated.  He then later said he told his supervisor about the pain before 
calling the City Clinic which claimant believed to be around August or September 2021. 
Claimant also testified that he sought out care from his personal physician after being 
told by the City Clinic they would not take x-rays. However, the visit to claimant’s 
personal physician occurred on August 10, 2021.  
Claimant’s imprecise recollection of when the pain in his left knee began and 
when he informed his supervisor of his injury is less attributable to credibility issues and 
more likely due to lack of a good memory. Even Mr. Adams-Brown stated claimant was 
an honest and good employee. There were no other signs of credibility problems in 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 8 
 
claimant’s injury presentation to his doctors or in his testimony at hearing.  
Mr. Adams-Brown was aware of claimant limping at work in the summer of 2021. 
Mr. Adams-Brown dismissed this as related to some home activity on the part of the 
claimant. He did not make a connection between claimant’s physically taxing work and 
his limping despite Mr. Adams-Brown knowing that claimant’s physical condition was 
challenged during his many years of service in the forestry department.  
During the time between August 2021 and December 2021, Kevin Buttrey served 
as a stand-in supervisor who helped direct injured workers to the City Clinic. During this 
time period, he advised claimant to seek aid from the City Clinic for the knee problem.  
Thus, it is found that the employer had actual and imputed knowledge of 
claimant’s potential work injury at least by August 2021. Since the date of injury is 
deemed to be October 2, 2021, claimant’s claim is not barred by lack of notice.  
The parties stipulate that the claimant sustained a 37 percent functional loss.  
Claimant seeks additional penalty benefits for unreasonable denial of benefits.  
Defendant denied liability for claimant’s left knee injury and have paid no weekly 
benefits for this injury.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) requires that if a delay in 
commencement or termination of benefits occurs without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award additional weekly 
benefits in an amount not to exceed 50 percent of the amount of benefits that were 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b).  A reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse must satisfy the following requirements: 
1. The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits 
were owed to the employee; 
2. The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits; 
3. The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis of the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay or termination of benefits. 
(Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c)) 
   
Defendant has the burden to show compliance with this statutory provision in 
order to avoid the mandatory assessment of a penalty.  In this case, by the time of 
hearing, defendant based the denial of their claim on the testimony of Mr. Adams-
Brown. Mr. Buttrey was not questioned, although it may have been because Mr. Buttrey 
was retiring. The record is not clear. Other than the testimony of Mr. Adams-Brown, it 
appears no other investigation was undertaken before the denial of benefits. Deposition 
of the claimant was not taken until November 17, 2022. Prior to that, no statement was 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 9 
 
taken from the claimant. It does not appear that even after the medical records were 
obtained wherein claimant reported pain stemming back to April that any additional 
investigation was undertaken.  
The law requires proof of a prompt investigation and that factual basis be 
provided to the injured worker at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits.  
Herein, defendant must show a timely investigation of claimant’s report of an injury, that 
the denial of the left knee claim is based on the results of that timely investigation, and 
that there was a timely communication to claimant of the reasons for the denial. There is 
no such evidence in the record of defendant taking such action.  Therefore, due to the 
failure of defendant meeting its burden of proof, a penalty of 25 percent of all benefits 
owed shall be imposed.  
Claimant seeks future medical care and reimbursement of costs.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
According to IAC rule 876 4.33 the claimant can request that costs be taxed by 
the deputy to a prevailing party.  “Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the report is 
requested.” Rule IAC 876 4.33. 
Claimant is entitled to future medical care for his left knee as well as 
reimbursement for costs paid including but not limited to the report of Dr. Bremner as 
itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 3:6.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, it is ordered: 
That defendant is to pay unto claimant 81.4 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of one thousand twenty and 82/100 dollars ($1,020.82) per week 
from June 6, 2022.  
That defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That claimant is entitled to future medical care related to his left knee.  
That defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 

WALL V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 10 
 
That defendant shall pay penalty benefits of 25 percent of all unpaid benefits. 
 
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33. 
Signed and filed this ___3rd __ day of May, 2023. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Christopher Spaulding (via WCES) 
Molly Tracy (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
