Case Number: 5067985.01
Case Title:  DANILSON, KELLY R V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Danilson Kelly-5067985.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KELLY R. DANILSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
              File No.  5067985.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
  :  
vs. 
 
  :  
 
 
  :  
COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
DISTRICT, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  :  
Head Note Nos.:   1402.40, 1801, 2204 
 
 
  :  
 
 
    2501, 2502, 2701, 2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Kelly Danilson, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against College 
Community School District, as the employer, and West Bend Mutual Insurance 
Company, as the insurance carrier.  This case came before the undersigned for an 
arbitration hearing on August 4, 2021.   
Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via videoconference using CourtCall.  All participants, including the 
court reporter, appeared remotely via the CourtCall video platform. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 7, as well as Defendants Exhibits A through I.  As the result of an evidentiary 
ruling at the time of hearing, the record was suspended at the conclusion of the 
arbitration hearing pending receipt of Defendants’ Exhibit I, which was timely filed and is 
received into the evidentiary record.  
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the 
hearing.  The testimonial record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing and 
the evidentiary record closed completely once defense Exhibit I was filed.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-24  12:08:15     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 2 
 
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on 
September 20, 2021.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on 
that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to a running healing period from November 9, 
2018 through the date of the arbitration hearing. 
2. 
Whether the work injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, including a claim 
for permanent total disability benefits. 
3. 
The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits. 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation fees pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
5. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care into the future. 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to vocational rehabilitation benefits pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.70. 
7. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence in the record, finds: 
Kelly Danilson, claimant, is a 45-year-old gentleman, who possesses a 
bachelor’s degree in education from Iowa State University and a Master’s in education 
degree from Graceland University.  Mr. Danilson began his teaching career as a 
physical education teacher in Missouri.  However, he accepted employment at College 
Community School District in 2003.  College Community School District is located in 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa and is locally known and referred to as “Cedar Rapids Prairie” 
(hereinafter referred to as “Prairie”).   
During his stint with Prairie, Mr. Danilson worked as an elementary and high 
school physical education teacher.  While working as a teacher, claimant also engaged 
in coaching duties.  In 2017, claimant accepted a new position with Prairie and began 
transitioning to a full-time position as a Building Facilitator.  As a Building Facilitator, Mr. 
Danilson was an aide to the school administration performing classroom management 
support.  In essence, claimant worked with disruptive and struggling students dealing 
with school and non-school related issues. 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 3 
 
 
Mr. Danilson sustained an admitted mental injury as a result of an unfortunate 
event occurring at the school on October 25, 2018.  On that date, a student was having 
a mental health crisis and left the school building.  That student began running toward 
Interstate 380, which is located just off school premises, and appeared intent upon 
committing suicide. 
Mr. Danilson received notification of the student’s flight, left the school building, 
and observed what was transpiring.  He immediately began running toward the fleeing 
student, climbed the fence and positioned himself between the student and the 
interstate traffic.  Ultimately, claimant was able to verbally de-escalate the situation and 
get the student to return to a safe-room within the school.  Once in the safe-room, the 
student began some self-harm, and claimant restrained the student until the student’s 
mother arrived. 
As a result of the events of October 25, 2018, claimant sustained some mental 
health injuries.  The precise diagnosis and extent of those injuries is disputed, however. 
Mr. Danilson testified that he has ongoing effects from this event, including difficulties 
with his memory, inability to organize his thoughts, inability to maintain concentration 
and focus, fatigue or lack of stamina, among various other symptoms.  Claimant 
testified that he has good days and bad days but does not believe he can return to work 
at this time because he cannot consistently string good days together to perform 
employment activities. Therefore, claimant contends that the effects of this event 
continue to affect him daily and that he is entitled to a running healing period.  
Defendants contend claimant has achieved maximum medical improvement and is 
entitled to little, if any, permanent disability. 
Claimant first sought medical care after the incident with his personal physician, 
Jason Booth, M.D., on October 31, 2018.  At that initial evaluation, claimant reported 
racing thoughts, being on edge, not sleeping well, and being short-tempered.  Dr. Booth 
noted that claimant reported the onset of his symptoms “was approximately a few 
week(s) ago” and were “gradually worsening since that time.”  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1)  
Dr. Booth recommended psychiatric evaluation after recognizing the possibility of post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) arising from the incident.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 3)  Claimant 
denies pre-existing symptoms, though it is strange that his initial medical encounter 
suggests his symptoms predated the October 25, 2018 incident.  
At any rate, Prairie accepted the claim and redirected claimant for medical care 
through an occupational medicine physician, Shirley J. Pospisil, M.D.  Dr. Pospisil 
evaluated claimant on November 5, 2018.  She also recognized the possibility of PTSD 
and removed claimant from work.  (Joint Ex. 2, pp. 6-7)  Claimant returned to Dr. 
Pospisil two days later.  In her November 7, 2018 office note, Dr. Pospisil documents 
symptoms of PTSD and referred claimant to a mental health counselor, Cher 
Stephenson, LMHC, CRC.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 8) 
Ms. Stephenson initially met with claimant on November 13, 2018.  She initially 
diagnosed claimant with acute stress disorder, which eventually resulted in a diagnosis 
of PTSD after the passage of time.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 54)  Ms. Stephenson has continued 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 4 
 
 
to provide mental health counseling to claimant from November 13, 2018 through the 
date of the arbitration hearing.  
The initial factual dispute that must be resolved in this case is claimant’s mental 
health diagnosis.  As noted above, claimant’s personal physician, Dr. Booth, has 
referred to a PTSD diagnosis.  The authorized occupational medicine physician, Dr. 
Pospisil, has offered a PTSD diagnosis.  The authorized therapist, Ms. Stephenson, has 
provided a PTSD diagnosis. 
In addition to these three medical providers, defendants obtained a 
neuropsychological evaluation and opinion from Daniel Tranel, Ph.D.  Dr. Tranel 
evaluated claimant on November 6, 2019.  Following administration of 
neuropsychological testing and evaluation, Dr. Tranel opined that claimant sustained 
PTSD and major depressive disorder, moderate with anxious distress.  Dr. Tranel 
causally related his diagnoses to claimant’s experiences at Prairie on October 25, 2018.  
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 9) 
Defendants also obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by a 
board certified psychiatrist, Martin Carpenter, M.D. on June 2, 2021.  Dr. Carpenter 
concurred with Dr. Tranel and diagnosed claimant with PTSD.  However, Dr. Carpenter 
opined that the PTSD could not be directly attributable to the one incident at Prairie on 
October 25, 2018.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 9) 
Defendants also solicited and obtained a records review by another psychologist, 
John Brooke, Ph.D.  Dr. Brooke questioned the PTSD diagnosis.  Instead, Dr. Brooke 
opined that claimant sustained an adjustment disorder and opined that this diagnosis 
was a reaction to various job difficulties not just the alleged injury on October 25, 2018.  
(Defendants Ex. D, p. 7) 
Mr. Danilson also obtained an independent psychological evaluation, performed 
by Frank S. Gersh, Ph.D. on February 21, 2021.  Dr. Gersh concurred with the majority 
of the other medical providers and offered PTSD as his diagnosis.  Dr. Gersh also 
concurred that claimant suffers from major depressive disorder and causally related 
both diagnoses to the work incident on October 25, 2018.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Considering these various diagnoses, I note that all medical providers and 
evaluators concur with the PTSD diagnosis except Dr. Brooke.  Dr. Brooke is a 
psychologist with good credentials.  However, he did not evaluate claimant and 
performed only a record review in this case.  His opinion appears to be the “outlier” 
among these medical professionals.  Dr. Tranel, Dr. Carpenter, and Dr. Gersh are all 
equally, if not more, qualified to offer a diagnosis for claimant’s condition.  Each of these 
medical providers concurs with the treating therapist that the proper diagnosis is PTSD.  
I accept the opinions of therapist Stephenson, Dr. Tranel, Dr. Carpenter, Dr. Pospisil, 
and Dr. Gersh that claimant suffers from PTSD.  I find that claimant’s PTSD is the result 
of the events of October 25, 2018, or that the events of October 25, 2018 have 
materially aggravated and worsened any underlying, though undiagnosed, mental 
health condition.  I further accept the diagnoses of Dr. Tranel and Dr. Gersh that 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 5 
 
 
claimant suffers from major depressive disorder as a result of the October 25, 2018 
events. 
Having determined the diagnoses for claimant’s injury and its causal connection 
to the October 25, 2018 events, the next factual issue to determine is whether claimant 
has achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) or remains in a healing period as 
of the date of hearing.  Again, there are contradictory opinions on this issue. 
Dr. Pospisil has opined that claimant reached MMI on October 10, 2020.  Dr. 
Pospisil opined that claimant might need retraining to a different profession. (Joint Ex. 2, 
p. 45)  However, she subsequently indicated that claimant does not require permanent 
restrictions other than staying away from the Prairie school campus.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 50) 
Ultimately, however, Dr. Pospisil indicated that she would defer to the opinions of a 
psychiatrist or psychologist.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 50) 
Therapist Stephenson issued what appears to be contradictory or conflicting 
opinions in this case.  In January 2021, Ms. Stephenson opined that claimant was not 
yet at MMI and required ongoing therapy.  (Joint Ex. 3, pp. 227-228)  In a June 14, 2021 
report, Ms. Stephenson opined that claimant was at or near MMI.  However, she opined 
that claimant would require additional therapy.  She suggested that the ongoing therapy 
would be “to manage or improve symptoms.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 231)  The expectation of 
improvement of symptoms suggests that claimant has not achieved MMI. 
Claimant also produces and relies upon the opinions of Dr. Gersh.  Dr. Gersh 
opines that claimant has not achieved MMI and notes that claimant continues to make 
progress in his therapy.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 4-5)  Dr. Gersh evaluated claimant three 
times and provided a supplemental report after his third interview on July 7, 2021.  Once 
again, Dr. Gersh opined that claimant still had not achieved MMI.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 
12) 
Perhaps more importantly, Dr. Gersh did not simply recommended “more of the 
same” for symptom management.  Instead, Dr. Gersh recommends additional types of 
therapy for claimant.  Specifically, Dr. Gersh recommends prolonged exposure therapy 
and marital counseling for claimant.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 13)  As of the date of the hearing, 
claimant had not participated in either prolonged exposure therapy or marital 
counseling.  Presumably, Dr. Gersh recommends these additional therapies with the 
anticipation that they will improve claimant’s symptoms and functional abilities.  Such 
recommendations are contrary to a finding of MMI at this time. 
Defendants again offer the opinions of Dr. Tranel, Dr. Carpenter, and Dr. Brooke.  
Dr. Tranel opines that claimant achieved MMI on October 10, 2020.  He opines that 
claimant cannot return to teaching at his former school but that he is capable of full-time 
work and that regular, full-time work would be beneficial to Mr. Danilson’s mental health.  
(Defendants’ Ex. B., pp. 9-13)   
Interestingly, however, in his initial report Dr. Tranel recommends additional 
treatment methods be implemented for claimant.  Specifically, Dr. Tranel recommends 
prolonged exposure therapy and cognitive processing therapy, which he opines “are 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 6 
 
 
both empirically supported for treating PTSD.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 11)  Additionally, 
in response to a specific question about marital counseling, Dr. Tranel concedes that 
claimant’s PTSD responses could exacerbate marital problems.  Dr. Tranel defers to the 
opinions of Therapist Stephenson about whether claimant would benefit from marital 
counseling as a result of the work incident.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 12)  
Recommendations for prolonged exposure therapy, cognitive processing therapy, 
and/or marital counseling all belie the notion of MMI and suggest that additional 
therapies exist that may improve claimant’s PTSD symptoms and render him more 
functional. 
Defendants also produce the opinion of Dr. Carpenter.  Dr. Carpenter opines that 
claimant requires no further treatment and no restrictions other than not returning to the 
Prairie schools.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 9)  Dr. Carpenter explains that returning to work 
in some capacity “would be most beneficial in finding the meaning and purpose 
necessary to recover optimal function both personally and professionally.”  (Defendants’ 
Ex. C, p. 15)  Accordingly, Dr. Carpenter opines that claimant has achieved MMI.  
(Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 15; Defendants’ Ex. I)  Even more troubling is Dr. Carpenter’s 
suggestion that claimant will not be able to fully improve or recover until this litigation is 
resolved and ended.  (Defendants’ Ex. I) 
Finally, defendants also produce the opinions of Dr. Brooke.  Dr. Brooke 
questions the validity of some of claimant’s symptom reporting on the MMPI testing 
performed by Dr. Tranel.  Dr. Brooke instead opines that claimant achieved MMI on 
October 20, 2020 and that he requires no further treatment or restrictions.  (Defendants’ 
Ex. D, p 7) 
As I ponder the competing opinions relative to MMI, I do not find the opinions of 
Dr. Brooke to be convincing.  Dr. Brooke performed only a records review.  His 
diagnosis is the “outlier” among the medical professionals.  I give no weight to his 
opinion in this instance. 
Dr. Pospisil offered an opinion that claimant achieved MMI.  However, Dr. 
Pospisil also indicated that she would defer to the expertise of a psychiatrist or 
psychologist.  Opinions from other mental health professionals are in this evidentiary 
record.  Therefore, I give the opinions of Dr. Pospisil about MMI very little weight. 
Therapist Stephenson has treated claimant for approximately three years.  She 
has intricate knowledge of claimant, his symptoms, his recovery, and his ongoing 
struggles.  She has recommended marital counseling, which had not been performed by 
the date of this hearing.  However, she has also offered somewhat contradictory 
opinions about MMI.  Given that Ms. Stephenson is neither a psychologist nor a 
psychiatrist and has offered potentially contradictory opinions on MMI, I do not place 
significant weight on her opinions about MMI in this case. 
Dr. Carpenter is the only board certified psychiatrist offering opinions in this case.  
His status as a board certified psychiatrist gives him superior credentials and entitles his 
opinions to significant weight.  In fact, I accept and believe his opinions that a return to 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 7 
 
 
work would be beneficial to claimant’s recovery and return of optimal function both 
personally and professionally to be accurate and convincing.  I believe and find that it 
likely would be beneficial for claimant to return to work in some capacity moving 
forward.  However, claimant also offered credible testimony about ongoing symptoms 
that include difficulties with concentration, fatigue, and irritability, among other 
symptoms.   
Given the ongoing symptoms, I tend to favor and accept the opinions of Dr. 
Tranel and Dr. Gersh.  Dr. Tranel opined that claimant reached MMI as of October 20, 
2020.  However, as noted above, Dr. Tranel also offered suggestions for additional 
therapies that could improve claimant’s symptoms and function.  Specifically, Dr. Tranel 
recommended prolonged exposure therapy and cognitive processing therapy.  
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 11)  He also deferred to Ms. Stephenson about whether marital 
counseling could be beneficial.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 12) 
Dr. Gersh opined that claimant continues to make progress in his therapy with 
Ms. Stephenson.  He also acknowledged the recommendation of Dr. Tranel that 
claimant submit to cognitive processing therapy.  Dr. Gersh opined that was a good 
recommendation by Dr. Tranel and recommended that therapy be attempted.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 5-6) 
I find the opinions and recommendations made by Dr. Tranel, especially as 
accepted and recommended by Dr. Gersh, to be reasonable, necessary, and 
appropriate.  I find that claimant could submit to cognitive processing therapy with the 
hope and expectation that it would improve his symptoms and functional abilities.  
Therefore, although Dr. Tranel opined that claimant was at MMI, I find that additional 
therapies exist that will likely improve claimant’s functional and psychological abilities.  I 
specifically find that claimant is not at MMI and that these additional therapies offer a 
reasonable expectation of improvement into the future. 
Dr. Gersh offered Ms. Stephenson a recommendation for a workbook to learn 
and perform cognitive processing therapy.  If she concurs it is appropriate to attempt 
that therapy at this time and she is willing to do so, she should be authorized to perform 
that therapy.  If Ms. Stephenson is not willing or does not feel competent to perform 
cognitive processing therapy, defendants should identify a therapist or psychologist 
willing to assist claimant with this type of therapy. 
Ms. Stephenson has also recommended marital counseling.  Claimant requests 
an order for alternate medical care ordering marital counseling.  Claimant had 
scheduled and was to participate in marital counseling with his wife after the date of the 
arbitration hearing.  Given that Dr. Tranel deferred on this issue and given Ms. 
Stephenson’s recommendation for marital counseling, I find that marital counseling is 
necessary, reasonable, and appropriate medical care resulting from claimant PTSD 
diagnosis following the events of October 25, 2018.   
In other words, I find the marital counseling is a sequela of and the result of the 
work injury and exposure.  I find that it is necessary medical care.  Defendants do not 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 8 
 
 
willingly authorize marital counseling as part of this claim.  Therefore, I find that it is 
related, necessary, reasonable, and appropriate care for claimant’s injuries.  I find that 
refusing the request for marital counseling and offering nothing in its place (other than 
perhaps joint therapy sessions through Ms. Stephenson—something she has opined is 
not sufficient) is not reasonable or appropriate care.  Therefore, I find that claimant has 
proven the defendants’ refusal of marital counseling is unreasonable and a denial of 
reasonable, necessary and appropriate care.  Claimant identified more extensive and 
necessary care, via marital counseling, through Keys to Living in Cedar Rapids. 
Again, the notion of obtaining marital counseling suggests that further 
improvement of claimant’s condition or coping skills is possible.  This further additional 
care belies the notion of MMI.  I specifically find that claimant has not achieved MMI as 
of the date of the arbitration hearing. 
Finally, I note that claimant was offered the opportunity to consult with a 
psychiatrist to determine if there is a proper pharmacological treatment for his 
symptoms.  Claimant was adamant throughout his treatment that he did not want 
medications and feared the side effects of such medications.  He reiterated those 
concerns during his deposition.  However, at trial, claimant testified he is now willing to 
consider medications to help manage his symptoms and improve his function.  Dr. 
Carpenter is the only psychiatrist who has evaluated claimant.  He noted the possibility 
of medications that could assist claimant’s symptoms but dismissed the possibility 
because claimant had refused such treatment options previously.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, 
pp. 7, 10) 
While claimant could be criticized for refusing medication management prior to 
the hearing and then changing his position and suggesting at hearing that he would be 
willing to consider the use of medications, I find claimant’s testimony on the issue to be 
sincere and credible.  Mr. Danilson had serious concerns about the side effects of 
medications that can increase anxiety and cause suicidal thoughts.  However, Mr. 
Danilson testified that he has moved past such symptoms and is now willing to consider 
potential medications to assist with improving his symptoms and function.  Again, this 
appears to be an avenue for treatment that should be expected to improve claimant’s 
symptoms and function.  Again, this suggests claimant is not at MMI.  If Ms. Stephenson 
or Dr. Pospisil believe it is now appropriate to pursue the use of medications for 
claimant’s symptoms, this should be pursued. 
In reaching a finding that claimant has not yet achieved MMI, I must also find that 
claimant has not proven that his injuries resulted in permanent disability for purposes of 
his vocational rehabilitation claim.  I acknowledge the competing vocational expert 
opinions.  However, these opinions are not terribly helpful to me at this time given that I 
find additional treatment options exist that can and should be attempted to improve 
claimant’s symptoms and function.  I also decline to enter a finding that claimant cannot 
return to gainful employment.  To the contrary, I find that it would be beneficial for 
claimant to return to gainful employment and that it remains possible, if not likely, that 
he will do so after further counseling and treatment. 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 9 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, the initial factual dispute to be determined was the proper diagnosis 
for claimant’s mental health condition and whether it was causally related to the alleged 
injury on October 25, 2018.  Having found the diagnosis and opinions of Ms. 
Stephenson, Dr. Tranel, Dr. Carpenter, and Dr. Gersh most convincing and credible in 
this record, I found that claimant proved he sustained PTSD as a result of the events at 
work on October 25, 2018.  I also accepted the opinions and diagnosis of Dr. Tranel and 
Dr. Gersh and found that claimant proved he also suffers from major depressive 
disorder.  I found both diagnoses and related symptoms causally connected to or 
materially aggravated and worsened by the events at Prairie on October 25, 2018.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant has proven he sustained a mental health injury and 
that the diagnoses offered by the above medical experts are related to his alleged work 
injury.  Claimant has established a compensable work injury by a preponderance of the 
evidence.   
The next disputed issue requires a determination of whether claimant has 
achieved MMI or remains in a running healing period as of the date of the arbitration 
hearing.  His personal physician and Dr. Pospisil removed claimant from work shortly 
after the October 25, 2018 incident.  Claimant testified convincingly that he has not 
returned to full-time, gainful employment and all medical experts recommend against 
him returning to work at Prairie.  Accordingly, claimant has established that he 
sustained some temporary disability and defendants stipulated that the injury caused a 
period of temporary disability. 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 10 
 
 
However, claimant asserts that he has not yet achieved MMI and that his 
entitlement to healing period, or temporary total disability, benefits should continue from 
November 9, 2018 through the date of the arbitration hearing and continuing into the 
future.  Defendants assert that claimant has reached MMI and that healing period, or 
temporary total disability, benefits should end October 10, 2020 pursuant to the MMI 
declaration of Dr. Tranel, Dr. Pospisil, and Dr. Brooke.   
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of 
recuperation from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker 
is entitled to temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is 
disabled by the injury.  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work, or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar 
to the work performed at the time of injury.  Section 85.33(1).  
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor 
an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the 
healing period. 
Temporary total disability and healing period benefits are compensated under 
different statutory sections but represent payment of benefits for the same purpose:  lost 
time during a period of temporary disability.  A determination of whether benefits paid or 
payable should be categorized as temporary disability benefits under Iowa Code section 
85.33 or as healing period benefits under Iowa Code section 85.34(1) cannot be 
determined until it is known whether the injury causes permanent disability.  Of course, 
a determination of whether an injury causes permanent disability is not ripe until the 
claimant achieves MMI.  Bell Bros Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn. 779 N.W.2d 
193, 200 (Iowa 2010). 
Therefore, the next disputed issue to determine is whether claimant has achieved 
MMI.  In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. Tranel and Dr. Gersh to be the most 
credible and convincing on the issue of MMI and future treatment.  Although Dr. Tranel 
opined that claimant had achieved MMI in October 2020, he also recommended 
additional forms of treatment.  I found that the recommendation for additional treatment 
was intended to improve claimant’s condition, symptoms and functional abilities.  As 
such, I found those recommendations belied a finding of MMI. 
I also accepted the opinion of Dr. Gersh.  Dr. Gersh concurred that additional 
therapy was a good recommendation by Dr. Tranel and should occur.  Dr. Gersh 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 11 
 
 
specifically opined that claimant has not achieved MMI.  I accepted that opinion as 
credible and convincing. 
Ms. Stephenson also recommended marital counseling for claimant and his wife.  
Dr. Tranel deferred to Ms. Stephenson on this issue.  I found that the recommendation 
for marital counseling was reasonable, necessary, and appropriate care resulting from 
and causally related to the October 25, 2018 work injury.  Accordingly, I found that 
additional counseling and treatment was indicated and was likely to improve claimant’s 
condition, symptoms, and functional abilities.   
Claimant also testified at hearing that he is now willing to consider the use of 
medications to manage his mental health symptoms.  I accepted claimant’s testimony 
as reasonable and credible.  Medication management could improve claimant’s 
condition and suggests that MMI has not yet been achieved.  Having reached these 
findings, I also found that claimant was not at MMI as of the date of the arbitration 
hearing.   
Every medical expert offering an opinion has indicated that claimant cannot 
return to Prairie in his former position.  Accordingly, claimant is not at MMI, he has not 
returned to work, and he is not capable of performing substantially similar work to that 
which he performed on October 25, 2018.  Claimant established entitlement to either 
temporary total disability benefits or healing period benefits from November 9, 2018 
through the date of the arbitration hearing and continuing until the first condition of 
either Iowa Code section 85.33(1) or Iowa Code section 85.34(1) is met.  In other 
words, in common worker’s compensation parlance, claimant is entitled to a “running 
healing period” from October 25, 2018 through the date of the arbitration hearing.  Iowa 
Code section 85.33(1); Iowa Code section 85.34(1). 
Claimant asserts a claim for permanent disability benefits.  However, as noted 
above, a claim for permanent disability is not ripe and cannot be determined until the 
claimant achieves MMI.  Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 200.  Having determined that claimant 
has not yet achieved MMI, I conclude that the claim for permanent disability is 
premature and cannot be determined at this time. 
Mr. Danilson also seeks reimbursement of the independent medical evaluation 
charges from Dr. Gersh pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Nb31 
The requirements of Iowa Code section 85.39 are construed strictly by the Iowa 
Supreme Court and must be established and met before reimbursement is required.  
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 
2015). 
Dr. Gersh is a licensed psychologist.  However, he is not a physician.  Under the 
plain language of Iowa Code section 85.39, reimbursement is only owed for an 
evaluation performed by a “physician.”  Claimant failed to establish the prerequisites of 
Iowa Code section 85.39 because he did not seek evaluation by a physician.  I conclude 
that claimant’s request for reimbursement of Dr. Gersh’s charges fails under Iowa Code 
section 85.39. 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 12 
 
 
Mr. Danilson also asserted a claim for alternate medical care.  At the 
commencement of hearing, defendants acknowledged an obligation to provide ongoing 
care and agreed to authorize continuing treatment and therapy though Cher 
Stephenson, a licensed mental health counselor.  Ms. Stephenson’s care is, therefore, 
authorized pursuant to the parties’ agreement.  Defendants shall pay for all care through 
or recommended by Ms. Stephenson. 
Mr. Danilson asserted a second alternate medical care claim at the time of 
hearing.  Specifically, he requested authorization of marital counseling.  The authorized 
therapist, Ms. Stephenson, recommended this counseling and noted that it needs to be 
performed by a different therapist with experience in this form of therapy.  Defendants 
advised the undersigned at the commencement of hearing that they had searched for a 
provider to offer marriage counseling but had not found one.  Therefore, defendants 
offered marriage counseling (really allowing Mrs. Danilson to attend claimant’s therapy 
sessions) through Ms. Stephenson.  This is not what Ms. Stephenson recommended, 
nor is it reasonable or appropriate care given the recommendations of Ms. Stephenson.  
In essence, defendants denied the request for additional care recommended by their 
authorized therapist, Ms. Stephenson. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). 
An employer’s right to select the provider of medical treatment to an injured 
worker does not include the right to determine how an injured worker should be 
diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional medical judgment.  
Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 19, 1988).   

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 13 
 
 
When a designated physician refers a patient to another physician, that physician 
acts as the defendant employer’s agent.  Permission for the referral from defendant is 
not necessary.  Kittrell v. Allen Memorial Hospital, Thirty-fourth Biennial Report of the 
Industrial Commissioner, 164 (Arb. November 1, 1979) (aff’d by industrial 
commissioner).  See also Limoges v. Meier Auto Salvage, I Iowa Industrial 
Commissioner Reports 207 (1981). 
In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997), the 
supreme court held that “when evidence is presented to the commissioner that the 
employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is ‘inferior 
or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the employee, . . . the 
commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate care.” 
In this case, I found that the marital counseling requested by claimant was 
reasonable, necessary and appropriate medical care for his injuries resulting from the 
October 25, 2018 work injury.  Defendants declined to authorize the requested marital 
counseling.  However, their authorized mental health counselor is the individual that 
recommended the counseling.  Ms. Stephenson recommended it be performed by 
another counselor with that specific knowledge and experience.  Defendants’ refusal or 
failure to authorize marital counseling is not reasonable and does not meet the standard 
to provide reasonable, necessary, and appropriate care without undue inconvenience to 
the claimant.  I specifically found that the defendants’ refusal to offer marital counseling, 
as recommended by the authorized therapist, was not reasonable care under Iowa 
Code section 85.27. 
Moreover, claimant identified a specific mental health provider, Keys to Life, who 
was scheduled to meet with claimant and his wife for marital counseling shortly after the 
arbitration hearing.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant has identified additional 
treatment that can and should be provided and has identified a specific medical provider 
for that care.  The marital counseling claimant has identified and arranged is superior to 
and more extensive than the care being offered by defendants. 
For each of these reasons, I conclude that Mr. Danilson has proven entitlement 
to an order for alternate medical care.  Specifically, he is entitled to additional medical 
care through or at the direction and recommendation of Ms. Stephenson, including 
potential medication management and the additional treatment modalities 
recommended by Dr. Tranel and Dr. Gersh, if Ms. Stephenson concurs and believes 
those are appropriate.  Additionally, I conclude that claimant has proven entitlement to 
marital counseling for he and his wife through Keys to Living in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. 
Claimant also asserted a claim for vocational benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.70.  Iowa Code section 85.70(1) provides for the payment of an additional 
$100.00 in weekly benefits for a period of 13 weeks and, at the discretion of the agency, 
renewable for an additional 13 weeks (a potential total of 26 weeks of increased 
benefits).  The benefits payable pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.70(1) are payable for 
an employee “who has sustained an injury resulting in permanent partial or permanent 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 14 
 
 
total disability.  Claimant must also prove that he “cannot return to gainful employment 
because of such disability.”  Iowa Code section 85.70(1). 
In this instance, I have already concluded that claimant remains in a running 
healing period.  Since claimant has not yet achieved MMI, it is not possible or ripe to 
determine whether he has sustained permanent disability.  Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 200.  
Given that a determination of whether claimant sustained permanent disability is not yet 
ripe, claimant cannot establish the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.70(1) at this 
time.  Claimant’s request for vocational weekly benefit payments pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.70(1) is denied at this time because it is not ripe for determination. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  
Claimant has prevailed on the main substantive issue in the case.  I conclude it is 
appropriate to assess his costs in some amount. 
Claimant lists his requested costs at Claimant’s Exhibit 7.  He seeks assessment 
of his filing fee ($100.00) and service fees ($13.80).  Both of these are reasonable costs 
and are assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(3) and (7). 
Mr. Danilson requests that the expense ($200.00) of a report from Cher 
Stephenson be assessed.  He also seeks to have the cost ($1,625.00) of an 
independent medical evaluation report prepared by Dr. Gersh assessed, as well as the 
cost of his vocational expert’s report ($1,864.00).  
Given my findings and conclusions that claimant has not achieved MMI, I did not 
ultimately consider or rely upon any vocational reports because the issue of permanent 
disability is not yet ripe.  Accordingly, I did not find the report or opinions of Ms. Laughlin 
to be insightful or helpful in any way at this stage of the litigation.  I conclude it would not 
be appropriate to assess any of her expenses as a cost. 
However, agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(6) permits assessment of “the reasonable 
costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports.”  The Iowa 
Supreme Court has considered and interpreted this rule.  The Court permits only the 
cost of drafting the report, in lieu of the medical practitioner testifying live or via 
deposition, to be assessed as a cost under 876 IAC 4.33(6).  Des Moines Area 
Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015). 
Review of Ms. Stephenson’s invoice letter suggests that the charges incurred 
were for a 30-minute conference for counsel to discuss the case with Ms. Stephenson.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 126)  Although that conference did result in Ms. Stephenson 
checking some yes or no questions and providing a signature the day after the January 
13, 2021 conference, it appears that Ms. Stephenson’s charges were for the 30-minute 
conference she attended with counsel.  Nothing in the Young case suggests that 
charges for an attorney-provider conference are taxable costs under 876 IAC 4.33(6).  I 
decline to tax these requested costs. 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 15 
 
 
Dr. Gersh’s invoice, on the other hand, itemizes his charges.  Dr. Gersh charged 
$375.00 for preparation of his report.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 127)  This is a taxable cost 
under 876 IAC 4.33(6).  I find Dr. Gersh’s charges to be reasonable and I relied upon 
Dr. Gersh’s opinions in finding that claimant is not at MMI and has viable additional 
treatment options.  Therefore, I tax $375.00 of Dr. Gersh’s report expense as a cost 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
Finally, Mr. Danilson requests that his deposition expense be taxed as a cost.  
Transcription charges are potential costs that can be taxed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2).  
However, in this instance, I found much of the deposition testimony to be repetitious of 
trial testimony.  While the deposition had relevance and provided some additional 
information, I conclude that it was unnecessary to include the deposition transcript as an 
exhibit.  I decline to assess the cost of claimant’s deposition transcript as a cost.  
Therefore, I assess costs totaling $488.80. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant temporary total disability benefits from November 
9, 2018 through the date of the arbitration hearing and continuing into the future until 
claimant returns to work, is capable of performing substantially similar employment, or 
achieves maximum medical improvement, whichever shall occur first. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated rate of eight hundred ninety-
three and 90/100 dollars ($893.90) per week. 
Defendants are entitled to the stipulated credit for weekly benefits paid to 
claimant against the award of temporary total disability benefits. 
If additional weekly benefits are owed after the aforementioned credits are taken 
and applied, all additional accrued benefits shall be paid in lump sum and interest shall 
be payable on the accrued weekly benefits at an annual rate equal to the one-year 
treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 
report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader 
Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Continued mental health therapy or treatment is authorized through or at the 
referral of Cher Stephenson, LMHC. 
Defendants shall pay for all causally related mental health therapy or treatment 
performed through or at the referral of Cher Stephenson, LMHC. 
Future medication management is authorized through Dr. Pospisil or through a 
referral to a psychiatrist by either Dr. Pospisil or Ms. Stephenson, if deemed medically 
appropriate by either of those providers. 
Marital counseling is authorized through Keys to Life in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. 

DANILSON V. COLLEGE COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 16 
 
 
Defendants shall pay for the martial counseling through Keys to Life. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs totaling four hundred eighty-eight 
and 80/100 dollars ($488.80). 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __24th___ day of January, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
Mark Woollums (via WCES) 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division  of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
