Case Number: 20009756.01
Case Title:  MILBRANDT, NANCY V. R.R. DONNELLEY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Milbrandt Nancy-20009756.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NANCY MILBRANDT, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
  File No. 20009756.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
R.R. DONNELLY, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Ace American Insurance, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
           Head Notes:  2300, 2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Nancy Milbrandt, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from R.R. Donnelly, employer and Ace American Insurance, 
insurance carrier, as defendants.  Hearing was held on April 12, 2022.  This case was 
scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  However, due to the 
declaration of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
ordered all hearings to occur via Internet-based video.  Accordingly, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely.     
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed 
in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
 
Nancy Milbrandt was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record also includes claimant’s exhibits 1-8, and defendants’ exhibits A-E.  All exhibits 
were received without objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
arbitration hearing.       
 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on May 20, 2022, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.  
    
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Aug-29  11:08:50     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether this agency has jurisdiction over this case in light of claimant’s 
settlement with the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
 
2. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment, on November 26, 2019. 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability; and if so, the 
nature and extent of entitlement. 
 
4. The appropriate commencement date for any permanency benefits. 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits. 
 
6. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.27. 
 
7. Whether defendants are entitled to any credits against any award. 
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to mileage for the independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
9. Assessment of costs. 
  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
On November 19, 2020, claimant, Ms. Nancy Milbrandt, filed a petition seeking 
workers’ compensation benefits from R.R. Donnelly, employer, and Ace American 
Insurance, insurance carrier, for injuries to her left and right arms and hands which she 
contends were caused by her cumulative work duties.  She has alleged an injury date of 
November 26, 2019.  (Original Notice & Petition; Testimony) 
 
In April 2021, Ms. Milbrandt amended her petition to state a claim against the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa (SIF).  Prior to the arbitration hearing in this matter, Ms. 
Milbrandt and the SIF entered into a compromise settlement pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.35(3).  The parties set forth their settlement in writing on forms prescribed by 
the Commissioner.  This agency approved that settlement on March 23, 2022.  The 
settlement agreement included the November 26, 2019, injury to Ms. Milbrandt’s left 
and right arms and hands.  Claimant does not dispute that the date of injury and the 
subject matter of the settlement with the SIF are the same as the pending litigation.  I 
find the date of injury and the subject matter of the current pending case is the same 

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 3 
 
date of injury and subject matter as the settlement between Ms. Milbrandt and the SIF.    
(Defendants’ Exhibit C; Testimony)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has recognized in Iowa, the right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.  Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 
(Iowa 1992) (citing Caylor v. Employers Mut. Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890, 893 (Iowa 
App. 1983)).  
 
Defendants contend the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner does not 
have jurisdiction over this case because the Commissioner previously approved a 
compromise settlement between this claimant and the SIF involving the same alleged 
injury at issue in this case.  Claimant contends her settlement with SIF was a contract 
between the parties to that settlement and is binding only on the parties to the contract.           
 
Iowa Code section 85.35 addresses settlements and provides: 
1. 
The parties to a contested case or persons who are involved in a 
dispute which could culminate in a contested case may enter into a 
settlement of any claim arising under this chapter or chapter 85A, 85B, or 
86, providing for disposition of the claim. The settlement shall be in writing 
on forms prescribed by the workers' compensation commissioner and 
submitted to the workers' compensation commissioner for approval. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.35(1) 
 
In the present case, approximately three weeks prior to the arbitration hearing, 
claimant settled her claim against the SIF.  Claimant and the SIF set forth their 
settlement in writing on forms prescribed by the Commissioner.  The settlement was 
submitted to the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner for approval and was approved 
on March 23, 2022.  (Def. Ex. C) The SIF claim was settled on a compromise settlement 
basis pursuant to Iowa Code 85.35(3) which states: “[t]he parties may enter into a 
compromise settlement of the employee's claim to benefits as a full and final disposition 
of the claim.”   
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.35(9) provides: 
9.     Approval of a settlement by the workers' compensation commissioner 
is binding on the parties and shall not be construed as an original 
proceeding. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter and chapters 
85A, 85B, 86, and 87, an approved compromise settlement shall 
constitute a final bar to any further rights arising under this chapter 
and chapters 85A, 85B, 86, and 87 regarding the subject matter of the 
compromise and a payment made pursuant to a compromise settlement 

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 4 
 
agreement shall not be construed as the payment of weekly 
compensation. 
Iowa Code section 85.35(9)(emphasis added). 
 
The Commissioner has previously addressed this statutory language in a similar 
situation.  See Ahn v. Key City Transport, Inc., File Number: 5042640, 2015 WL 
5927330 (App. Dec., Oct. 8, 2015).  In Ahn, defendant-employer asserted that the 
section 85.35(3) compromise settlement between claimant and the SIF, which covered 
the same condition that was the subject of the case between the claimant and the 
defendant-employer, deprived this agency of jurisdiction for claimant to re-litigate the 
same condition against the defendant-employer.  In Ahn the Commissioner looked at 
the language of Iowa Code section 85.35(3) and (9).  The Commissioner stated: 
The Iowa Supreme Court interpreted the statutory language, “final bar to 
any further rights,” broadly in United Fire v. St. Paul Fire & Marine, 677 
N.W. 2d 755 (Iowa 2004) The Court concluded that “a compromise special 
case settlement under section 85.33 bars an employer's or it [sic] insurer's 
statutory right to indemnification and contribution under section 
85.21(3).” Id. at p. 761. Had the Court interpreted this statutory language 
narrowly, perhaps it would have found a difference between the subject 
matter of the compromise and the third-party claim. The Supreme Court's 
broad interpretation of the legislative intent to terminate the 
commissioner's jurisdiction of a compromised claim indicates claimant's 
approved compromise settlement with SIF in File No. 5038569 bars his 
claim in this case against defendants. If an employer or its insurer cannot 
sue a third party for an injury resolved by way of a compromise settlement, 
it only stands to reason that a claimant cannot sue his employer and its 
insurer for the same injury previously resolved with the Second Injury 
Fund by way of compromise settlement. 
The settlement documents in claimant’s compromise settlement with SIF 
in File No. 5038569 states the following, in pertinent part, in Paragraph E 
on the second page: 
. . . I am aware that if the Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner approves this compromise settlement and the 
Second Injury Fund pays me the agreed sum, then I am 
barred from future claims or benefits under the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law for the injury(ies) . . . (citation 
omitted). 
That language of the compromise settlement documents in File No. 
5038569, which is form language formulated by this agency, supports 
defendants’ argument that approval of the compromise settlement 
operates as a matter of law to bar the present claim against defendants for 
the same injury claimant previously settled with SIF.  If the legal effect of 
the settlement was to foreclose only future claims against the parties to 

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 5 
 
the settlement itself, the language would contain the following: “… then I 
am barred from future claims or benefits against the Second Injury Fund 
only under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Law for the injury(ies).” 
Analogous to this issue is the controlling law that a claimant cannot 
maintain a claim against SIF if a qualifying injury has previously been the 
subject of an approved compromise settlement.  Ulrick v. Garner Printing 
and Second Injury Fund, File No. 949030 (App. April 29, 1994).  In 
Brislawn v. Chapman, File No. 1073973 (Arb. Dec. September 23, 1999), 
this agency held that a prior special case settlement (n/k/a compromise 
settlement) between the claimant and the employer and its insurer 
constituted a final bar of the claimant’s rights under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, even as against SIF, which was explicitly noted not to 
be released party to the settlement contract.  Id., at p.2.  The deputy 
commissioner in Brislawn stated: 
Pursuant to the special case settlement statute, it is found 
claimant’s settlement constitutes a final bar to any further 
rights under Iowa Code chapter 85 including Second Injury 
Fund benefits under Iowa Code Section 85.64.  Based on a 
review of the file, including official notice taken under Iowa 
Code Section 17A.14(4), it is found the Second Injury Fund’s 
affirmative defense has been established by a 
preponderance of the evidence, and claimant is barred from 
recovery against the Second Injury Fund as a matter of law.  
Ulrick v. Garner Printing and Second Injury Fund, File No. 
949030 App. April 29, 1994); Hilpipre v. Care Initiatives, File 
No. 1057894 (App. September 27, 1997).  See also Lambert 
v. Second Injury Fund, File No. 716025 (App. September 30, 
1983). 
See Ahn, File Number: 5042640, 2015 WL 5927330, at *6-7 (App. Dec., Oct. 8, 2015). 
 
In Ahn, the Commissioner determined that the language of the compromise 
settlement documents was not specific enough and supported defendants’ argument 
that approval of the compromise settlement operated as a matter of law to bar the claim 
against the defendants for the same injury.  Regardless of the settlement language, the 
Commissioner further concluded that the compromise settlement between claimant and 
the SIF operated as a matter of law to deprive the agency of jurisdiction for claimant to 
re-litigate the same injury against the defendants that was the subject of the settlement 
with the SIF; the Commissioner concluded the settlement served as a second basis for 
dismissing claimant’s petition.  Id. at 8. 
 
In the present case, Ms. Milbrandt contends that the language in the compromise 
settlement with the SIF preserved her claim against the defendant-employer.  The 
settlement states: 

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 6 
 
6.  RELEASE.  In consideration of this payment, claimant releases and 
discharges the above-named defendant Second Injury Fund of Iowa from 
all liability under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Law for the above 
compromised claim. 
7.  STATEMENT OF AWARENESS OF CLAIMANT.  I have read the 
compromise settlement and attached page(s).  I understand that the 
money I receive under this settlement is the total amount I will receive 
from my claim and against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa and that there 
will not be a decision on my claim against the Second InjuryFund [sic].  I 
understand I may (1) consult with an attorney of my own choosing, or (2) 
call the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation at 1-800-645-4583, or 
both in order to receive a full explanation of the terms of this document 
and of my rights under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Law.  I have 
either done so or freely waive my right to do so.  I understand that my 
claim is settled as to the Second injury Fund, other than as set out in the 
attachment.   
(Defendants’ Exhibit C, pp. 12-13) 
 
In Ahn, the Commissioner held the settlement language was not specific enough 
to foreclose only future claims against the parties to the settlement itself.  In the present 
case, the settlement language the parties inserted into the Commissioner’s settlement 
form is similar to the language used in Ahn.  It does state the claimant releases and 
discharges” the “Second Injury Fund of Iowa from all liability,” but it does not say the 
“Second Injury Fund of Iowa only.”  Based on the language of Ahn, I conclude that this 
language used by the parties in the settlement form supports defendants’ argument that 
approval of the comprise settlement operates as a matter of law to bar the present claim 
against the defendants for the same injury claimant previously settled with SIF.    
 
The settlement with the SIF includes an “Attachment to Settlement” which was 
submitted and approved by the Commissioner as part of the settlement.  The 
attachment states in pertinent part, “Further, the parties agree that in settlement of this 
claim with the Second Injury Fund, Plaintiff does not in any way compromise or waive 
Plaintiff’s entitlement to benefits against the Employer and its insurer in File No. 
20009756.01 pending before the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Court.”  (Def. Ex. C, p. 
14) The attachment is not part of the form language formulated by the agency and 
presumably was drafted by the parties to the settlement.  This language may be strong 
enough to preserve the claim against an employer if such preservation was possible 
under the law.  However, such preservation is not possible because in Ahn, the 
Commissioner concluded the compromise settlement between the claimant and the SIF 
operated as a matter of law to deprive this agency of jurisdiction for claimant to re-
litigate that same condition against the defendant-employer.  See id. at p.8.  The 
Commissioner noted a compromise settlement constitutes a final bar to any further 
rights under chapter 85 regarding the subject matter of the compromise.  Id. (citing 
Brislawn v. Chapman, File No. 1073973 (Arb. Dec. September 23, 1999)).  Thus, I 
conclude the compromise settlement between Ms. Milbrandt and SIF operates as a 

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 7 
 
matter of law to deprive this agency of jurisdiction for her to re-litigate the same 
condition against the defendant-employer.    
 
It should be noted there is a more recent decision from the Commissioner related 
to this issue.  See Tweeten v. Tweeten d/b/a Tweeten Farms, File No. 20700058.01 
(App. May 20, 2022).   
 
In Tweeten, the claimant filed a petition against the defendant employer and its 
insurance carrier (“the defendants”) and a claim against the SIF.  Tweeten sought 
permanent partial disability benefits from the defendants for an alleged scheduled loss 
to the right upper extremity.  Tweeten sought industrial disability benefits from the SIF 
for the combined disability caused by the injury to his right lower extremity in 2008, and 
the 2018 work-related injury to his right upper extremity.  Shortly before the arbitration 
hearing, the SIF notified the agency that the SIF and the claimant had reached a 
settlement and therefore the SIF would not participate in the hearing.  Claimant 
proceeded to hearing against the employer and its workers’ compensation insurance 
carrier.  In the arbitration decision the deputy found claimant established that his injury 
to his right upper extremity was work-related and he was entitled to permanency 
benefits.  Defendants timely filed an application for rehearing.  (Tweeten v. Tweeten 
d/b/a Tweeten Farms, File No. 20700058.01 (Arb. Dec., September 17, 2021).   
   
In their application for rehearing defendants argued that claimant’s compromise 
settlement with the SIF deprived the agency of subject matter jurisdiction to hear the 
claim between the claimant and employer and insurance carrier.  Defendants sought 
rehearing because the issue was not addressed in the arbitration decision1.  In the 
rehearing decision, the deputy held that the defendants’ contention that the agency 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the case was without support in fact or law.  The 
deputy concluded the correct issue was whether the agency had jurisdiction of the case, 
not subject matter jurisdiction.  The deputy held that because the defendants did not 
raise the issue of jurisdiction until their post-hearing brief, defendants had waived the 
issue.  Furthermore, the deputy held that even if defendants had not waived the issue of 
jurisdiction, the defendants’ contention the SIF settlement barred an action against the 
employer was without merit and had no basis in law.  As part of the deputy’s analysis, 
he distinguished the Ahn case from the facts in Tweeten and found Ahn was not 
applicable. See Tweeten, File No. 20700058.01 (Ruling on Motion for Rehearing Dec., 
October 13, 2021).  The defendants appealed.      
 
On appeal, the Commissioner affirmed the deputy’s finding that the issue of the 
compromise settlement did not relate to the agency’s subject matter jurisdiction over the 
case, but rather involved the agency’s authority to hear the case.  In the appeal decision 
the Commissioner issued “additional and substituted analysis.”  The Commissioner 
agreed with the deputy’s conclusion that the correct issue was whether the agency had 
jurisdiction of the case, not subject matter jurisdiction of the case.  The Commissioner 
                                                 
1 The SIF filed a notice of intent to settle on February 15, 2021 which merely advised that the claimant and 
the SIF had reached a settlement and that the SIF would not be present at the arbitration hearing.  The arbitration 
hearing was held on March 10, 2021.  The settlement between Tweeten and the SIF was approved by this agency on 
April 23, 2021.  Thus, at the time of the arbitration hearing the settlement papers had not been filed with and 
approved by this agency.   

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 8 
 
further concluded that the defendants waived the issue of whether the agency had 
jurisdiction of the case because the issue was not raised at the time of the hearing.  In 
the appeal decision, the Commissioner made no determination as to whether the 
compromise settlement between the claimant and the SIF would operate as a matter of 
law to deprive this agency of jurisdiction for claimant to re-litigate those same conditions 
and same date of injury against the defendants in this case, if the issue of jurisdiction 
had not been waived.  In the substituted analysis of the Tweeten appeal decision the 
Commissioner does not mention the Ahn decision which suggests that Ahn is still good 
law.  See Tweeten v. Tweeten d/b/a Tweeten Farms, File No. 20700058.01 (App. May 
20, 2022).   
  
We now turn to the case at bar.  The situation in Ahn is applicable to the present 
case.  In this case, the claimant entered into a compromise settlement under section 
85.35(3) with the SIF.  The settlement included her alleged November 26, 2019 injury to 
her right and left hands and upper extremities.  In the pending case, Ms. Milbrandt is 
seeking benefits under Iowa Code chapter 85 for the same alleged date of injury and 
the same conditions for which she entered into a settlement with the SIF.  The 
Commissioner approved the compromise settlement between the claimant and the SIF.  
The statutory language of Iowa Code 85.35(9) plainly states an approved compromise 
settlement shall constitute a final bar of any further rights arising under chapter 85 
regarding the subject matter of the compromise.  I conclude that when Ms. Milbrandt 
entered into the settlement agreement with the SIF, under Iowa Code section 85.35, 
she agreed that the settlement constituted a final bar to any further rights she had under 
chapter 85 regarding the subject matter of the compromise.  The date of injury and the 
conditions she seeks compensation for against the defendants in this case were the 
subject matter of the compromise settlement. Thus, under Ahn, the compromise 
settlement between the claimant and the SIF operates as a matter of law to deprive this 
agency of jurisdiction for claimant to re-litigate those same conditions and same date of 
injury against the defendants in this case.  Claimant cannot sue her employer and its 
insurer for the same injury previously resolved with the SIF by way of compromise 
settlement.  
 
Because this agency lacks jurisdiction over this case, claimant’s claim is 
dismissed.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant’s arbitration petition is dismissed. 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 

MILBRANDT V. R.R. DONNELLY 
Page 9 
 
Signed and filed this ___29th __ day of August, 2022. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Paul Demro (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer (via WCES) 
Tyler Smith (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
