Case Number: 19007252.01
Case Title:  FLEMING, CRAIG V. GNA TRUCKING LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Fleming Craig-19007252.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
CRAIG FLEMING, 
File No. 19007252.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
GNA TRUCKING, LLC, 
 ARBITRATION D EC ISION 
 
Employer, 
FIRSTCOMP INSURANCE COMPANY, 
Headnotes:  1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Craig Fleming seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer GNA Trucking, LLC (GNA) and insurance carrier FirstComp 
Insurance Company (FirstComp). The undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing 
held on January 25, 2023. Fleming participated personally and through attorney John 
Lawyer. The defendants participated by and through attorney Timothy W. Wegman. The 
case was fully submitted on February 27, 2023, with the filing of the parties’ post-
hearing briefs. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability caused by the alleged 
injury under Iowa Code section 85.34? 
2) What is the commencement date for permanent disability benefits under 
Iowa Code section 85.34? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Aug-04  10:52:00     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 2 
 
3) Is Fleming entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
4) Is Fleming entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants under Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.33? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Fleming and GNA at the 
time of the stipulated injury. 
2) Fleming sustained an injury on December 9, 2019, which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment with GNA. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, but Fleming’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits is 
no longer in dispute. 
4) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5) At the time of the stipulated injury, Fleming: 
a) Had gross earnings of $926.54 per week. 
b) Was married. 
c) Was entitled to five exemptions. 
6) From December 10, 2019, and continuing, the defendants paid to Fleming 
weekly compensation. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE-1 through JE-4; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 2;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through D; and 
 Hearing testimony by Fleming.  

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 3 
 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, 
the undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
At the time of hearing, Fleming was 63 years of age. (Hrg. Tr. p. 31) Fleming 
earned his diploma from Abraham Lincoln High School in Des Moines, Iowa. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
10) Fleming attended the Lincoln Technical Institute, an automotive school, and 
obtained a certificate. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 10–11) Fleming then enlisted in the Marine Corps 
where he worked as a mechanic. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) 
After Fleming’s honorable discharge from the Marine Corps, he worked various 
warehouse jobs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) Fleming worked for a chemical company for a few 
years. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) He worked at the Iowa State Fair, cooking in the grandstand, a 
couple of times. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) Fleming also performed odd jobs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) It is 
more likely than not based on the totality of the evidence Fleming is physically unable to 
return to warehouse jobs, working for the chemical company, or performing odd jobs 
due to the work injury and the disability it caused. 
Fleming worked at Liberty Hardwoods for about nine years. (Hrg. Tr. p. 12) He 
worked in the warehouse where he moved lumber by hand and using a forklift. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 12) His job duties required operating a forklift, lifting, pushing, and pulling. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
12) Fleming estimated he had to lift as much as seventy pounds in that job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
12) He credibly testified at hearing that he would be unable to perform the job due to the 
stipulated work injury and resulting disability limiting his physical ability to perform the 
job duties. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 12–13) The weight of the evidence establishes Fleming could 
not return to this job because of the functional limitations caused by the stipulated work 
injury. 
Fleming next worked as a bus driver for about a year for Durham Schools, a 
company with which the Waukee Community School District contracted. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13) 
He drove a school bus for about a year, transporting children to and from school. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 13) A part of that job included being able to evacuate the children from the bus if 
needed. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 13–14) It is more likely than not that Fleming’s permanent 
functional limitations caused by the stipulated work injury would prevent him from 
returning to this job. 
JMT hired Fleming as a dump truck driver. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) He drove the truck, 
picked up materials, sometimes used a shovel, and cleaned out the truck. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
14) Fleming estimated that he had to lift as much as fifty pounds in that job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
14) JMT discharged Fleming after he backed into another vehicle because it was 
company policy to terminate the employment of any employee whose negligence 
caused an accident. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) Because of the functional limitations caused by the 
stipulated work injury, Fleming was unable to perform this job at the time of hearing. 
After JMT, Fleming obtained employment driving a cement truck at CTI Concrete, 
where he worked for about two years. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) The job duties were more 
physically demanding than driving a dump truck and he made more money. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
15) For example, Fleming had to perform more lifting at CTI. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15)  

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 4 
 
While working for CTI, Fleming had a truck stolen and was struck by a vehicle 
while attempting to chase down the culprit. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) The incident caused an injury 
to Fleming’s knee that prevented him from being able to perform his job duties at CTI 
and while he was willing to work, CTI did not have work that he could perform given his 
limitations due to the injury. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 26–27) Fleming’s boss advised him to file a 
claim with the Division of Unemployment Insurance Services at Iowa Workforce 
Development (IWD) for unemployment insurance (UI) benefits and Fleming did so. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 26)  
On the claim form, Fleming indicated he was able and available for work. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 26) The agency initially awarded him UI benefits, but ultimately reversed its 
decision and concluded it had overpaid him benefits because he was not able and 
available for work. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 26–27) Fleming believes, and the record shows it is 
more likely than not, that he could perform some work at that time, just not all of the job 
duties he was performing before his injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27)  
Nonetheless, IWD recommended Fleming for prosecution based on the 
allegation he made a misrepresentation on his claim for UI benefits and he ultimately 
entered a guilty plea. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) At the time of hearing, he had paid about 
$10,000.00 in restitution to IWD. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) The undersigned concludes Fleming 
believed in good faith that he was eligible for UI benefits at the time he filed his claim 
because his boss advised him to apply and he was able to perform some work despite 
his injury, and he did not intend to receive benefits to which he was not entitled. The 
undersigned draws no negative inference with respect to Fleming’s credibility from this 
incident. 
Later in Fleming’s tenure with CTI, he injured his back. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) Because 
of the pain, Fleming took two pills of Vicodin he had from an old prescription on a Friday 
night after work to help alleviate his pain and then tested positive for Vicodin on the 
following Monday on a random drug test. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17) CTI discharged Fleming 
because of the positive drug test. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17) Fleming was physically incapable 
of performing the duties of a CTI cement truck driver at the time of hearing because of 
the functional limitations caused by the stipulated work injury. 
GNA hired Fleming as a truck driver. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) On December 9, 2019, a 
winter storm came through the Des Moines metro area. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) Fleming’s boss 
instructed him to return to the shop because the weather was too bad to drive. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 17) Fleming’s next memory is waking up at the hospital. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17)  
Fleming was involved in a multiple-vehicle car crash on the interstate near 
Mitchellville, Iowa. (Ex. JE-2, p. 24) Fleming was transported to the Mercy Hospital and 
when he woke up there, he could not move anything. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18; Ex. JE-2, p. 24) 
Fleming was diagnosed with a spinal cord injury at C5-6, a traumatic disk injury at C7-
T1, and facial lacerations. (Ex. JE-2, pp. 23–29). Because of Fleming’s severe spinal 
cord injury, he underwent emergency surgery on his back consisting of anterior cervical 
discectomy and arthrodesis at C5-C6 and C7-T1, placement of intervertebral 
biomechanical devices at C5-C6 and C7-T1, anterior cervical plating between C5 and 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 5 
 
T1, and use of morselized allograft. (Ex. JE-2, pp. 23–26). Fleming also underwent 
surgery to repair his facial lacerations. (Ex. JE-2, pp. 27–29) 
Ultimately, providers transferred Fleming to a rehabilitation hospital by 
ambulance. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) While at the facility, he participated in physical therapy and 
occupational therapy for several hours daily. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18–19) Fleming found the 
intensive therapy regimen there very helpful. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) 
The defendants arranged for Fleming to undergo an independent medical 
examination (IME) with Robert Broghammer, M.D., on May 17, 2021. (Ex. JE-3, p. 36) 
Dr. Broghammer performed a records review and examination of Fleming, then issued 
an IME report dated May 21, 2021. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 36–43) Dr. Broghammer opined on 
multiple questions probative in reaching a determination of the issues disputed between 
the parties. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 43–47) 
On the question of maximum medical improvement (MMI), Dr. Broghammer 
opined that Fleming reached MMI on December 17, 2020, because that “is the point in 
time when the worker followed up with [Ai Huong Phu, D.O.] with a recent MRI showing 
essentially normal findings without any evidence of hydronephrosis or nephrology 
disease” and it was “the point in time that the worker’s back pain had gotten 
substantially better, and he was sleeping throughout the night without waking up as 
often.” (Ex. JE-3, p. 44) Fleming credibly testified that he had plateaued in terms of his 
recovery about a year out from his December 9, 2019 surgery. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 35–36) The 
weight of the evidence establishes that Fleming reached MMI on December 17, 2020. 
Dr. Broghammer opined that Fleming sustained a permanent partial impairment 
(PPI) from the stipulated work injury and used the Fifth Edition of the American Medical 
Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides)1 to opine as 
to its extent. (Ex. JE-3, p. 44) He used Table 13-15, “Criteria for Rating Impairments due 
to Station and Gait Disorders,” to place Fleming into Class 3 because Fleming can rise 
and maintain standing position with difficulty but cannot walk without assistance. (Ex. 
JE-3, p. 44; Guides, p. 336) According to the table, the range of PPI for an individual in 
Class 3 is 20 to 39 percent and Dr. Broghammer assigned Fleming a 30 percent 
impairment of the whole person under the table. (Ex. JE-3, p. 44; Guides, p. 336) 
Dr. Broghammer then consulted Table 13-17, “Criteria for Rating Impairments of 
Two Upper Extremities,” to place Fleming in Class 2, for individuals that can use both 
upper extremities for self-care and can grasp and hold objects with difficulty but has no 
digital dexterity. (Ex. JE-3, p. 44; Guides, p. 340) Under the table, Class 2 has a PPI 
                                                 
1 In 2017, the legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act to require, under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(x), “In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through 
“u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the [Guides], 
published by the American medical association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner 
by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.” Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—2.4 adopts the Fifth Edition of the 
Guides for use in workers’ compensation cases. In this decision, all references to the Guides are to the 
Fifth Edition unless otherwise noted. 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 6 
 
range between 20 and 39 percent to the whole person. (Ex. JE-3, p. 44; Guides, p. 340) 
Because Fleming demonstrated difficulty in range of motion of the left shoulder on 
examination, Dr. Broghammer assigned him a 39 percent impairment to the whole body. 
(Ex. JE-3, p. 44) 
Section 13.7 of the Guides, “Criteria for Rating Spinal Cord and Related 
Impairments,” addresses the respiratory, anorectal, urinary, and sexual systems. (Ex. 
JE-3, p. 45; Guides, pp. 340–42) Dr. Broghammer noted Fleming had no issue with his 
bladder and no troubles with respiration, so he opined Fleming had no PPI under the 
table. (Ex. JE-3, p. 45) Using Table 13-20, “Criteria for Rating Neurologic Anorectal 
Impairment,” Dr. Broghammer placed Fleming in Class 1 and assigned him a 10 percent 
whole person impairment because he had “some reflex regulation but only limited 
voluntary control.” (Ex. JE-3, p. 45) Using Table 13-21, “Criteria for Rating Neurologic 
Sexual Impairment,” Dr. Broghammer placed Fleming in Class 3 and assigned a 20 
percent PPI to the whole person because has no sexual function. (Ex. JE-3, p. 45) 
Dr. Broghammer then used the Combined Values Chart on pages 604 and 605 of 
the Guides to combine the values of the multiple PPI ratings: 
39% upper extremity impairment related to neurologic disorders combined 
with 30% for lower extremity impairment related to his neurologic 
disorders would equate to a 57% whole person impairment. A 57% whole 
person impairment combined with 20% impairment for sexual functioning 
yields a 66% whole person impairment. A 66% whole person impairment 
combined with 10% whole person impairment for the worker’s anorectal 
impairment yields a 69% whole person impairment. 
(Ex. JE-3, p. 45) 
Dr. Broghammer opined on permanent work restrictions thusly: 
Mr. Fleming would have extensive work restrictions. Given his age and 
education, I am not sure what gainful employment Mr. Fleming could 
complete. He cannot use his hands for writing or typing or any fine motor 
control. He can only use them on in gross manner. He is limited in his left 
upper extremity use, and so he could not do any at or above shoulder 
level work. He has weakness in all four extremities due to his cervical cord 
injury, and I do not think he could reasonably lift more than 10 pounds in a 
work setting. He certainly cannot stand or walk to any degree for work 
because he requires assistance from an individual as well as the use of a 
cane. He would be confined to his motorized wheelchair. He cannot write. 
He cannot balance. He cannot stoop, squat, crawl, crouch, or kneel. He 
cannot climb ladders. He cannot climb stairs. He cannot do any pushing or 
pulling to any significant degree. 
In my medical opinion, if Mr. Fleming were trained as a psychiatrist or an 
attorney or had some type of training such as a motivational speaker, he 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 7 
 
may be able to return to some type of speaking work. In my medical 
opinion, this is likely the only gainful employment activity that Mr. Fleming 
could do, and that would be talking. He is so physically debilitated from 
this injury that I do not think there is anything physical that he could 
reasonably do from a gainful employment perspective, and I highly doubt 
he would be able to find work in a competitive workforce. Again, if Mr. 
Fleming could work in a capacity with speaking, he might be able to do 
this, but this is the only gainful employment activity that I think he could 
reasonably complete given his significant injuries. As noted previously, 
unfortunately, he does not have formal training in psychology, psychiatry, 
law or any other field that would require . . . the use of his mind, and I 
highly doubt he would find anything in the competitive workforce. 
(Ex. JE-3, pp. 46–47) 
With respect to future care, Dr. Broghammer recommended Fleming continue 
care with Dr. Phu “for ongoing pain management to include but not necessarily limited 
to his baclofen as well as his chemodenervation with Botox up to four times yearly.” (Ex. 
JE-3, p. 46) He also recommended supplies and equipment for anorectal dysfunction, 
bracing devices as needed, and additional home equipment such as a bed with an 
adjustable mattress or mechanical lift to help with transfers. (Ex. JE-3, p. 46) Dr. 
Broghammer made clear that these are foreseeable needs and other needs may arise. 
(Ex. JE-3, p. 46) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Fleming to undergo an IME with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., an occupational medicine specialist, on August 5, 2022, in Urbandale, Iowa. (Ex. 
JE-1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal performed a records review and in-person examination, then 
issued a report dated October 27, 2022, in which he answered multiple questions posed 
by claimant’s counsel. (Ex. JE-1) Dr. Bansal agreed with the diagnoses Fleming 
received from his care providers and Dr. Broghammer. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 18–19) 
On the question of PPI to Fleming’s face, Dr. Bansal opined, “With reference to 
[the Guides], Fifth Edition, specifically Table 8.2, Mr. Fleming meets the criteria of a 
Class 1 impairment. For his facial scarring he is assigned a 5% whole person 
impairment.” (Ex. JE-1, p. 20; Guides, p. 178)  
Dr. Bansal addressed PPI in activities of daily living (excluding work) to the rest 
of Fleming’s body as follows: 
Mr. Fleming has corticospinal tract impairment from his cervical spine 
condition related to his December 9, 2019 injury. Guidance for this 
condition is provided per the [Guides], Fifth Edition, Section 15.7. 
For Mr. Fleming, six rating categories are combined for the total 
impairment. 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 8 
 
First is the DRE Category per Table 15-5. With reference to the [Guides], 
Fifth Edition, specifically Table 15-5, we find that Mr. Fleming meets 
criteria from DRE Category IV. He is status post anterior cervical 
discectomy and arthrodesis at C5-C6 and C7-T1, placement of 
intervertebral biomechanical devices at C5-C6 and C7-T1, anterior 
cervical plating between C5 and T1, and use of morselized allograft. He 
has been left with spastic quadriplegia and limited use of his upper and 
lower extremities. He is assigned a 28% whole person impairment[.] 
(Ex. JE-1, pp. 20–21) 
The legislature has mandated use of the Guides when determining the extent of 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment. This makes the Guides dispositive on the 
question of permanent impairment when determining the extent of disability and 
entitlement to benefits for such. In Section 15.6, “DRE: Cervical Spine,” the Guides 
explain how to use Table 15-5 when evaluating permanent impairment, stating, “If the 
cervical spine problem is due to corticospinal tract involvement, use Table 15-6 alone.” 
Guides, p. 392.  
Dr. Bansal states, “Fleming has corticospinal tract impairment from his cervical 
spine condition related to his December 9, 2019 injury.” (Ex. JE-1, p. 20) He then uses 
Table 15-5, “Criteria for Rating Impairment Due to Cervical Disorders,” in addition to 
Table 15-6. This is contrary to the directive in the Guides to “use Table 15-6 alone” if the 
individual’s “cervical spine problem is due to corticospinal tract involvement.” Guides, p. 
392. Therefore, the portion of Dr. Bansal’s permanent impairment rating using Table 15-
5 is rejected because it does not adhere to the Guides. 
Dr. Bansal assigned Fleming the following PPI ratings using Table 15-6: 
For his upper extremity dysfunction, per Table 15-6b he meets the criteria 
of a Class 3 impairment as he has no functional use of his upper 
extremities and is assigned a 79% whole person impairment. 
For his station and gait disorder, per Table 15-6c we find that he meets 
the criteria for Class 3 impairment, as he utilizes a wheelchair and cane 
for ambulation. Therefore, I assign a 39% whole person impairment rating. 
For his neurological bladder, per 15[-]6d he meets the criteria for a Class 1 
impairment, as he has intermittent incontinence and does require periodic 
catheterization. He is assigned a 9% whole person impairment.  
For his neurogenic bowel, per 15[-]6e he meets the criteria for a Class 1 
impairment, but he does require frequent enemas. He is assigned a 19% 
whole person impairment. 
For his sexual impairment, per 15[-]6f he is assigned a 20% impairment of 
the body as a whole for having no sexual function. 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 9 
 
(Ex. JE-1, p. 21)  
Dr. Bansal offered the following assessment in response to questions about what 
activities Fleming should avoid and whether he has the ability to work: 
Mr. Fleming has no practical function of his hands, and markedly restricted 
ambulation. In this case, rather than enumerating a list of activities that Mr. 
Fleming should avoid, the list of activities that he is able to perform is far 
shorter, and in this case no practical function is noted. 
**** 
Mr. Fleming does not have the ability to be gainfully employed. He lacks 
functionality of his hands, and has markedly limited ambulatory ability. He 
has frequent bowel incontinence. It would not be practical or feasible for 
Mr. Fleming to be employed. 
(Ex. JE-1, pp. 21–22) 
At the time of hearing, Fleming was receiving ongoing care. Dr. Phu manages 
Fleming’s prescription medications and administers Botox injections, which help loosen 
up Fleming’s muscles. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 20–21) Dan Moyse, M.D., a pain management 
specialist, administers trigger point injections in his lower back to stimulate the muscles 
and reduce his pain. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22; Ex. JE-3, pp. 49–57) 
Before the stipulated work injury, Fleming’s wife, Rhonda, was working as a 
dispatcher for a towing company in Des Moines. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) The crash and resulting 
disability caused her to quit her job and become his primary caretaker. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) 
She helps Fleming get in and out of his wheelchair, bathe, get dressed, complete 
personal care activities, use the restroom, with his medication, and to prepare his 
meals. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 19–20, 30–31) They also periodically have a caretaker help Rhonda 
out with Fleming’s needs. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 25–26) The Flemings’ grandchildren assist him 
as well. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 29–30) 
In the week before hearing, Fleming was hospitalized because doctors thought 
he was having a stroke. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) However, it turned out he was just experiencing 
a bad migraine, was dehydrated, and his blood pressure was low. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 22–23) 
Migraines are a common and random occurrence in Fleming’s life after the crash. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 23) 
Before the crash, Fleming had no issues with body temperature regulation. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 24) Since the crash, Fleming feels cold all of the time. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) He needs a 
blanket even when the temperature is in the 90s. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) Fleming’s muscles 
tighten when they get cold. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) His hands are regularly tight; however, when 
cold, his hands tighten into an extremely tight fist. (Hrg. Tr. p. 25)  

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 10 
 
At the time of hearing, Fleming had a valid driver’s license. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) He 
attended school to learn how to drive with hand controls and his vehicle is equipped 
with them. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) No doctor has told Fleming that he is physically incapable for 
driving. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) 
Fleming primarily uses an electric wheelchair for mobility. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) He 
uses it when he leaves his residence. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) Around the house, Fleming walks 
with a cane and his wife’s assistance. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) 
At the time of hearing, Fleming would have good days and bad days with respect 
to his physical capabilities. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) Some days, he spends the majority of his 
waking time in bed. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) This worsens his depression. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) 
Fleming did not look for work between the date of the stipulated work injury and 
the 2022 Iowa State Fair. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 33–34) Fleming saw a job listing online for the 
State Fair, applied, and got the job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34–35) During the State Fair, Fleming 
could not use the scanner to scan tickets because he was physically incapable of 
pulling the trigger to activate the scanner, so they assigned him to work at the gate 
stamping fairgoers hands if they wanted re-entry. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34, 36–37) The State Fair 
effectively accommodated Fleming by eliminating the requirement that he scan tickets 
and allowing him to only stamp fairgoers as they exited.  
Fleming credibly testified that he never intended to go without a job and that he 
would love to work despite his disability. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) Fleming also credibly testified 
that, before the stipulated work injury, he intended to work until he was 70 or could no 
longer work. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) If he would have been capable of working past the age of 
70, he would have. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 28–29) 
In the determination of the extent of permanent impairment, the disfigurement of 
Fleming’s face must be considered. Section 8.2 of the Guides, entitled “Disfigurement,” 
defines “skin disfigurement” for its purposes to mean, 
an altered or abnormal appearance that may be an alteration of color, 
shape, or structure, or a combination of these. Disfigurement may be a 
residual of injury or disease, or it may accompany a recurrent or ongoing 
disorder. Examples of disfigurement include giant pigmented nevi, nevus 
flammeus, cavernous hemangioma, and pigmentation alteration. 
Disfigurement usually has no effect on body function and may have little or 
no effect on the ability to perform activities of daily living, except if the 
disfigurement causes social rejection or an unfavorable self-image with 
self-imposed isolation, lifestyle alteration, or other behavioral changes. 
Guides, pp. 175–76.  
The Guides direct an evaluator of permanent impairment to use Table 8-2, 
“Criteria for Rating Permanent Impairment Due to Skin Disorders,” when rating the 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 11 
 
impairment caused by disfigurement. Id. at pp. 176, 178. When using Table 8-2, the 
Guides instruct: 
The signs and symptoms of disorders in classes 1, 2, and 3 may be 
intermittent and not present at the time of examination. Consider the 
impact of the skin disorder on the ability to perform activities of daily living 
(see Table 1-2) in determining the class of impairment. Consider the 
frequency and intensity of signs and symptoms (i.e., severity) and the 
frequency and complexity of medical treatment when selecting an 
appropriate impairment percentage and estimate within any class (see 
Introduction). 
Id. at 178 (Table 8-2 Asterisk). 
Class 1 on the table is used when the following criteria are met: 
Skin disorder signs and symptoms present or intermittently present 
and 
no or few limitations in performance of activities of daily living; exposure to 
certain chemical or physical agents may temporarily increase limitation 
and 
requires no or intermittent treatment 
Id. at p. 178 (bold-face and italics used in original). 
Dr. Broghammer did not assign Fleming an impairment rating for the 
disfigurement of his face caused by the vehicle crash. Neither did any of Fleming’s 
treating physicians. However, none of these doctors opined Fleming did not sustain a 
permanent impairment under Table 8-2. The undersigned finds Dr. Bansal’s opinion on 
permanent impairment for the facial disfigurement persuasive because Fleming meets 
the criteria set forth in the Guides, Table 8-2, for Class 1. It is more likely than not 
Fleming sustained a permanent impairment of 5 percent to the whole body due to the 
facial disfigurement caused by the stipulated work injury. 
Moving to Fleming’s spinal cord injury, when comparing Dr. Bansal’s opinion on 
PPI to that of Dr. Broghammer, the notable difference is the former uses Table 15-6 and 
the latter uses tables in Chapter 13. The cause for their different references is 
discussed in the Guides: 
In prior editions of the Guides, rating spinal cord injury was done either 
through a combination of DRE categories or in the nervous system 
chapter. It was decided in this edition to evaluate spinal cord injuries 
based on the criteria in the nervous system chapter (Chapter 13). These 
criteria are repeated in this section. For bilateral neurologic or 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 12 
 
corticospinal tract damage, consultation with a spinal cord injury specialist 
and review of Chapter 13, The Central and Peripheral Nervous System, is 
recommended. Thus, for an individual with a spinal cord injury affecting 
the upper extremities, use Table 15-6 and the appropriate impairment 
rating for impairment of one or both upper extremities. For impairments 
involving the loss of use of the lower extremities, use the section in Table 
15-6 pertaining to station and gait impairment. If there is additional bowel 
or bladder dysfunction, combine the upper extremity or lower extremity 
loss with impairments in bladder, anorectal, and/or neurologic sexual 
impairment as warranted. 
Once a class has been selected, the exact value is obtained by combining 
the value with the corresponding additional impairment from DRE 
categories II through V for cervical lumbar impairment and DRE categories 
II through IV for thoracic impairment. An exact value is determined based 
on degree of impairment of [activities of daily living]. 
Guides, p. 396. Example 15-17 provides an illustrative example of a man who sustained 
a vertebral fracture with corticospinal tract involvement, which means “he should be 
rated using the neurology tables.” Id. at 397. 
Thus, Dr. Bansal did not use the neurology tables, as the Guides instruct, and Dr. 
Broghammer did. Nonetheless, their ratings largely used the same standards because 
the Guides published them in both Chapter 13 and Chapter 15. Thus, the two experts 
used the same guidelines in their opinions, even if they are found in different chapters 
and tables of the Guides. 
The duo’s opinions diverge most widely on the question of permanent impairment 
to the upper extremities. While both doctors placed Fleming in Class 3, “Individual can 
use both upper extremities but has difficulty with self-care,” Dr. Bansal concluded 
Fleming had “no functional use of his upper extremities,” which seems more in line with 
Class 4, “Individual cannot use upper extremities,” and assigned him a 79 percent 
impairment rate. In contrast, Dr. Broghammer placed Fleming in Class 2, “Individual can 
use both upper extremities for self-care, can grasp and hold objects with difficulty, but 
has no digital dexterity,” and assigned him 39 percent permanent impairment, the 
highest allowed in this category.  
The evidence shows that Fleming is properly categorized in Class 3, as Dr. 
Bansal opined, because while “he can use both upper extremities,” he nonetheless “has 
difficulty with self-care activities.” Fleming’s difficulty is such that he requires assistance 
from family members, and occasionally a professional, with self-care activities. 
Therefore, Dr. Bansal’s 79 percent impairment rating is adopted because it is supported 
by the weight of the evidence in the record. 
With respect to Fleming’s station and gait disorder, Dr. Bansal placed him in 
Class 3, “Rises and maintains standing position with difficulty; cannot walk without 
assistance,” and assigned him a 39 percent whole person impairment rating, the highest 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 13 
 
allowed in that class under the tables. Dr. Broghammer similarly placed Fleming in 
Class 3, but opined his impairment rating was 30 percent. The evidence here shows 
that while Fleming can stand, he rarely walks, even with assistance, outside the home. 
His primary means of getting around is using his electronic wheelchair. Consequently, 
Dr. Bansal’s opinion is more persuasive and is adopted. It is more likely than not 
Fleming sustained a 39 percent whole person impairment for the station and gait 
disorder caused by the stipulated work injury. 
On the neurologic impairment of Fleming’s bladder, Dr. Bansal opined Fleming 
had a 9 percent impairment because of “intermittent incontinence” and “periodic 
catheterization” occurring approximately once every six months. In contrast, Dr. 
Broghammer assigned an impairment rating of zero percent because he had no issue 
with his bladder or respiration. Requiring periodic catheterization, even once every six 
months on average, shows Dr. Broghammer’s assessment that he has no issue with his 
bladder is incorrect. Fleming has “intermittent incontinence,” which means Dr. Bansal 
properly categorized him in Class 1. Dr. Bansal’s 9 percent impairment rating is 
adopted. 
Both experts classified Fleming’s neurologic anorectal impairment as falling 
under Class 1, for individuals with “reflex regulation but only limited voluntary control.” 
Dr. Bansal assigned a 19 percent whole person impairment because Fleming requires 
frequent enemas. Dr. Broghammer opined Fleming had a 10 percent impairment 
without explanation. Dr. Bansal’s reasoning based on Fleming requiring enemas is more 
persuasive. Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating is adopted. 
On the question of neurologic sexual impairment, the experts agreed. Both 
assigned Fleming a 20 percent whole body impairment because has no sexual function. 
Their consensus impairment rating is adopted. 
The Guides include the Combined Values Chart on pages 604 and 605 for 
combining different impairment ratings into one. Doing so here, we start with 79 percent 
impairment to the upper extremities and combine it with 39 percent for station and gait, 
which combine for 87 percent on the Chart. 87 percent combines with Fleming’s 20 
percent neurologic sexual impairment for 90 percent. That combines with 19 percent for 
his neurologic anorectal impairment to equal 92 percent, which combines with the 9 
percent impairment to his bladder for 93 percent. And 93 percent combines with the 5 
percent impairment for his facial disfigurement for 93 percent. Thus, the stipulated work 
injury has caused Fleming to sustain a 93 percent permanent impairment in activities of 
daily living excluding work under the Guides. 
Further, Dr. Broghammer and Dr. Bansal also articulated similar opinions with 
respect to permanent work restrictions. Dr. Broghammer opined that Fleming might be 
able to return to work if he had education, training, and experience as an attorney, 
therapist, or speaker; however, because he does not, “[h]e is so physically debilitated 
from this injury that I do not think there is anything physical that he could reasonably do 
from a gainful employment perspective, and I highly doubt he would be able to find work 
in a competitive workforce.” Dr. Bansal opined that “[i]t would not be practical or feasible 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 14 
 
for Mr. Fleming to be employed.” The undersigned finds the opinions of both doctors 
persuasive with respect to Fleming’s ability to work given the physical limitations caused 
by the stipulated work injury and adopts them. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments took effect on July 1, 2017. See id. 
at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). Because the injury at issue in this case 
occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, 
applies. See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., No. 5064673, 2020 WL 6037539 *2 (Iowa 
Work. Comp. Comm’r, App., Oct. 2, 2020). 
A .  
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(3) is entitled, “Permanent total disability,” but does not 
define the term or contain a framework for determining whether an injured employee is 
permanently and totally disabled due to a work injury. The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held the factors used to evaluate industrial disability under what is now section 
85.34(2)(v) are also used to determine whether a work injury has caused permanent 
total disability under section 85.34(3). See Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 
N.W.2d 493, 495 (Iowa 2003) (quoting Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 
103 (Iowa 1985)). The extent of an injured employee’s industrial disability is based on 
consideration of the following factors: functional disability, age, education, qualifications, 
work experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings before and after 
the injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics, and the employer’s inability to 
accommodate the injured employee’s functional limitations. See Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 
621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); E.N.T. Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 830 (Iowa 
1994); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976).  
The Iowa Supreme Court has quoted the Commissioner with approval for the 
principle that under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, “‘[t]otal disability does not 
mean a state of absolute helplessness.’” Caselman, 657 N.W.2d at 501 (quoting Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d at 633). “Such disability occurs when the injury wholly disables the 
employee from performing work that the employee's experience, training, intelligence, 
and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to perform.” Al-Gharib, 
604 N.W.2d at 633 (citing Diederich v. Tri–City Ry., 219 Iowa 587, 593–94, 258 N.W. 
899, 902 (1935)). A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's 
physical and educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total 
disability.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). “Simply put, the question is this: Are there jobs in the community that the 
employee can do for which the employee can realistically compete?” Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 815 (Iowa 1994) (citing Guyton v. Irving 
Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 103, 104 (Iowa 1985)). 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 15 
 
Permanent impairment is one factor considered when determining permanent 
disability. As found above, the stipulated work injury caused Fleming to sustain a 93 
permanent impairment to the whole body. This is a significant permanent impairment. 
Fleming was 63 years of age at the time of hearing. He had achieved a high 
school diploma and certificate as a mechanic. Given his age, educational background, 
and physical limitations, he is a poor candidate for retraining and education. 
Another factor that must be considered is the injured employee’s work history. 
Fleming has been motivated to work throughout his adult life. He has consistently 
sought out employment, typically with demanding job duties. Fleming’s training and 
experience are in jobs that require physical labor. The physical limitations caused by the 
stipulated work injury prevent him from returning to these types of jobs. 
Fleming is no longer able to perform the job he held at GNA at the time of injury. 
He could not perform the ancillary duties relating to driving a cement truck such as 
shoveling and cleaning the truck. Further, while Fleming has learned to drive a car using 
only his hands with special attachments, the weight of the evidence in this case shows 
he could not physically drive a cement truck for GNA, which is a more physically 
demanding endeavor. 
Evidence of Fleming’s motivation to work is found in him applying and getting 
hired to work at the gate of the Iowa State Fair. Fleming’s disability, caused by the 
stipulated work injury, prevented him from being able to use the ticket scanner because 
he lacks the dexterity in his hands to do so. This demonstrates the extent of Fleming’s 
physical limitations, which the State Fair accommodated by eliminating a primary job 
duty of his position—scanning tickets—and allowing him to only stamp fairgoers’ hands 
as they left.  
Further, when asked about whether Fleming could return to work, both expert 
witnesses opined that they did not see how he could return to the competitive labor 
market because of the physical limitations caused by the stipulated work injury. Dr. 
Broghammer opined that he does not think there is anything physical that Fleming could 
reasonably do from a gainful employment perspective. Dr. Bansal stated it is not 
feasible for Fleming to be employed. The record shows there is little reason to believe 
Fleming can find job on the open labor market, regardless of how hard he looked. 
Fleming has no income from work. He receives disability benefits. The stipulated 
work injury and resulting disability have had a significant negative impact on his 
earnings. 
Fleming has met his burden of proof. The weight of the evidence shows there are 
no jobs in the community that he can do for which he can realistically compete. The 
stipulated work injury has left Fleming permanently and totally disabled under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(3). 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 16 
 
B . 
C o m m e n c e m en t  D a t e .  
Iowa Code section 85.34 provides, “Compensation for permanent disabilities and 
during a healing period for permanent partial disabilities shall be payable to an 
employee as provided in this section.” Under section 85.34(1), an injured employee is 
entitled to healing period benefits “beginning on the first day of disability after the injury, 
and until the employee has returned to work or it is medically indicated that significant 
improvement from the injury is not anticipated or it is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.” And section 85.34(2) states, 
“Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically indicated 
that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and that the 
extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by use of the 
[Guides] . . . .”  
Thus, the statute uses the term “maximum medical improvement” and ties it to 
the ability to evaluate permanent impairment using the Guides. Id. The Guides use the 
term “maximal medical improvement.” Guides, p. 19. While the terminology between the 
two is different, the substantive meaning of the two terms, as fleshed out in the Guides 
and Iowa Supreme Court precedent pre-dating the 2017 amendments, is largely similar.  
The Guides provide, “An impairment should not be considered permanent until 
the clinical findings indicate that the medical condition is static and well stabilized.” See 
id. “Maximal medical improvement refers to the date from which further recovery or 
deterioration is not anticipated, although over time there may be some expected 
changes. Once an impairment has reached [maximal medical improvement], a 
permanent impairment rating may be performed.” Id.  
The Iowa Supreme Court has held “a claim for permanent disability benefits is 
not ripe until maximum medical improvement has been achieved.” Bell Bros. Heating 
and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & 
Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 80.03D[3] n. 10, at D80–43 to 
D80–48.2 (2009)). “[A] claimant is entitled to PPD benefits upon proof that ‘it is 
medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated.’” 
Broadlawns Med. Ctr. v. Sanders, 792 N.W.2d 302, 307 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Iowa 
Code § 85.34(1)) (emphasis in opinion). “Any disability that remains after stabilization of 
the condition will support an award of [PPD] benefits to the extent the residual 
impairment decreases the claimant's earning capacity.” Id.  
As found above, Dr. Broghammer’s opinion on the date of MMI is most 
persuasive. It is supported by Fleming’s testimony with respect to when his recovery 
plateaued. The weight of the evidence establishes that Fleming reached MMI on 
December 17, 2020. This is the proper commencement date for permanent disability 
benefits. 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 17 
 
C . 
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated Fleming’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date were 
gross earnings were $926.54 per week. They also stipulated he was married and 
entitled to five exemptions at the time. Based on the parties’ stipulations and the rate 
spreadsheet issued by the agency for work injuries sustained between July 1, 2019 and 
June 30, 2020, Fleming’s workers’ compensation rate is $630.15 per week. 
D . 
I M E  R e i m b u r s em e nt .  
The parties identified IME reimbursement as a disputed issue in the hearing 
report. (Hrg. Rpt. § 8) They agreed that this was a disputed issue at the time of hearing. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 5) In Fleming’s post-hearing brief, he argues he is entitled to $577.00 for the 
cost of Dr. Bansal’s examination under section 85.39(2) and $3,912.00 for the cost of 
his report under section 86.40 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.33(6). 
In the 2017 amendments, the legislature mandated use of the Guides for the 
determination of functional impairment. As their title would suggest, the Guides contain 
clear instructions for the steps a physician should take when evaluating permanent 
impairment. Guides, chs. 1–2. The evaluation process is inextricably intertwined with 
the impairment rating because the former is the end result of the latter. See id. The 
legislature would not codify a requirement to use only the Guides when determining 
permanent impairment in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) if section 85.39(2) does not 
allow for reimbursement relating to an examination that complies with that which the 
Guides expressly direct a physician to include as part of the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, including the evaluation and report. See Guides, pp. 17–24.  
Dr. Bansal’s report reflects that he performed the examination of Fleming in 
accordance with the Guides, which means Fleming is entitled to reimbursement for the 
cost of the examination. The undersigned finds that Fleming is entitled to 
reimbursement for the full cost of Dr. Bansal’s examination and report under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2) because they comply with Chapter 2 of the Guides. The defendants 
shall pay to Fleming $4,489.00, the reasonable cost of Dr. Bansal’s examination. 
E . 
C o s t s .  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 660 (Iowa 
2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are strictly 
construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 18 
 
Because Fleming prevailed on the disputed issue of the extent of permanent 
disability caused by the work injury, the following costs are taxed against the defendants 
under Iowa Code section 86.40 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.33: 
 $14.66 for the original notice cost of service; and 
 $103.00 for the cost of the filing fee and convenience fee incurred by using 
the payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System 
(WCES). 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to Fleming permanent total disability benefits at the 
rate of six hundred thirty and 15/100 dollars ($630.15) per week from the 
commencement date of December 17, 2020. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants are to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the 
stipulated amount. 
5) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
6) The defendants shall pay Fleming four thousand four hundred eighty-nine and 
00/100 dollars ($4,489.00) for Dr. Bansal’s examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39. 
7) The defendants shall pay to Fleming the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a. One hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee; 
b. Fourteen and 66/100 dollars ($14.66) for the original notice cost of 
service; 
8) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this    4th    day of August, 2023. 

FLEMING V. GNA TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 19 
 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
John Lawyer (via WCES) 
Timothy W. Wegman (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
