Case Number: 1657411.01
Case Title:  MARKLEY, KARL V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Markley Karl-1657411.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KARL MARKLEY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 1657411.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
J. RETTENMAIER USA LP, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND INSURANCE 
  :     Head Note Nos.:  1803.1, 3001, 4000.2 
COMPANY OF AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Karl Markley filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from, the employer, J. Rettenmaier USA, LP, employer, and Accident Fund 
Insurance Company, the insurance carrier. 
The matter came on for hearing on February 12, 2021, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joseph L. Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call, an 
electronic video hearing system.  The record in the case consists of joint exhibits 1 
through 8; claimant’s exhibits 1 through 5; and defense exhibits A through D; as well the 
sworn testimony of claimant.  Jane Weingart served as the court reporter.  The parties 
argued this case and the matter was fully submitted on March 8, 2021. 
ISSUES AND STIPULATIONS 
 
Many of the issues have been stipulated by the parties through the hearing report 
and order.  The stipulations submitted by the parties in that order are hereby accepted 
and are deemed binding upon the parties at this time. 
 
The parties stipulate that claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment on July 28, 2018.  This injury is a cause of both temporary 
and permanent disability.  In fact, it is stipulated that defendants paid 42 weeks of 
temporary disability and 52 weeks of permanency.  The parties stipulate the defendants 
are entitled to a credit for these payments.  The claimant disputes the gross wages that 
defendants used to calculate his rate of compensation. Specifically, claimant contends 
that medical insurance opt-out pay was excluded from his gross wages calculation.  
Therefore, he contends he is owed additional compensation for both his temporary and 
permanency payments.  The dates he was paid, however, are correct.  The nature and 
extent of permanent disability are disputed.  Claimant contends his disability is in his 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Nov-04  15:05:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 2 
body as a whole and he should be entitled to industrial disability benefits, while 
defendants contend his disability is scheduled. 
 
Affirmative defenses have been waived.  Medical expenses are not in dispute.  
The claimant is seeking payment for a Section 85.39 independent medical examination, 
as well as other costs.  The claimant also contends he is entitled to a penalty for the 
underpayment of the rate, as well as late-paid permanency benefits. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Karl Markley is a pleasant 55-year-old married man who worked at J. 
Rettenmaier USA (hereafter “Rettenmaier”).  He testified live and under oath at hearing 
and his testimony was highly credible.  Mr. Rettenmaier provided short concise answers 
and served as an excellent historian.  There was nothing about his demeanor which 
caused me any concern for his truthfulness.  On the contrary, he is highly credible. 
Mr. Markley is a high school graduate who began working for Rettenmaier in 
2013.  He has no further formal education.  Mr. Markley has worked primarily in manual 
labor jobs, however, he is highly skilled in machine maintenance and repair work.  He 
began working for SunOpta Ingredients in 2013 as a machine maintenance and repair 
person.  SunOpta was purchased by Rettenmaier in 2018.  His job description is in the 
record and it is consistent with Mr. Markley’s testimony regarding his job duties.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1) 
The parties have stipulated that Mr. Markley sustained an injury which arose out 
of and in the course of his employment on July 28, 2018.  At the time of injury, Mr. 
Markley earned $25.69 per hour and generally worked in excess of 40 hours per week.  
He also earned other pay which was included in his regular weekly paychecks, including 
on-call pay, regular bonuses and medical insurance opt-out pay.  While the on-call pay 
and bonuses were eventually included in his rate calculation, the defendants have 
excluded the medical insurance opt-out pay from his average weekly wage calculation.  
Mr. Markley testified that when Rettenmaier purchased SunOpta, the employer offered 
workers an opportunity to opt-out of the health insurance plan. (Testimony)  This 
allowed workers to receive cash payments in lieu of medical insurance.  Presumably 
this saves the employer money on health insurance premiums and allows workers who 
have access to other health insurance to receive additional cash compensation in their 
paychecks.  Mr. Markley testified that he opted out of the insurance and took the cash 
payments.  (Testimony)  The wage records reflect that he was, in fact, paid for the 
medical insurance opt-out in each weekly check.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 3, pages 46-47)  
The evidence reflects was cash in his pocket on a weekly basis and there is no good 
reason to exclude it from his gross wages. 
Following his stipulated work injury, the employer directed Mr. Markley’s medical 
treatment.  He was directed to see orthopedic surgeon, Kyle Switzer, M.D., at 
Physicians Clinic of Iowa (PCI).  His medical treatment initially included conservative 
care including physical therapy medications and various diagnostic tests.  When the 
condition did not improve, Dr. Switzer eventually performed surgery on November 28, 
2018.  The surgery was scheduled as an arthroscopic surgery, however, complications 
arose and Dr. Switzer determined it was necessary to “open the anterior portion of the 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 3 
shoulder to remove this and repair the subscapularis.”  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 64)  Claimant 
presented evidence which included a photograph of the scar from the incision which is 
located in claimant’s right pectoral muscle.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19) 
Following surgery, Mr. Markley had relatively difficult post-surgical recovery.  He 
underwent a significant amount of physical therapy through St. Luke’s.  Throughout 
2019, the pain and stiffness in his shoulder worsened.  He had been doing a significant 
amount of overhead lifting at work.  By June 2019, Dr. Switzer noted the increasing 
symptoms.  In July, he underwent an additional MRI.  On July 24, 2019, Dr. Switzer 
recommended rather significant restrictions which included no use of ladder, no 
overhead lifting or reaching and no lifting more than 30 pounds in general.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
36)  An injection was attempted which provided little relief.  In October 2019, the 
symptoms continued and Dr. Switzer recommended a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) to assign permanent restrictions.  Dr. Switzer explained the ongoing symptoms 
as follows:  “He has no recurrent tear of the subscapularis.  Does have a fair amount of 
tendinopathy.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 27)  The FCE placed Mr. Markley in the heavy work 
category and appeared to clear Mr. Markley to return to work at Rettenmaier.  (Jt. Ex. 8, 
p. 77)  The FCE however, did clearly document some overhead lifting deficits.  (Jt. Ex. 
8, p. 79)  In December 2019, Dr. Switzer placed Mr. Markley at maximum medical 
improvement.  His restrictions were continued on December 3, 2019, which included no 
lifting/reaching above shoulder, no ladders and no lifting more than 30 pounds above 
the shoulder.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 40) 
Rettenmaier terminated Mr. Markley on February 6, 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 40)  
There is no written documentation of the basis for the termination in the record.  
Rettenmaier provided the following second amended response to a request for 
admission: 
Based upon the permanent restrictions recommended by Dr. Switzer ( a 
limit of 25# bilateral overhead lifting on an occasional basis) Claimant 
would be physically capable of returning to his pre-injury employment with 
J Rettenmeier [sic] as a maintenance technician if a position was 
available.  See attached Job Description for the Maintenance Technical 
position.  The employer contact, Ms. Smith has confirmed that the 
Maintenance Technician position does not require lifting more than 25 
pounds overhead bilaterally and overhead lifting is on an occasional basis.  
This fits within Claimant’s permanent restrictions as recommended by Dr. 
Switzer. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 40)   
On May 12, 2020, Dr. Switzer issued an impairment report.  He rated Mr. Markley 
using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, and 
assigned a 13 percent impairment for the right upper extremity based upon range of 
motion loss.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 45-46)  In July 2020, Dr. Switzer provided an additional 
report clarifying Mr. Markley’s permanent restrictions.  “I would not place permanent 
restriction on lifting below chest height, but would place a limit of 25# bilateral overhead 
lifting on an occasional basis only.  This is based of [sic] the injury and his FCE.”  (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 47) 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 4 
Mark Taylor, M.D., evaluated Mr. Markley in August 2020.  Dr. Taylor reviewed 
the appropriate records and documented a summary of the same.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 11-13)  
Dr. Taylor took a history and performed a thorough evaluation.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 14-15)  
He diagnosed right rotator cuff tear of subscapularis, as well as labral tearing and 
subluxating biceps tendon, as well as persistent loss of motion and decreased strength.  
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15)  Dr. Taylor included the loss of strength measurements in his rating 
and concluded Mr. Markley had sustained a 16 percent loss of function of the right 
upper extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 16)  He recommended restrictions of only occasional 
overhead reaching on the right side.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 16)  He further opined the following:  
“Mr. Markley sustained a rotator cuff tear affecting the subscapularis, which required an 
open repair utilizing a deltapectoral approach.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19)  Therefore, he opined 
the disability extended into Mr. Markley’s whole body.   
Mr. Markley testified credibly that he still has pain and limitations in his right 
shoulder area.  The symptoms go into his upper back and neck area and extend down 
into his right arm.  He testified that he has significant challenges with some activities of 
daily living, such as shopping and snow removal and his hobbies have been impacted, 
such as boating, fishing and playing with his grandchildren. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is claimant’s gross wages prior to his work injury. 
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury.  Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings that fairly represent the employee’s customary earnings, however.  Section 
85.36(6). 
The focus of section 85.36 is on whether the employee’s “earnings” are 
“customary.” As the court in Jacobson explained,  
"Customary" means "based on or established by custom"; "commonly 
practiced, used or observed"; or "usual." Merriam-Webster's Collegiate 
Dictionary 285 (10th ed.2002). We have previously defined "customary" as 
"typical." . . . . Ascertainment of an employee's customary earnings does 
not turn on a determination of what earnings are guaranteed or fixed; 
rather, it asks simply what earnings are usual or typical for that employee.  
Jacobson Transportation Co. v. Harrison, 778 N.W.2d 192, 199 (Iowa 2010).  

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 5 
The burden is on the claimant to prove his gross wages.  Both parties have 
submitted wage calculations.  (Compare Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28 with Def. Ex. C)  I find that the 
flex compensation that claimant receives in lieu of medical insurance is compensation 
which must be included in his average weekly wages.  This compensation is paid to 
claimant in his regular paychecks and can be spent any way claimant sees fit.  It is part 
of his average customary wage.  Defendants seek to characterize this compensation as 
a “benefit” similar to employer payments to a 401k.  It is not.  It is compensation paid 
instead of a benefit.  The evidence all suggests the employer simply offered the 
claimant higher wages in order to forego a benefit.  There is really no doubt the 
compensation is part of his wages.  As such, I find that claimant’s gross earnings prior 
to the July 28, 2018, work injury were, on average, $1,225.34 per week.  I therefore 
conclude his appropriate weekly rate is $768.24 per week. 
The next issue is the nature and extent of claimant’s disability. 
The first question here is the nature of the disability.  Claimant alleges his 
disability is in his body as a whole, and is therefore, industrial.  Defendants contend his 
disability is limited to the right shoulder under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
In Deng v. Farmland Foods, File No. 5061883 (Appeal September 29, 2020), the 
Commissioner held that the 2017 amendments to Chapter 85 were ambiguous as to the 
definition of the shoulder.  He therefore undertook an effort to construe the statute by 
looking to the intent of the legislature.  Id. at 5.  He ultimately concluded the following: 
I recognize the well-established standard that workers’ compensation 
statutes are to be liberally construed in favor of the worker, as their 
primary purposes is to benefit the worker.  See Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 842 (Iowa 2015) (citations 
omitted); see also Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 197 
(Iowa 2010); Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 
(Iowa 2010) (“We apply the workers' compensation statute broadly and 
liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective....”); Griffin Pipe Prods. 
Co. v. Guarino, 663 N.W.2d 862, 865 (Iowa 2003) (“[T]he primary purpose 
of chapter 85 is to benefit the worker and so we interpret this law liberally 
in favor of the employee.”).  This liberal construction, however, cannot be 
performed in a vacuum.  As discussed above, several of the principles of 
statutory construction indicate the legislature did not intend to limit the 
definition of “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) to the glenohumeral joint.  
For these reasons, I conclude “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) is not 
limited to the glenohumeral joint. 
Claimant’s injury in this case was to the infraspinatus muscle. As 
discussed, the infraspinatus is part of the rotator cuff, and the rotator cuff’s 
main function is to stabilize the ball-and-socket joint.  As noted by both Dr. 
Bansal and Dr. Bolda, the rotator cuff is generally proximal to the joint.  
However, because the rotator cuff is essential to the function of the 
glenohumeral joint, it seems arbitrary to exclude it from the definition of 
“shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) simply because it “originates on the 
scapula, which is proximal to the glenohumeral joint for the most part.” 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 6 
(Def. Ex. A, [Depo. Tr., 27]).  In other words, being proximal to the joint 
should not render the muscle automatically distinct. 
Given the entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that 
make up the rotator cuff, including the infraspinatus, and the importance of 
the rotator cuff to the function of the joint, I find the muscles that make up 
the rotator cuff are included within the definition of “shoulder” under 
section 85.34(2)(n).  Thus, I find claimant’s injury to her infraspinatus 
should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n).  The 
deputy commissioner’s determination that claimant’s infraspinatus injury is 
a whole body injury that should be compensated industrially under section 
85.34(2)(v) is therefore respectfully reversed.  
Deng, at 10-11. 
 
In Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270 (App. September 30, 2020) 
filed just after Deng, the Commissioner affirmed his legal holding in Deng and applied 
his interpretation to the various impairments and disabilities sustained by the claimant in 
that case. 
Again, as explained in Dr. Peterson’s operative note, claimant’s 
subacromial decompression was performed to remove scar tissue and 
fraying between the supraspinatus and the underside of the acromion.  
As discussed above, the acromiom forms part of the socket and helps 
protect the glenoid cavity, and as such, I found it is closely interconnected 
with the glenohumeral joint in both location and function. And as 
discussed in Deng, I found the supraspinatus - a muscle that forms the 
rotator cuff - to be similarly entwined with the glenohumeral joint.  Thus, 
claimant’s subacromial decompression impacted two anatomical parts that 
are essential to the functioning of the glenohumeral joint; in fact, the 
procedure was actually performed to improve the function of the joint.  As 
such, I find any disability resulting from her subacromial decompression 
should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n).  
I therefore find none of claimant’s injuries are compensable as 
unscheduled, whole body injuries under section 85.34(2)(v).  The deputy 
commissioner’s finding that claimant sustained an injury to her body as a 
whole is therefore respectfully reversed. 
Chavez, at 6. 
 
I conclude the key holdings of Deng and Chavez are: 
1. The definition of a “shoulder” is ambiguous in Section 85.34(2)(n).  
Deng, at 4. 
2. There is no “ordinary” meaning of the word shoulder.  Deng, at 5. 
3. The appropriate way to interpret the statute is to examine at the 
legislative history.  Deng, at 5. 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 7 
4. The well-established history of “liberal construction” of workers’ 
compensation statutes is inapplicable here because to do so would be 
to ignore the legislature’s intent to limit compensation to injured 
workers in the 2017 amendments.1  Deng, at 10-11. 
5. The legislature did not intend to limit the definition of a “shoulder” to the 
glenohumeral joint.  Rather, the legislature intended to include the 
entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that make up 
the rotator cuff.  Deng, at 11. 
Applying this interpretation of the facts of this case, I find the claimant suffered an 
injury to his “shoulder” under Iowa Code section 85.43(2)(n).  The claimant herein has 
presented compelling evidence from Dr. Taylor that his disability is well into his trunk, 
which logically and historically would make his disability a body as a whole injury 
compensated under Section 85.34(2)(v).  This finding, however, would conflict with the 
Commissioner’s ruling in Deng. 
Having concluded that the disability is a scheduled member evaluated under 
Section 85.34(2)(n), the next issue is to assess the degree of disability to the claimant’s 
right shoulder. 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American Medical 
Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining 
functional impairment and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2019). Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with 
an injured worker’s actual functional loss or disability as determined by the evidence, 
but rather the impairment rating as assigned by the adopted version of The AMA 
Guides.  The only function of the agency is to determine which impairment rating should 
be utilized. 
                                                 
1 The fundamental guiding principle of statutory construction in a workers’ compensation case is 
that the statute is to be interpreted liberally in favor of the injured worker and their family.  “Any doubt in 
its construction is thus resolved in favor of the employee.”  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W. 2d 405, 407 (Iowa 
1986). Workers’ compensation laws are to be construed in favor of the injured worker. Myers. v. F.C.A. 
Services, Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 356 (Iowa 1999).  The beneficent purpose is not to be defeated by 
reading something into the statute that is not there. Cedar Rapids Community School v. Cady, 278 
N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979).  This, combined with the legal principle that the legislature is presumed to know 
the prior construction of the law. State ex rel. Palmer v. Board of Supervisors of Polk County, 365 N.W.2d 
35, 37 (Iowa 1985), would lead me to reach the alternative conclusion in this case.  This, however, is not 
what the Commissioner held.  As a Deputy Commissioner, I am bound to follow the rulings of the 
Commissioner as binding precedent. 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 8 
 
Having thoroughly reviewed all of the evidence in the record related to claimant’s 
extent of impairment under the AMA Guides, I find claimant has sustained a 16 percent 
impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of his work-connected right shoulder 
condition.  This is based upon the rating from claimant’s expert Dr. Taylor.  I conclude, 
therefore, claimant is entitled to 64 weeks of compensation commencing on December 
3, 2019. 
 
The next issue is whether the claimant is entitled to expenses for his independent 
medical evaluation (IME) under Section 85.39. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
 
I find claimant is entitled to the IME expenses of Dr. Taylor set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 4, page 55, in the amount of $2,670.50. 
 
The next issue is penalty. 
Claimant also seeks an award of penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 86.13.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 9 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the 
following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable 
investigation and evaluation by the employer or 
insurance carrier into whether benefits were owed 
to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and 
evaluation were the actual basis upon which the 
employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the 
denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. 
In this case, the basis for the claimant’s penalty allegation is that the defendants 
paid benefits at an incorrect rate.  Claimant argues there was no reasonable basis for 
the defendants’ rate calculation.  The defendants’ rate calculation is set forth in 
Defendants’ Exhibit C.  The defendants recalculated the rate in October 2020, after 
inquiries by claimant’s counsel and agreed to include his bonuses and on-call pay.  The 
defendants, however, refused to include the claimant’s compensation which was paid in 
lieu of health insurance benefits.  I have already found this compensation is, in fact, 
wages, and should be included in the calculation.  The question, for penalty purposes, is 
whether the defendants’ decision to exclude these wages was reasonable. 
The defendants articulated their explanation for their rate in their brief. 
The insurance opt-out pay offered by J Rettenmaier is something extra, in 
addition, to Claimant’s normal earned wages.  It provides assistance for Claimant 
to pay his insurance premiums through another insurer.  Health insurance meets 
the definition of a welfare benefit [under Section 85.61(9)], and therefore 
payment for opting out of the employer-provided health insurance in order to 
contribute to the premium for outside insurance is also a welfare benefit.  It is 
something extra given by an employer for the welfare of an employee. 
(Def. Brief, p. 21)  While this argument is creative and innovative, I do not find it to be 
consistent with the law or the facts.  In fact, I find it to be unreasonable.  Mr. Markley 
was not required to purchase insurance from another company with the compensation.  
It was simply paid in cash in his regular checks.  In other words, he received more pay 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 10 
for opting out, which benefited both parties.  Moreover, the defendants cited no relevant 
authority for excluding this compensation from claimant’s wages.  The defendants cited 
Evenson v. Winnebago Industries, Inc., 881 N.W.3d 360, 367-68 (Iowa 2016).  In 
Evenson, the Iowa Supreme Court upheld the exclusion of the employer’s 401k 
contribution from claimant’s gross wages.  I find that the precedent cited by the 
defendants is not a reasonable extension of that principle.  In Evenson, the employer 
had no particular benefit from a worker participating in the 401k plan and did not pay 
cash wages directly to the worker.  In this case, the employer simply paid higher wages 
to incentivize the employee opt out of a benefit, which likely benefited both parties.  This 
case is more akin to Cottrell v. Newman Catholic School System, File Nos. 5066407, 
5066408 (Arb. July 9, 2020). 
Therefore, I find the defendants’ rate calculation was unreasonable.  The 
defendants simply chose to exclude wages, which were paid regularly to the claimant, in 
order to arrive at a lower rate of compensation.  The total amount of benefits delayed to 
the claimant was $5,501.93 and I find a 50 percent penalty on this amount is 
appropriate.  Defendants shall pay a penalty of $2,750.00. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of seven hundred sixty-eight and 
24/100 dollars ($768.24). 
Defendants shall pay the claimant healing period benefits from August 22, 2019, 
through December 2, 2019, at the correct rate of compensation. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant sixty-four (64) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing December 3, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay a penalty in the amount of two thousand seven hundred 
fifty and no/100 dollars ($2,750.00). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the benefits previously paid. 
Defendants shall pay IME expenses in the amount of two thousand six hundred 
seventy and 50/100 dollars ($2,670.50). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
 

MARKLEY V. J. RETTENMAIER USA LP 
Page 11 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of two hundred ninety-two and 
20/100 dollars ($292.20). 
Signed and filed this __4th ___ day of November, 2021. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
Lindsey Mills (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
