Case Number: 1656606.01
Case Title:  STANTON, TIMOTHY V. STATE OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stanton Timothy-1656606.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TIMOTHY STANTON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 1656606.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
STATE OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               Head Notes: 1402.40 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Claimant, Timothy Stanton, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Glenwood Resource Center, employer, and State of Iowa, 
insurer, both as defendants.  The hearing occurred before the undersigned via 
CourtCall on May 10, 2021. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of: Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 5, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through D.  All exhibits were received without 
objection.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at hearing.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  Both parties 
served their post-hearing briefs on June 11, 2021, at which time this case was deemed 
fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained permanent disability to his bilateral knees as 
a result of the September 20, 2018, work injury; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-13  09:47:59     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 2 
 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care under Iowa Code 
section 85.27; and  
3. 
Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Timothy Stanton alleges he sustained injuries to his right shoulder, neck, and 
bilateral knees, arising out of and in the course of his employment with Glenwood 
Resource Center, on September 20, 2018.  This decision will focus solely on issues 
pertaining to the bilateral knee injury. 
On the date of injury, claimant and his co-worker, Scott Burmeister, were sent to 
the pool area of Glenwood Resource Center to check on a problem with the pool. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 23)  To get to the pool area, claimant had to cross a dark room that he was 
unfamiliar with.  As he was walking across the room, claimant missed a step, lost his 
balance, and stumbled forward into a metal doorframe.  Claimant’s neck/right shoulder 
area struck the metal doorframe and he fell to the ground. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24)  At 
hearing, claimant testified that after hitting the metal doorframe, he smashed his knees 
(plural) onto the floor and folded backwards pinning his legs (plural) underneath him. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24)   
Mr. Stanton’s story at the time of trial is different from the versions of events he 
provided to emergency personnel and his employer shortly after the injury occurred. 
According to the EMS records from Glenwood Fire Department, claimant “struck 
the door frame and then twisted his right knee.” (Joint Exhibit 2, page 33)  This account 
of the accident does not mention claimant falling to the ground. (See id.)  Moreover, the 
medical record only references an injury to the right knee. (See id.) (“twisted his right 
knee. […] Chief complaint of Right knee pain […]”)   
Similarly, claimant’s handwritten injury report only describes an injury to the right 
knee.  When asked to describe the accident in as much detail as possible, claimant 
provided,  
Walking through a dark room [and] stepped off a step fell forward into a door 
hitting my neck and shoulder on doorframe causing me to fall backwards 
bending my right leg under me. 
(Ex. 1, p. 1) 
According to the medical records in evidence, Mr. Stanton did not describe the 
work injury as he did at the evidentiary hearing until he presented to Kevin O’Malley, 
M.D. on November 28, 2018. (JE5, p. 62)  Interestingly, Dr. O’Malley’s medical record 
indicates claimant, “stumbled down nine or ten steps” before striking his right shoulder 
and falling backwards on both knees. (Id.) 
In any event, the State accepted liability and directed medical care for claimant’s 
bilateral knee condition.  While the State acknowledges and admits claimant sustained 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 3 
 
injuries to his knees as a result of the September 20, 2018, fall, it maintains the fall did 
not materially aggravate claimant’s well-documented pre-existing condition. 
To this end, Mr. Stanton’s bilateral knee complaints did not begin on September 
20, 2018.  At hearing, Mr. Stanton acknowledged that he had received treatment for 
both of his knees prior to the September 20, 2018, work injury, including two surgeries. 
(See Hr. Tr., pp. 18-23)  
Indeed, claimant’s medical history is significant for pre-existing issues in his 
bilateral knees. (JE1, p. 1; see Hr. Tr., p. 18)  Medical records indicate claimant has 
previously sustained two surgical injuries to his knee(s). (See JE1, p. 7)  Little is known 
about the first injury, other than the fact it occurred while claimant was playing 
basketball in approximately 1987. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 48-49)  The second injury occurred 
in 2000, when he tore his meniscus while working for a different employer. (Hr. Tr., p. 
17)  As a result of the injury, claimant underwent arthroscopic surgery and participated 
in physical therapy. (Ex. A, p. 3)  Claimant believes both surgeries involved his right 
knee; however, the evidentiary record does not include the operative reports to confirm 
the same. (Hr. Tr., p. 48)  The evidentiary record does, however, contain medical 
records from claimant’s primary care provider, which date back to 2011.  These records 
indicate claimant had arthroscopies performed on both the left knee and the right knee. 
(See JE1, pp. 7, 10, 15)  I find the pre-injury medical records of his long-time primary 
care physician to be more accurate than claimant’s recollection.  
In addition to these two surgeries, claimant submitted to a series of steroid 
injections and was routinely prescribed pain medication specifically for his bilateral 
knees. (See JE1, pp. 1-3)  Notably absent from claimant’s pre-existing medical records, 
however, is a recommendation for total knee replacements prior to the September 20, 
2018, work injury. 
The earliest medical record in evidence noting knee pain stems from a January 
12, 2011, appointment with Ronald Silvius, D.O.  At the appointment, claimant 
complained of persistent left knee pain that began while golfing in the summer of 2010.  
Claimant reported that he initially experienced pain in both knees; however, the right 
knee pain resolved over time.  The medical record documents that claimant’s left knee 
was very painful when he was up and moving around.  The medical record notes a 
history of osteoarthritis and gout.  On examination, claimant had tenderness over the 
anterior medial joint line.  Dr. Silvius ultimately diagnosed claimant with left knee 
arthralgia, prescribed the pain medication Vicodin, and administered a Kenalog 
injection. Following his examination, Dr. Silvius recommended that claimant consider a 
referral to see a rheumatologist once he obtained health insurance. (JE1, p. 1)   
Claimant returned to Dr. Silvius on March 30, 2011, with complaints of ongoing 
bilateral knee pain and some low back pain.  Claimant reported that he was very stiff 
and sore in the morning and after periods of inactivity.  The medical record documents 
that claimant was still taking Vicodin on a daily basis.  Dr. Silvius specifically noted that 
claimant had been experiencing these chronic pain problems for some time.  It is further 
documented that claimant had tried numerous different NSAIDS, and injections had not 
been particularly helpful.  On examination, Dr. Silvius observed osteoarthritic changes 
of the bilateral knees.  He assessed claimant with osteoarthritis and administered an 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 4 
 
intramuscular injection.  Dr. Silvius explained that he chose the intramuscular injection 
because intraarticular injections had not helped claimant in the past.  Dr. Silvius refilled 
claimant’s Vicodin prescription and reminded him to use the medication sparingly. (JE1, 
p. 2) 
Less than three months later, claimant presented for medical care and reported a 
flare-up of his bilateral knee pain.  During his visit, claimant asked Dr. Silvius about 
potentially receiving another Kenalog injection.  Claimant reported that the Kenalog 
injections typically helped his condition for a month or more.  Claimant added that the 
injections were also helpful for his allergies.  Again, the record provides claimant had 
received intraarticular cortical steroid injections in the past and they were not beneficial.   
The medical record further notes that Mr. Stanton was still taking Vicodin fairly 
regularly “for his knee pain” on the date of the appointment.  The record explains, “He 
has a gutter and roofing business, and he is up and down ladders all of the time.  He is, 
also, the girls’ softball coach, and finds this time of the year to be particularly taxing on 
his joints.”  On examination, Dr. Silvius observed crepitus and osteoarthritic changes 
over both knees.  Dr. Silvius administered another Kenalog injection, refilled claimant’s 
Vicodin prescription, and instructed claimant “to try to take it easy on his knees as much 
as possible, and supervise his gutter jobs as much as he can.”  When discussing the 
Kenalog injection, Dr. Silvius provided, “Do not want to do this regularly, but every 3-4 
months, we could.” (JE1, p. 3)   
On November 14, 2011, claimant returned to Dr. Silvius complaining of 
worsening problems in his bilateral legs.  According to claimant, he could barely stand 
up if he had been sitting for a while.  He reported his legs felt weak and there was 
“aching constantly in the knees.”  Dr. Silvius documented claimant’s history of 
osteoarthritis and chronic pain.  He further documented that claimant, “takes Vicodin for 
that[.]”  Claimant attempted to distinguish between his then current pain and his 
osteoarthritis and chronic pain.  According to claimant, the then current pain had 
progressed over time and he thought there was something very wrong with his legs.  Dr. 
Silvius diagnosed claimant with lower extremity weakness and pain, as well as 
osteoarthritis.  (JE1, p. 5) 
The evidentiary record does not contain any medical records documenting 
claimant’s bilateral knee condition between December 2011 and December 2014. (See 
JE1, pp. 5-6)   
Mr. Stanton’s medical history also includes low back pain.  Claimant sustained an 
injury to his low back after attempting to bend over and pick something up on or about 
November 4, 2014.  He presented to Dr. Silvius on November 15, 2014, and reported 
debilitating pain in his low back, as well as numbness and tingling in his left leg.  Dr. 
Silvius noted that claimant was “on hydrocodone chronically.”  He told claimant that he 
would not be able to continue refilling the hydrocodone prescription if claimant was not 
able to come in for regular visits. (JE1, p. 6) 
Guy Music, M.D. performed surgery on claimant’s low back on February 19, 
2015.  The surgery consisted of a decompressive lumbar laminectomy at L4-L5, and a 
bilateral microdiscectomy at L5-S1. (See JE1, p. 18)  Claimant asserts he also 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 5 
 
underwent a spinal fusion at L4-L5 in 2017; however, there are no medical records in 
evidence to confirm the same. (See Hr. Tr., p. 18)  There is evidence that claimant 
presented to Dr. Silvius for a preoperative evaluation on December 21, 2017; however, 
the only procedure discussed in that record is sedation for an upcoming MRI of the 
lumbar spine. (JE1, p. 18) Neither the December 21, 2017, medical record, nor the July 
24, 2018, medical record, detail a spinal fusion occurring under the “Surgical Records” 
or “Procedures” tabs. (See JE1, pp. 18, 20)   
Mr. Stanton testified that he experienced an improvement in his bilateral knee 
pain after undergoing surgery on his low back. (Hr. Tr., p. 19)  However, there appears 
to be a difference between the symptoms claimant experienced because of his 
osteoarthritis, and the radicular symptoms claimant experienced in his lower extremities 
as a result of the low back injury.  In 2011, claimant complained of constant knee pain 
with activity.  Claimant’s knees felt weak and there was a constant aching. (JE1, p. 5)  
During this time, Dr. Silvius consistently discussed claimant’s history of osteoarthritis, 
diagnosed claimant with osteoarthritis, and prescribed treatments specifically for 
claimant’s bilateral knees.  Then, when claimant reported lower extremity symptoms 
that were “different” from his history of osteoarthritis and chronic pain, Dr. Silvius noted 
his concern about the possibility for spinal stenosis. (Id.)  Additionally, claimant 
presented to Dr. Silvius with neuropathic complaints of numbness and tingling in his left 
leg in 2014. (JE1, p. 6)  Dr. Silvius connected these symptoms to claimant’s lumbar 
spinal stenosis and degenerative disc disease. (JE1, p. 9)   
When asked about the improvements he experienced following his most recent 
spinal surgery, claimant seemingly confirmed the differences between the symptoms 
attributable to osteoarthritis and the symptoms attributable to the spinal stenosis: “I think 
you get that nerve pain radiating down your legs, and that causes a lot of what feels like 
– it feels like knee issues or ankle issues.  Once you get your spine taken care of you 
find that those things – they weren’t what you thought they were.” (Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20)   
While it is unclear when claimant underwent the spinal fusion at L4-L5, it is clear 
that claimant believes the surgery helped with the radicular symptoms he was 
experiencing between 2014 and 2017. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20)  Unfortunately, 
complaints of bilateral knee pain, similar to those reported in 2011, returned after the 
spinal fusion surgery but before the September 20, 2018, work injury. 
Just two months before the September 20, 2018, work injury, claimant returned 
to Dr. Silvius reporting an insidious onset of left knee pain.  Claimant told Dr. Silvius that 
his left knee pain began the evening of July 20, 2018; however, he denied any injury or 
unusual activity.  Claimant’s pain was worse on July 21, 2018, and he began “limping 
and hobbling around.”  Claimant relayed that he was taking 900 mg of ibuprofen and 
Aleve; however, the medications were not working to reduce his pain.  Dr. Silvius 
referenced claimant’s history of arthritis in multiple joints and noted claimant’s left knee 
was edematous, erythematous, and tender over the patellar tendon.  Dr. Silvius 
obtained an x-ray of claimant’s left knee and prescribed a prednisone taper.  Dr. Silvius 
noted that the x-ray revealed “significant osteoarthritic changes.”  (JE1, p. 20; see JE1, 
p. 23) 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 6 
 
The July 24, 2018, x-ray revealed “tricompartment degenerative changes most 
pronounced medially where there is joint space narrowing, sclerosis of paratracheal [sic] 
or osteophytes.”  It also revealed enthesopathic changes at the patella. (JE1, p. 23) 
On September 17, 2018, three days prior to the date of injury in this case, 
claimant returned to Dr. Silvius with complaints of “lots of pain” in multiple joints, 
including his knees.  Claimant reported that he experienced an increase in pain with any 
kind of movement or activity.  Claimant relayed that he was taking 800 mg of ibuprofen 
and two Aleve tablets each morning, “just to get going.”  Dr. Silvius ordered 
inflammatory arthritis labs and indicated he would consider a referral to rheumatology if 
the inflammatory labs were abnormal.  He also opined claimant should consider a pain 
management program. (JE1, p. 24)   
Claimant presented as a poor historian. Such a conclusion stems from claimant’s 
testimony regarding the causes of his pre-existing knee pain.   
At his deposition, claimant acknowledged he presented for medical treatment for 
his right knee prior to the September 20, 2018, work injury.  However, when asked if he 
ever had any other complaints or treatment for his knees before the date of injury, 
claimant asserted that he only presented to a physician once for left knee pain, and the 
left knee pain “turned out to be gout.” (Ex. A, Deposition Transcript pages 18-19)  At 
hearing, claimant attributed his pre-existing knee problems to his poorly-controlled 
diabetes. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 19, 22)  The contemporaneous medical records summarized 
above do not support claimant’s contentions.  (See JE1)  As discussed in defendants’ 
post-hearing brief, there is no evidence that claimant has ever experienced a gout flare-
up in his knees.  The medical records in evidence only document gout flare-ups in 
claimant’s right foot. (See JE1, p. 5)  Similarly, claimant testified that Dr. Silvius 
prescribed him medication to control his diabetes, and therefore his knee pain, following 
his July 24, 2018, appointment. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  However, Dr. Silvius’ medical records 
provide claimant was prescribed a prednisone taper solely to address the arthralgia in 
his left knee. (JE1, p. 20)  No physician, including Dr. Silvius, has provided an opinion 
relating claimant’s pre-existing bilateral knee pain to gout or diabetes.   
On September 20, 2018, claimant was initially examined by the emergency 
medical technicians of the Glenwood Fire Department. (See JE2, pp. 33-35) Following 
the examination, claimant declined emergency transportation to the hospital.  Instead, 
he elected to have his wife pick him up and drive him to Concentra Occupational Health.  
Claimant presented with complaints of right shoulder, neck, and bilateral knee pain. 
(JE3, p. 36)  Dr. West observed swelling and assessed sprains in both of claimant’s 
knees. (JE3, p. 37)  Dr. West ordered x-rays of claimant’s right shoulder and cervical 
spine.  He did not order x-rays or diagnostic imaging of claimant’s knees. (JE1, p. 38) 
At his return visit on September 24, 2018, claimant reported improved neck pain, 
improved right shoulder pain, but worsening left anterior knee pain.  Associated 
symptoms included clicking, stiffness, and swelling.  In comparison, claimant reported 
that the condition of his right knee was improving.  Claimant reported no swelling or 
clicking in the right knee.  Dr. West observed no swelling in either knee, however, 
claimant did have a positive McMurray test. (JE3, p. 41)  Dr. West kept his initial 
diagnoses and referred claimant to physical therapy. (JE3, p. 42) 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 7 
 
On October 24, 2018, claimant reported constant, moderate pain in his knees, 
bilaterally.  He described the pain as sharp and aching, with associated stiffness. (JE3, 
pp. 47-48)  After obtaining MRIs of claimant’s knees, Dr. West diagnosed acute medial 
meniscus tears in the bilateral knees and referred claimant’s medical care to Dr. 
O’Malley. (JE1, p. 52; see JE1, pp. 28, 30) 
Claimant first presented to Dr. O’Malley on November 28, 2018. (JE5, p. 62)  He 
described increasing discomfort over the inside aspect of both knees, left generally 
greater than right. (Id.)  Similar to reports from July 2018, claimant reported that he had 
tried several anti-inflammatories without success. (Id.)  After reviewing claimant’s 
diagnostic imaging, Dr. O’Malley assessed claimant with an exacerbation of the 
advanced degenerative arthritis in his bilateral knees. (JE5, p. 63)  Dr. O’Malley opined 
the injury on September 20, 2018, aggravated his advanced degenerative arthritis.  
Claimant asked Dr. O’Malley about undergoing an arthroscopy to assess his meniscus 
tear.  In response, Dr. O’Malley explained to claimant that his underlying problem was 
degenerative arthritis with extrusion of the meniscus, and, according to Dr. O’Malley, a 
knee arthroscopy would likely exacerbate his symptoms rather than make them better.  
Instead, Dr. O’Malley offered to provide claimant with injections based on his age and 
continued symptoms.  Claimant declined Dr. O’Malley’s offer, noting that the same 
injections had not worked for him in the past. (JE5, p. 64)  Dr. O’Malley told claimant the 
only surgical option that would be available to claimant for his condition would be total 
knee arthroplasties. (Id.)   
After giving it some thought, claimant returned to Dr. O’Malley’s office on 
December 12, 2018, and requested injections to his bilateral knees. (JE5, p. 65)  Dr. 
O’Malley released claimant and noted he would let claimant’s symptoms dictate any 
follow-up appointments.  Claimant received repeat injections five months later, on May 
6, 2019. (JE5, p. 79)  Dr. O’Malley subsequently placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement on May 7, 2019. (JE5, p. 81) 
On May 7, 2019, Dr. O’Malley authored a letter addressing causation to the 
State’s third-party administrator.  The causation opinion is poorly worded; however, the 
main takeaway is that Dr. O’Malley’s diagnosis of exacerbation of advanced 
degenerative arthritis was caused by the work injury on September 20, 2018. (JE5, p. 
81)  This is the same diagnosis he provided following his initial assessment.  That is, 
claimant sustained an exacerbation of his underlying, advanced degenerative arthritis 
on the date of injury. (See JE5, p. 63)  Dr. O’Malley next opined that any surgical 
intervention would be a result of his pre-existing arthritis and the natural progression of 
the same. (JE5, p. 81)  In other words, the need for surgical intervention would not be 
causally related to the September 20, 2018, work injury.  Inherent in these two opinions 
is Dr. O’Malley’s belief that the exacerbation that occurred on September 20, 2018, was 
not a substantial factor in bringing about the need for a total knee replacement. (Id.)   
Claimant underwent a right shoulder superior capsular reconstruction with biceps 
tenodesis on February 1, 2019. (JE6, pp. 100-103)  He was released to return to work 
without restrictions on July 30, 2019. (JE6, p. 91)  Claimant remains employed in the 
same position for which he was hired. (Ex. A, p. 4)  Dr. Rosipal placed claimant at 
maximum medical improvement and released him from care on September 10, 2019. 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 8 
 
(JE6, p. 97)  There is no evidence claimant presented for medical treatment related to 
his knee between May 6, 2019, and October 2, 2019. 
After being released from Dr. O’Malley’s care, claimant began presenting to 
Craig Hansen, M.D. of Ortho Nebraska. (See JE7, p. 104)  He first presented to Dr. 
Hansen on October 3, 2019. (JE7, p. 104)  Dr. Hansen obtained x-rays of claimant’s 
bilateral knees and reviewed the prior MRI reports. (JE7, p. 105)  Dr. Hansen 
administered bilateral knee injections and placed claimant in basic hinged knee braces. 
(JE7, p. 105)  Repeat injections were administered on January 8, 2020, April 8, 2020, 
July 8, 2020, October 8, 2020, and January 8, 2021. (JE7, pp. 106, 112, 114, 116, 118) 
Claimant’s counsel penned a letter to Dr. Hansen requesting that he provide 
opinions on causation. (See JE7, pp. 108-109)  The letter does not indicate what, if any, 
medical records were provided to Dr. Hansen for review.  Moreover, Dr. Hansen’s 
invoice does not include a charge for medical records review.  The invoice only provides 
a “Fee for Medical Report.” (JE7, p. 110) 
Dr. Hansen responded to claimant’s request on April 7, 2020. (JE7, p. 111)  In 
his letter, Dr. Hansen diagnosed claimant with bilateral knee degenerative joint disease 
and opined the fall at work on September 20, 2018, aggravated claimant’s pre-existing 
condition. (Id.)  In support of this conclusion, Dr. Hansen explained that claimant did not 
have severe pain in his knees prior to the date of injury.  Dr. Hansen concluded his 
letter by recommending claimant undergo knee replacement surgery. (Id.) 
Defendant subsequently requested updated opinions from Dr. O’Malley. 
Dr. O’Malley expanded upon several of his opinions in an April 30, 2020, letter to 
defendant. (See JE5, p. 98)  In the letter, Dr. O’Malley diagnosed claimant with severe 
bilateral knee arthritis.  He opined, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that 
claimant sustained a minor irritation of his severe bilateral knee arthritis on September 
20, 2018, and the injury neither caused nor accelerated the underlying, pre-existing 
condition.  He therefore concluded claimant’s current complaints and need for surgical 
intervention are not related to the September 20, 2018, work injury.  Dr. O’Malley 
explained the only surgical options available to claimant at this point are bilateral total 
knee replacements.  Again, Dr. O’Malley opined that his surgical recommendation “is 
not and has never been” a result of the September 20, 2018, work injury. (JE5, p. 98) 
Additional treatment for claimant’s bilateral knees was denied on May 4, 2020, as 
a result of Dr. O’Malley’s opinions. (Ex. 4, p. 1) 
Claimant sought a follow-up report from Dr. Hansen on February 16, 2021. (See 
JE7, pp. 120-121)  Dr. Hansen responded to claimant’s request on April 5, 2021. (JE7, 
p. 123)  Dr. Hansen acknowledged that claimant had degenerative joint disease in both 
of his knees prior to the date of injury, and that he did not have the opportunity to 
physically examine claimant prior to the date of injury.  He again opined that the 
September 20, 2018, fall at work aggravated claimant’s pre-existing condition.  He 
further opined conservative treatment was starting to fail, and claimant’s condition would 
require total knee replacements in the near future. (JE7, p. 123) 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 9 
 
On the issue of whether the September 20, 2018, fall materially aggravated, 
accelerated, or lit up claimant’s underlying bilateral knee condition, it is difficult to say 
that there is a stark difference of opinion among the medical professionals.  Both 
physicians opined that the injury aggravated claimant’s pre-existing condition; however, 
neither physician specifically opined that the work injury substantially or materially 
aggravated claimant’s pre-existing condition.  Similarly, neither physician opined that 
the work injury accelerated the arthritic condition such that it became symptomatic and 
progressed claimant toward total knee replacement surgery.   
In the battle of the experts, I note the opinions of Dr. O’Malley are more logical 
and consistent with the pre-existing condition and the medical records in evidence.  Dr. 
O’Malley is the only physician to provide definitive answers with respect to the nature 
and extent of claimant’s injuries.  In his April 30, 2020, letter, Dr. O’Malley opined 
claimant’s injury was a minor irritation that neither caused nor accelerated the 
underlying, pre-existing condition or need for total knee replacements.  He further 
opined claimant’s current complaints and need for surgical intervention are not related 
to the September 20, 2018, work injury. (JE5, p. 98)  Dr. O’Malley concluded his report 
by stating the recommendation for bilateral knee replacements, “is not and has never 
been a result of his most recent work injury.” (Id.) 
Throughout his post-hearing brief, claimant attributes a number of opinions to Dr. 
O’Malley that are not supported by the medical records in evidence.  At one point, 
claimant asserts, “[Dr. O’Malley] clearly states that all of [claimant’s] ongoing bilateral 
knee problems are causally related to an exacerbation of his preexisting degenerative 
arthritis when he fell at work on September 20, 2018.” (PHB, p. 7)  Claimant further 
asserts it is clear, “Dr. O’Malley feels strongly that the fall at work materially aggravated, 
exacerbated and lit up [claimant’s] preexisting arthritis and the need for ongoing medical 
treatment is related to that exacerbation.” (Id.)  I do not share claimant’s understanding 
of Dr. O’Malley’s opinions.  While it is true that Dr. O’Malley has opined that the work 
injury caused an aggravation of claimant’s pre-existing, degenerative condition, Dr. 
O’Malley has not opined that the aggravation was material or permanent.  Moreover, Dr. 
O’Malley has not opined that claimant’s ongoing bilateral knee problems are causally 
related to the fall at work on September 20, 2018.  In fact, Dr. O’Malley expressly 
opined just the opposite.  In his April 30, 2020, letter, Dr. O’Malley opined claimant’s 
injury was a minor irritation that neither caused nor accelerated the underlying, pre-
existing condition or need for total knee replacements.  He further opined claimant’s 
current complaints and need for surgical intervention are not related to the September 
20, 2018, work injury. (JE5, p. 98) 
Comparatively, Dr. Hansen’s opinions are vague and imprecise as to the nature 
and extent of claimant’s injuries.  Dr. Hansen opined that the injury aggravated 
claimant’s pre-existing degenerative condition; however, he did not specifically address 
whether the work injury substantially or materially aggravated claimant’s pre-existing 
condition, or whether the work injury was a substantial factor in bringing about the need 
for bilateral total knee replacements.  While Dr. Hansen was asked if the fall at work on 
September 20, 2018, aggravated claimant’s pre-existing condition “to the extent that he 
now needs to have [right and left knee replacements],” Dr. Hansen did not directly 
address the question in his April 5, 2021, letter.  Instead, Dr. Hansen merely provided, 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 10 
 
“With both his knees being advanced degenerative joint disease, the medical treatment 
will require knee replacements for both his right and left knee.” (JE7, p. 123)   
Claimant stresses the fact that the February 17, 2020, and February 16, 2021, 
letters to Dr. Hansen set forth the proper legal standard for causation under Iowa law.  
Given this information, claimant asserts Dr. Hansen clearly used the correct definition of 
causation as accepted by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner in his 
reports.  While claimant’s letters set forth the proper definition of causation, this is of 
little relevance when the questions posed, and the answers provided, do not incorporate 
the very language utilized in the definition.  Dr. Hansen was not asked if the fall at work 
on September 20, 2018, substantially aggravated, worsened, accelerated, or lit up his 
pre-existing degenerative condition; rather, he was simply asked – on two occasions – if 
the fall aggravated the pre-existing condition. (JE7, p. 121)   
While Dr. Hansen was asked if the fall at work on September 20, 2018, 
aggravated claimant’s pre-existing condition “to the extent that he now needs to have 
[right and left knee replacements],” Dr. Hansen did not directly address the question in 
his April 5, 2021, letter. (JE7, p. 123)  Moreover, such a question does not address 
whether the aggravation was a substantial factor in bringing about the need for total 
knee replacements.  Dr. Hansen’s opinion, “With both his knees being advanced 
degenerative joint disease, the medical treatment will require knee replacements for 
both his right and left knee” is not dissimilar from Dr. O’Malley’s opinion.  Both 
physicians agree that the only surgery that will address claimant’s degenerative joint 
disease is a total knee replacement; however, Dr. O’Malley is the only physician to 
explain whether the work injury accelerated the need for a total knee replacement. 
Lastly, it is unclear what, if any, pre-existing medical records Dr. Hansen 
reviewed prior to forming his opinions.  The only medical record pre-dating the 
September 20, 2018, fall at work referenced by Dr. Hansen is claimant’s July 24, 2018, 
x-ray. (JE7, p. 123)  There is no evidence that Dr. Hansen knew of claimant’s past 
arthroscopic surgeries, claimant’s 2011 or 2015 complaints, or that claimant was 
“limping and hobbling around” after an insidious onset of pain in his left knee occurred in 
July, 2018.  I find Dr. Hansen did not have a complete understanding of claimant’s 
medical history pre-dating the September 20, 2018, fall at work. 
There is a lack of convincing medical evidence that the fall on September 20, 
2018, is the cause of claimant’s current condition.  Ultimately, I find the opinions of Dr. 
O’Malley to be the most consistent and credible.  As such, I find that Mr. Stanton proved 
he sustained a work related injury, but that the injury was only a temporary aggravation 
of his underlying and pre-existing degenerative condition.  Accordingly, I find claimant 
failed to prove the September 20, 2018, work injury resulted in permanent disability to 
his knees.  I further find that claimant failed to prove his need for bilateral total knee 
replacements is causally related to the September 20, 2018, fall at work.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Claimant is seeking a determination as to whether his current bilateral knee 
condition is causally related to the September 20, 2018, work injury, and, if so, a 
transfer of medical care to Craig Hansen, M.D. 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 11 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. O’Malley to be the most credible and 
convincing in the evidentiary record.  Accordingly, I found that Mr. Stanton proved he 
sustained a work related injury, but that the injury was only a temporary aggravation of 
his underlying and pre-existing degenerative condition.  Further relying upon his medical 
opinions, I found that claimant failed to prove he sustained permanent functional 
impairment or permanent disability as a result of the September 20, 2018, work injury.  
Accordingly, I conclude that Mr. Stanton failed to prove entitlement to an award of 
permanent disability benefits.   
Claimant seeks alternate medical care and specifically requests an order 
transferring care to Dr. Hansen. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care .... The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 

STANTON V. GLENWOOD RESOURCE CENTER 
Page 12 
 
To prove entitlement to ongoing or future medical care, Mr. Stanton had to prove 
that the care requested is causally related to his work injury.  I found that claimant failed 
to prove that his need for bilateral total knee replacements is causally related to, or was 
materially aggravated, exacerbated, or accelerated by the September 20, 2018, fall at 
work.  Having found claimant's injury to be only a temporary aggravation of an 
underlying and pre-existing degenerative condition, I conclude claimant failed to prove 
that the need for total knee replacement surgeries is causally related to the temporary 
injury he sustained on September 20, 2018.  Claimant’s request for alternate medical 
care is not related to the September 20, 2018, work injury.  As such, I deny claimant’s 
request for alternate medical care. 
Finally, the hearing report identifies costs as a disputed issue. Costs are taxed at 
the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. In this instance, Mr. Stanton has 
not proven entitlement to any additional benefits and has failed to secure an award in 
this case. I decline to award any costs to Mr. Stanton under these circumstances. 
Rather, I conclude that all parties should bear their own costs. 
ORDER 
Claimant shall take nothing further. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall timely file all reports as required by 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ____13th ____ day of January, 2022. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Jacob Peters (via WCES) 
Meredith Cooney (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless  the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period  
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
