Case Number: 22700730.01
Case Title:  CEE, EDITH V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Cee Edith-22700730.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
EDITH CEE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                      File No. 22700730.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SFM MUTUTAL INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.: 1100, 1402.40, 1801 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Edith Cee, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from Trinity Center Luther Park, employer, and SFM Mutual Insurance 
Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of an alleged injury 
sustained on July 24, 2020.  This matter came on for hearing before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch via videoconference, using Zoom.  The 
record in this case consists of joint exhibits 1 through 3, defendants’ exhibits A through 
E, and the testimony of the claimant and Deb Nowachek.   
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
her employment on July 24, 2020;  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability;  
3. If so, whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from July 
24, 2020 to September 25, 2020;  
4. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability;  
5. If so, the nature and extent of any permanent disability; and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-20  08:43:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 2 
 
6. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if awarded. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing gave the undersigned no 
reason to doubt claimant’s veracity. However, there are noted inconsistencies between 
the evidentiary record, claimant’s evidentiary testimony, and her deposition testimony. I 
do not believe claimant intended to deceive, with the noted inconsistencies likely 
attributable to claimant’s comprehension of questions posed, as well as the listener’s 
understanding of claimant’s heavily-accented speech. Nevertheless, I find the value of 
claimant’s testimony is reduced due to these questions regarding the accuracy of her 
responses. Therefore, while I find claimant is a credible witness, the probative value of 
her testimony is limited.    
Claimant was 47 years of age at the time of hearing. She currently resides in 
Grimes, Iowa. (Claimant’s testimony) She was born in Liberia and immigrated to the 
United States in 2004. Claimant is fluent in English, yet speaks with a notable accent. 
Upon arrival in the United States, claimant completed nursing assistant training and 
obtained her certified nursing assistant (CNA) certification. (Defendants’ Exhibit E, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 6-8) Claimant began working as a nursing assistant in 2014. She began 
such work at defendant-employer, providing care for residents, in about 2016 or 2017. 
(Claimant’s testimony; Deb Nowachek’s testimony) 
Claimant’s relevant medical history includes evaluation of low back pain. On 
January 26, 2020, claimant presented to the emergency department at Broadlawns 
Medical Center (Broadlawns) and was seen by William Ingram, III, M.D. Claimant 
complained of right low back and gluteal pain. It was noted that the claimant was 
pregnant. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1) She reported ongoing pain for three days, without 
relief on the medicine previously offered after a recent evaluation. (JE1, p. 6) Dr. Ingram 
assessed low back pain with sciatica and prescribed cyclobenzaprine and 
acetaminophen for pain relief. Claimant was recommended to follow up with her primary 
care provider. (JE1, p. 3)  
On February 6, 2020, claimant presented to the occupational medicine 
department at UnityPoint Health and was seen by Brandon Penix, D.O. Dr. Penix noted 
a chief complaint of low back pain following a reported injury on January 29, 2020 while 
working. Claimant reported she was attempting to roll a resident, when she felt a pulling 
sensation in her low back and developed a significant increase in right-sided low back 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 3 
 
pain. Claimant reported pain at a level 4 on a 10-point scale. She noted previously 
sustaining a work injury approximately one year prior, with low back pain which resolved 
following an epidural steroid injection. Claimant also reported she had experienced low 
back pain prior to this recent injury, but described it as tolerable. The recent work injury 
reported resulted in a significant increase in pain which had not returned to pre-injury 
levels. Dr. Penix assessed a work-related lumbar strain and recommended use of over-
the-counter medication, heat, and home exercises. (JE2, pp. 71-72) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Penix in follow-up on February 20, 2020. Claimant 
reported her low back pain had improved to a level 1, described as stiffness. Claimant 
reported she had returned to her pre-injury state and was able to perform her job duties 
without difficulty. Dr. Penix assessed a resolved lumbar strain and discharged claimant 
to full duty, without impairment. (JE2, p. 74)  
On July 24, 2020, claimant was working the overnight shift. (DEE, Depo. Tr. p. 
16) Claimant slipped and fell in water that had been spilled on the floor by a resident. 
She was unable to get up and had to wait until a morning shift employee arrived, at 
which point an ambulance was called. (Claimant’s testimony) She was transported by 
ambulance to Broadlawns for evaluation. (DEE, Depo. Tr. p. 20) The evidentiary record 
contains verification that claimant was transported to Broadlawns; however, no 
associated treatment records are included for review. (JE1, p. 19) Claimant stated she 
was pregnant at the time of the alleged work injury and further testified the provider at 
Broadlawns told her not to return to work until she had given birth. (Claimant’s 
testimony)  
Claimant testified she experienced back pain following the fall. She had difficulty 
sitting and standing; her son would help her rise and sit down. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Deb Nowachek, chief human resources officer for defendant-employer, testified 
at evidentiary hearing. Ms. Nowachek testified that claimant was initially seen for 
emergency care in the Broadlawns Emergency Department. Thereafter, defendants 
authorized care with an occupational medicine practice. (Ms. Nowachek’s testimony) 
Ms. Nowachek’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record 
and her demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing gave the undersigned no reason to 
doubt her veracity.  Ms. Nowachek is found credible. 
On July 28, 2020, claimant presented to the occupational medicine department at 
UnityPoint Health and was seen by David Berg, D.O. Claimant reported she slipped and 
fell at work, landing on her right side, right buttocks, and right upper leg. Claimant 
complained of right low back pain with a great deal of difficulty weightbearing on the 
right lower extremity. She also described difficulty sitting due to pain of the right low 
back and pelvic area, as well as groin pain and pain which radiated down the right leg. 
Claimant denied a history of back problems or prior injuries. (JE2, p. 76) 
On examination, Dr. Berg noted claimant as in mild to moderate acute distress. 
He described the examination as “quite difficult” due to some element of exaggerated 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 4 
 
pain response, such as a great deal of low back pain with passive reflex testing of the 
lower extremities. Nevertheless, he noted a great deal of tenderness of the right SI joint. 
Claimant was unable to externally rotate the hip to perform FABER’s testing. He noted 
complaints of significant back pain, but no leg pain, with straight leg raise testing. Dr. 
Berg experienced difficulty examining claimant’s right hip range of motion due to pain 
complaints. Following examination, he assessed low back contusion, right SI joint 
dysfunction, and conditions worrisome for a right hip injury. Dr. Berg noted he was 
unable to perform x-rays due to claimant’s pregnancy and he was similarly unable to 
prescribe medication. As a result, he provided crutches to use with ambulation and 
recommended physical therapy. He released claimant to sedentary work. (JE2, pp. 76-
78)   
On August 3, 2020, claimant returned to Broadlawns and was seen in the 
obstetrics department by Emily Larson, M.D. and Larry Lindell, M.D. Claimant indicated 
she had fallen on her right side while at work on July 24, 2020. (JE1, pp. 23, 28) 
Claimant noted continued right hip pain, but the ability to ambulate with a crutch. 
Claimant reported she had not returned to work and had a physical therapy referral 
pending. Following evaluation, Dr. Larson assessed: 31 weeks gestation of pregnancy, 
doing well; and right-sided SI joint pain, status post fall at work. Claimant was excused 
from work until further notice, with a plan to return for a follow-up appointment in 2 
weeks. Physical therapy evaluation was scheduled. (JE1, pp. 23, 27, 30) 
On August 3, 2020, defendant-employer authored correspondence to claimant. 
Thereby, Ms. Nowachek indicated claimant had been released to return to work under 
restrictions of sedentary work as of July 28, 2020. (DEB, pp. 3-4) Ms. Nowachek 
indicated defendant-employer contacted claimant and claimant represented she could 
not come to work due to use of crutches. Ms. Nowachek indicated defendant-employer 
had work available within claimant’s work restrictions. (DEB, p. 4) She authored an 
“offer of suitable work” for claimant, representing claimant would be asked to fold 
laundry, clean equipment, and speak one-on-one with residents; tasks could be done 
sitting or standing. (DEB, p. 3) Ms. Nowachek further indicated she had received a 
physician note from Broadlawns, dated August 3, 2020; however, as the care was not 
authorized, defendant-employer would not recognize the hours missed as part of a 
workers’ compensation claim. (DEB, p. 4)  
On August 4, 2020, claim representative for defendants, Lindsey Calvert, 
authored a letter to claimant. Thereby, Ms. Calvert indicated the authorized provider for 
claimant’s workers’ compensation claim was UnityPoint Occupational Medicine. She 
further indicated that no other providers were authorized and to the extent care was 
received from other providers, defendants would not pay such expenses and would not 
consider any imposed work restrictions. The letter also indicated Dr. Berg had released 
claimant to work under sedentary work restrictions as of July 28, 2020 and defendant-
employer could accommodate the restrictions; accordingly, no lost time benefits would 
be paid. (DEA, p. 1) 
Claimant testified she did not return to work at defendant-employer after her work 
injury. Claimant admitted defendant-employer made an offer for her to return to work, 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 5 
 
but she did not believe herself capable of returning. (DEE, Depo. Tr. p. 21) Claimant 
indicated she was unable to drive and requested assistance with transportation from 
defendant-employer, but was denied. (Claimant’s testimony) She also testified her 
obstetrics physician told her not to return to work until after she had given birth. 
Claimant testified she took the work excuse to defendant-employer, but was told it 
would not honor a work excuse that was not written by the authorized doctor. (DEE, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 18-19)  
Ms. Nowachek testified she did not recall a conversation with claimant regarding 
her inability to drive. Ms. Nowachek testified defendants continued to authorize care at 
the occupational medicine practice or via the physical therapy ordered by Dr. Berg; 
however, claimant did not return for the authorized care. (Ms. Nowachek’s testimony)  
Claimant presented for physical therapy evaluation at Broadlawns on August 14, 
2020. Claimant reported she fell on a wet floor on July 24, 2020, causing right lower 
extremity and low back pain. A course of therapy was initiated. (JE1, p. 31) Physical 
therapy continued on August 17, 2020, at which time claimant reported low back and 
right hip pain at a level 7 on a 10-point scale. (JE1, p. 35) At therapy on August 28, 
2020, claimant’s right-sided pain had improved to a level 5. (JE1, p. 37) 
On August 28, 2020, claims representative, Ms. Calvert, authored a letter to 
claimant. Ms. Calvert stated that Broadlawns’ providers and associates were not 
authorized providers. As claimant had not sought care since July 28, 2020 with an 
authorized provider, Ms. Calvert indicated claimant’s claim was considered closed and 
no further benefits would be considered unless sought in connection with care by an 
authorized provider. (DEA, p. 2) 
Claimant returned to physical therapy at Broadlawns on September 16, 2020. 
She reported bilateral low back and hip pain at a level 6. Pain was noted as originating 
from the centralized, pubic symphysis region, around the groin, and to the front of the 
right gluteal area. (JE1, p. 55)  
Claimant gave birth to a daughter on September 25, 2020. (Claimant’s testimony; 
JE1, p. 53) Claimant testified she called defendant-employer after she gave birth and 
indicated she lacked the childcare necessary to return to work. (Claimant’s testimony)  
Claimant returned to physical therapy at Broadlawns on October 2, 2020. At that 
time, claimant reported experiencing moderate pain when she pressed upon her right 
low back, as well as sharpness radiating into the groin and right lower extremity. 
Claimant indicated she was attempting to limit her use of a crutch. (JE1, p. 53) The 
therapist noted claimant continued to experience low back and right lower extremity 
pain since her fall at work late in her pregnancy. The therapist noted that since delivery, 
claimant reported less back pain and demonstrated improved mobility and alignment by 
the end of the session. (JE1, p. 54)  
On October 15, 2020, claimant presented to physical therapy. She reported a 
couple days of relief following the previous session, but a return of pain. Pain was 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 6 
 
described as a level 4 to 5 in the low back region. She also noted a clicking sensation in 
the right low back when walking. (JE1, p. 59) 
Ms. Nowachek authored a letter to claimant, dated October 19, 2020. Thereby, 
Ms. Nowachek summarized a conversation between the two on October 5, 2020. Ms. 
Nowachek represented that claimant had informed her she delivered her baby on 
September 25, 2020 and intended to return to work in January 2021. Ms. Nowachek 
represented claimant’s 12 weeks of FMLA leave would expire on December 18, 2020 
and claimant’s anticipated return to work date was, therefore, December 19, 2020. 
(DEB, p. 5) Ms. Nowachek testified defendant-employer wanted claimant to return to 
work after completion of her FMLA leave. (Ms. Nowachek’s testimony) 
Claimant returned to physical therapy at Broadlawns on October 21, 2020 and 
reported feeling well for a few days following the prior session. She indicated she was 
performing her home exercise program, with current pain levels of 3 to 4 in the right low 
back and gluteal region. (JE1, p. 59) At therapy on November 4, 2020, claimant 
reported right low back pain at a level 4. (JE1, p. 61) At her next therapy session on 
November 9, 2020, claimant’s pain had improved to a level 3. (JE1, p. 63) Claimant 
participated in physical therapy sessions on November 18, 2020 and November 30, 
2020. At the latter session, claimant reported right low back pain at a level 2 or 3. In the 
event her pain worsened, claimant reported it improved with rest. (JE1, pp. 65, 67) 
On December 14, 2020, claimant participated in her twelfth physical therapy 
session. She denied current pain. Claimant reported she had returned to some chores 
around the home; the tasks bothered her back somewhat, but not significantly. (JE1, p. 
69) The providing therapist, Shannon Bronstad, PT, opined claimant demonstrated and 
reported great improvement in her symptoms since the birth of her daughter. PT 
Bronstad indicated claimant was capable of participating in increasing activities of daily 
living and was confident in her ability to manage her symptoms and home exercise 
program. Following evaluation, claimant was discharged from physical therapy. (JE1, p. 
70)   
On February 17, 2021, human resources generalist for defendant-employer, 
Kristen Anderson, authored correspondence to claimant. Thereby, Ms. Anderson 
represented she had attempted to contact claimant on several occasions regarding her 
work status, as claimant had not worked since July 24, 2020. In the event claimant did 
not make contact by February 24, 2021, Ms. Anderson indicated defendant-employer 
would consider claimant to have resigned her employment. (DEB, p. 6) 
Claimant testified that after she obtained childcare, she sought and was hired for 
a new job. She began work, full time, as a CNA for another facility. Claimant testified 
her duties were the same as she would have performed at defendant-employer. She 
remained in this position until 2022, when she desired a position with fewer hours, in 
order to allow her additional time with her children. Claimant was hired as a CNA at a 
different facility, performing the same duties, but working only 32 hours per week. 
(Claimant’s testimony) 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 7 
 
At defendants’ request, claimant was evaluated on November 17, 2023 by 
orthopaedic spine surgeon, Trevor Schmitz, M.D., for purposes of an independent 
medical examination (IME). Following records review, history, and examination, Dr. 
Schmitz issued a report containing his findings and opinions dated December 1, 2023. 
Claimant informed Dr. Schmitz that she sustained an injury in 2020, after slipping and 
falling at work, and which resulted in right-sided low back pain. (JE3, p. 79) Claimant 
reported she had fallen after slipping in water that had been spilled by a resident. She 
was seen at Broadlawns, where she reported landing on her bottom and right hip. 
Claimant described level 8 pain in her right lower back, which radiated down the right 
leg. Due to her pregnancy, claimant had been given a Lidoderm patch for pain. (JE8, p. 
82) Claimant reported she had also sustained another work injury while rolling a 
resident and which resulted in low back and bilateral leg pain. Claimant denied any 
other instances of low back pain. (JE3, p. 79)  
Dr. Schmitz noted claimant was ultimately treated with a course of physical 
therapy and released from care, without pain, on December 14, 2020. (JE3, p. 82) 
Claimant reported she received some relief with physical therapy following her alleged 
work injury. To Dr. Schmitz, claimant reported primarily right-sided low back pain at a 
level 5 on a 10-point scale. Claimant indicated pain worsened with prolonged standing 
and was relieved with rest. (JE3, pp. 79-80) 
Dr. Schmitz performed a physical examination. On examination, Dr. Schmitz 
found normal alignment, functional range of motion, and no obvious muscle wasting. He 
noted no palpable spasm or subluxation. Dr. Schmitz did find tenderness to palpation of 
the midline low back, as well as low back pain with simulated trunk rotation and axial 
compression of the spine. (JE3, p. 81)  
Following examination and records review, Dr. Schmitz addressed claimant’s 
diagnosis as follows: 
[Claimant] is reporting to me that she has axial low back pain that she is 
rating as a 5/10. She denies any significant right hip complaints. All of these 
conditions are subjective in nature. She has an examination that is entirely 
consistent with a nonanatomic pain source and she is likely presenting with 
a psychosocial source for her pain. She does have several nonanatomic 
pain behaviors on my examination. These would include low back pain with 
simulated trunk rotation, low back pain with hip/knee/ankle/foot range of 
motion testing, and low back pain with axial compression of the spine.  
(JE3, p. 82) 
 
Dr. Schmitz indicated he did not believe claimant’s alleged work injury or her 
employment duties were a significant or substantial contributing factor to her low back 
or right hip complaints. He explained that claimant was involved in a “minor” slip and fall 
incident on July 24, 2020, had presented with only axial low back pain, and had no pain 
as of her release on December 14, 2020. (JE3, p. 82) Additionally, claimant did not 
present with a significant structural complaint to her low back. He further indicated 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 8 
 
claimant’s physical examination was entirely normal, absent “nonanatomic pain 
magnification behaviors.” (JE3, p. 83) He opined claimant achieved maximum medical 
improvement from the July 24, 2020 injury as of December 14, 2020. Dr. Schmitz 
opined claimant did not sustain permanent impairment to her low back or right hip, did 
not require permanent work restrictions, nor did she require further treatment as a result 
of the alleged work injury. (JE3, p. 83) 
Claimant testified she continues to experience lower back pain. The pain comes 
and goes. Claimant admitted she had lower back pain prior to the alleged work injury, 
but testified the pain worsened thereafter. At evidentiary hearing, claimant testified her 
pain was nearly the same level as preinjury. She explained that she attributed her 
preinjury pain to pregnancy, but the pain did not resolve after she gave birth as 
anticipated. She also testified that on occasion, the pain can now prevent her from 
moving and can interfere with her ability to stand up from a reclined position. 
(Claimant’s testimony) 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of her employment on July 24, 2020. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 9 
 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
Defendants argue claimant cannot prove she sustained an injury arising out of 
and in the course of her employment, as no physician has opined claimant sustained an 
injury at work. Defendants are correct insofar as no physician has offered this specific 
opinion; however, the record contains ample lay evidence and medical records to 
support claimant’s contention that she sustained an injury at work. Claimant consistently 
and credibly testified she suffered a fall at work after slipping on a wet floor. She was 
transported via ambulance from defendant-employer’s facility to Broadlawns for medical 
evaluation. Thereafter, defendants authorized medical care with an occupational 
medicine practice. At the time of her evaluation with Dr. Berg four days later, claimant 
reported she suffered a slip and fall at work. Although Dr. Berg noted some exaggerated 
pain response, he assessed a low back contusion, right SI joint dysfunction, and 
conditions worrisome for a right hip injury. He imposed work restrictions. Defendant-
employer acknowledged the restrictions and made an offer of light duty work. Claimant 
also reported she suffered a fall at work to providers at both the Broadlawns obstetrics 
and physical therapy departments.  
Claimant’s credible testimony and reports to multiple medical providers are 
consistent with respect to the mechanism of the alleged work injury. Additionally, there 
is no contrary explanation offered to account for the sudden onset of claimant’s 
symptoms, such as a fall at home or other activity aside from the reported work injury. 
One physician, Dr. Schmitz, did opine claimant’s ongoing low back and right hip 
symptoms over three years post-injury were not causally related to her employment 
duties or alleged injury. This opinion does not equate to a legal finding that claimant did 
not initially sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of her employment. In fact, 
Dr. Schmitz’s opinion acknowledges claimant sustained a “minor” slip and fall incident, 
for which she achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of December 14, 
2020.  
Based upon the totality of the evidentiary record, I find claimant has proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she sustained an injury arising out of and in the 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 10 
 
course of her employment. I find claimant did suffer a fall at work while performing her 
work duties on July 24, 2020, when she slipped and fell in water spilled by a resident, 
and which resulted in symptoms of her low back and right hip. 
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
temporary disability. If so, the next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled 
to temporary disability benefits from July 24, 2020 to September 25, 2020. These issues 
will be considered together. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Under Iowa law, the employer is required to provide care to an injured employee 
and is permitted to choose the care.  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 
N.W.2d 433, 435 (Iowa 1997). 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Iowa Code § 85.33(1) (2015).  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar to the 
work performed at the time of injury.  Id.  

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 11 
 
Claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her employment 
on July 24, 2020. Dr. Berg, the physician authorized by defendants, placed claimant 
under sedentary work restrictions as of his post-injury evaluation on July 28, 2020. As 
claimant has proven she sustained an injury which resulted in imposition of work 
restrictions and missed time from work, claimant has established the work injury was a 
cause of temporary disability. 
Given that Dr. Berg imposed work restrictions on July 28, 2020, it is concluded 
that claimant was also restricted from work duties following the injury on July 24, 2020. 
Claimant did not return to work and defendant-employer did not make an offer of work 
until August 3, 2020. Therefore, claimant is entitled to temporary total disability benefits 
from July 24, 2020 through August 3, 2020. The parties stipulated that at the time of the 
injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $668.18 per week and she was married and 
entitled to 6 exemptions. The proper weekly rate of compensation is therefore $476.29.   
On August 3, 2020, defendants advised claimant that sedentary work was 
available to her. The specific offer of work set forth duties which could be completed 
sitting or standing and included tasks such as folding laundry, cleaning equipment and 
speaking with residents. There is no evidence in the record which indicates these tasks 
are outside of claimant’s restrictions. I find that defendant-employer made an offer of 
suitable work on August 3, 2020.  
Claimant admits she did not return to work and testified she did not believe 
herself capable of returning to work at that time. Further, claimant relies upon the 
opinion of her obstetrics provider, which excused claimant from work at that time. 
Claimant is correct that her obstetrics provider removed claimant from work; however, 
claimant’s obstetrics provider was not an authorized physician in this matter. 
Additionally, claimant did not take steps to return to the authorized medical providers 
and explain her concerns regarding her pregnancy, nor provide Dr. Berg with a copy of 
the obstetrics note excusing her from work. Rather, claimant continued to seek medical 
care on her own, through her own chosen providers, and did not return to the authorized 
providers for additional evaluation.  
Under these facts, I cannot find defendants are bound to the medical opinion of 
claimant's unauthorized obstetrics provider. Defendants authorized reasonable medical 
care and, on August 3, 2020, offered work to claimant within the restrictions imposed by 
Dr. Berg. Claimant refused to return to work. Accordingly, defendants are not 
responsible for temporary disability benefits after August 3, 2020.  
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
permanent disability. If so, the next issues are the nature and extent of any permanent 
disability, as well as the commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if 
awarded. These issues will be considered together.  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 12 
 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Dr. Schmitz authored the only medical opinion in evidence regarding whether 
claimant’s ongoing low back and right hip complaints are causally related to the work 
injury on July 24, 2020. Dr. Schmitz performed an independent medical examination in 
November 2023, nearly three years following claimant’s release from active treatment of 
her work injury. He opined claimant presented with no significant structural component 
to her low back and an entirely normal examination, absent nonanatomic pain 
magnification behaviors. Dr. Schmitz indicated he did not believe claimant’s work injury 
or employment duties were a significant or substantial contributing factor to the low back 
and/or right hip complaints for which she presented. Rather, he opined claimant 
experienced a minor slip and fall incident at work, for which she achieved MMI and had 
no pain complaints as of her release on December 14, 2020. With respect to the work 
injury, Dr. Schmitz opined claimant did not sustain permanent impairment, required no 
restrictions, and claimant did not require further medical treatment.  
Dr. Schmitz’ opinion is unrebutted, and the undersigned is presented with no 
reason to reject his opinion based on inaccuracies or other faults in his examination or 
report. Dr. Schmitz’ opinions with respect to potential exaggerated pain 
behaviors/responses are consistent with notes authored by Dr. Berg. Dr. Schmitz’ 
opinion that claimant achieved MMI as of December 14, 2020 is consistent with physical 
therapy notes of that date noting great improvement in claimant’s symptoms, no pain at 
the time of evaluation, and ultimate release from care. Thereafter, claimant did not 
obtain additional medical care. When Dr. Schmitz’ unrebutted opinion is coupled with 
claimant’s past history of low back complaints, I am unable to find that claimant has 
proven the work injury of July 24, 2020 is a cause of permanent disability. 
Having found claimant has failed to prove the work injury is a cause of 
permanent disability, claimant is not entitled to permanent disability benefits. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 

CEE V. TRINITY CENTER LUTHER PARK 
Page 13 
 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant temporary total disability benefits at the 
weekly rate of four hundred seventy-six and 29/100 dollars ($476.29) for the period of 
July 24, 2020 through August 3, 2020. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a 
lump sum together with interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File 
No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
Signed and filed this _20th _ day of December, 2024. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Kenneth Weiland (via WCES) 
 
Marshall Tuttle (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The ap peal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
