Case Number: 5062153
Case Title:  KENKEL, STEVE V. HARLAN, CITY OF
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      1929213.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
CITY OF HARLAN and EMCASCO 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
 
Petitioners, 
 
vs. 
 
STEVE KENKEL, 
 
Respondent. 
 
 
Case No. CVCV058600 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR JUDICIAL 
REVIEW 
 
 
This matter came before the court on December 13, 2019, for hearing on Petitioners’ petition for 
judicial review. The City of Harlan and EMCASCO Insurance Company (“Petitioners”) appeared through 
attorney D. Brian Scieszinski. Steve Kenkel (“Respondent”) appeared through attorney Jason Neifert.  
Having entertained the arguments of the parties, having reviewed the court file, having reviewed the 
applicable case law, and being otherwise fully advised in the premises, the Court now enters the following 
ruling. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Factual Background  
Steve Kenkel (“Kenkel”) has worked for the City of Harlan since 1977. Kenkel started working at 
Harlan’s new wastewater treatment plant in 1978. He has worked at the wastewater treatment plant full-
time in various capacities ever since. From 1978 and 1993, Kenkel worked as a wastewater operator and 
technician at the plant. After a promotion, Kenkel served as the assistant superintendent of the plant from 
1993 to 2010. Kenkel has been the plant superintendent since 2010. The wastewater treatment plant can be 
a noisy place. Kenkel testified to a number of noise-sources in and around the plant. In the plant there is an 
office, restroom, breakroom, and a laboratory. From 1987 to 1993 the office was not enclosed. Of note, 
there are three sludge pumps in the lower level of the plant. The pumps are in a concrete room and only a 
metal grate separates them from the main level of the plant where the office is located.  The sludge pumps 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Mar-19  11:31:03     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

2 
 
were originally installed in 1978. Since then, the City of Harlan replaced one pump in 1998 and another in 
2014. There is always a minimum of one pump running at any given time. A shop nearby houses an air 
compressor and generator for the plant. 
In May 2015, a representative of the sludge pump manufacturer estimated that based on the models 
in use from 1978 to 1998 the total decibel level produced by the pumps was 98 db. The representative 
estimated that from 1998 to 2014 their decibel level was 89 db and that from 2014 and on the pumps ran at 
81 db. In November 2014, the City of Harlan’s safety director took noise readings at the plant for the first 
time. The readings revealed that eleven places measured decibel levels of 80 dB and greater. This included 
where the three sludge pumps were housed, the boiler room, the shop air compressor and the shop generator. 
Kenkel noted this was when he first learned the pumps had such a high decibel level. In his capacity as 
plant superintendent, Kenkel took several steps to mitigate noise levels and noise exposure, such as moving 
the shop generator outside, closing off the office area and laboratory from the plant, rebuilding the third 
sludge pump so it ran quieter, posting decibel levels in the building, and requiring that hearing protection 
be worn in areas with dB readings of 85 dB and higher. Kenkel testified that, prior to 2014, his use of 
hearing protection was limited and that he only wore protection when he was exposed to loud noises that 
were out of the ordinary. He indicated that he did not wear hearing protection during normal plant operation.  
Kenkel testified that he started experiencing hearing difficulties somewhere between 2005 and 
2007. He noted the onset of ringing and whistling in his ears and having to ask people to repeat themselves. 
Kenkel was advised about hearing aids at various points in time. Kenkel noted that an audiologist told him 
that his hearing was getting worse and that he might look into getting hearing aids sometime between 2010 
and 2012. Also, one of Kenkel’s July, 2013 audiograms noted that the clinician spoke with Kenkel about 
hearing aids. However, Kenkel did not investigate hearing aids because concerns about costs outweighed 
any apparent burden at the time. The City of Harlan provided hearing tests on a near annual basis since 
1992. Still, Kenkel was not provided with a copy of the results until he requested them in 2014.  
Kenkel explained that he recognized that his hearing loss was getting to the point where he needed 
to address it in August of 2014. At the time, he was spending more time with his daughter, and according 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
to him, she “talks a lot quieter and faster than his wife did. And she was getting very agitated at me of 
asking her to repeat things all the time. And so that’s when I started looking into [getting hearing aids].” 
Kenkel reported contacting his health insurance provider to see if they would cover hearing aids. They 
indicated they would not and directed Kenkel to one of their vendors to see if he could get a better rate. The 
individual he spoke with told Kenkel that he should talk with his human resources person at the City of 
Harlan because the hearing aids might be covered due to occupational hearing loss. Soon after, Kenkel 
spoke with the City Administrator about how to proceed and who would pay for his hearing aids.  
Kenkel testified that it was August, 2014, when he connected his hearing issues to his work for the 
City of Harlan. On August 19, 2014, Kenkel had his annual hearing test with the City of Harlan. Per the 
technician’s notes, Kenkel discussed hearing aids and further testing at the appointment. The report 
generated from this visit indicated that Kenkel had mild hearing loss at normal speech frequencies and more 
severe hearing loss at high pitched frequencies. On August 22, 2014, Kenkel went to Hearing Healthcare 
Centers to look into getting hearing aids. On his patient form, Kenkel reported his hearing loss was gradual, 
that he first noticed his hearing loss in the past five years, that the cause was work, and that he has the most 
difficulty hearing soft voices, people talking fast, and in crowds.  
Multiple individuals examined whether there was a causal relationship between Kenkel’s noise 
exposure at work and his hearing loss and tinnitus. Some of them questioned whether the noise exposure 
he experienced at work could have caused his hearing injuries. A City of Harlan-retained audiologist, Abby 
Couse, M.S. found it was difficult to confirm whether Kenkel’s employment with the City of Harlan was 
the sole cause of his hearing impairment. Couse’s review was based on a representation that hearing 
protection was worn at all times, with the exception of when employees were in the office. Couse also did 
not have the manufacturer’s estimates of the sludge pump decibel levels. Dr. Dean Wampler, relying on 
Kenkel having used hearing protection in the plant and pump areas, contended that with such hearing 
protection, the degree of Kenkel’s hearing loss could not have been caused by the noise exposure that he 
experienced working for the City of Harlan. The audiologist retained by Kenkel’s counsel, Richard Tyler, 
Ph.D., interviewed Kenkel and reviewed his audiogram records. Kenkel explained to Dr. Tyler that he first 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
noticed his tinnitus fifteen or twenty years earlier and described experiencing the condition constantly. 
Kenkel related the noise levels he experienced at work and the recreational noise exposure he experienced 
during target shooting, hunting, and using chainsaws. Dr. Tyler opined that Kenkel’s hearing loss and 
tinnitus were most probably the result of the noise exposure he experienced at work. He also explained that 
Kenkel’s audiogram results were consistent with noise-induced hearing loss. Ultimately, Dr. Tyler found 
that Kenkel had a permanent impairment of nine percent stemming from his tinnitus and a high frequency 
hearing loss of 18.3 percent in both ears.  Dr. Tyler recommended permanent work restrictions, which 
included that Kenkel should not work (1) around loud or unpredictable noise, (2) dangerous situations 
requiring accurate concentration, or (3) stressful situations that require auditory localization skills. 
Kenkel also saw Dr. Mark Zlab for an independent medical examination. Kenkel reported the noise 
exposure he experienced at work since 1977, his hunting, and that his hearing issues began in the early to 
mid-90s. Dr. Zlab tested Kenkel’s hearing with an audiogram and tympanometry. His assessment was that 
Kenkel had a five percent impairment from his tinnitus and age-corrected hearing loss of 14.65 percent in 
both ears. Dr. Zlab reviewed Kenkel’s audiograms dating back to 1992 and observed that Kenkel’s hearing 
loss worsened over the years, which he found to be consistent with noise damage. Dr. Zlab stated “we can 
conclude that the loss is from his noise exposure in the work environment.” and that there is no treatment 
other than hearing aids. R. 39.  
Kenkel reported receiving hearing aids on August 22, 2014, and testified that with his hearing aids 
he is able to perform all the elements of his job without difficulty. He also related that the hearing aids mask 
his tinnitus to some degree when he is wearing them, but he continues to experience symptoms when he 
takes them out.  
B. Procedural History 
 
On July 27, 2016, Kenkel filed an original notice and petition for benefits. Kenkel alleged that he 
suffered hearing loss and tinnitus arising out of and in the course of his employment with the City of Harlan 
and as a result, experienced a permanent industrial disability. The City of Harlan contested both of these 
claims and asserted, in any event, that Kenkel failed to provide timely notice of his alleged work-place 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
injuries pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.23 and failed to bring his claim within the two-year statute of 
limitations pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.26.  
On September 11, 2017, Iowa Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica Fitch 
(“Deputy Commissioner Fitch”) arbitrated this case and ruled on these matters. As an initial matter, Deputy 
Commissioner Fitch found Kenkel to be credible and found no reason to doubt the veracity of what he said. 
In her arbitration decision.  Deputy Commissioner Fitch gave the greatest weight to the consistent opinions 
of Dr. Ztlab and Dr. Tyler who identified a causal connection between Kenkel’s hearing injuries and his 
work for the City of Harlan. She found that Kenkel regularly worked without hearing protection. Moreover, 
she found that Couse’s and Dr. Womback’s reports relied on inaccurate and incomplete understandings of 
Kenkel’s noise exposure, particularly the frequency with which Kenkel wore hearing protection. Deputy 
Commissioner Fitch also noted that Couse opined on whether Kenkel’s hearing loss was solely caused by 
his work, a stricter causation standard than required by law. As such, Deputy Commissioner Fitch found 
that Kenkel proved his claim by a preponderance of the evidence.  
Deputy Commissioner Fitch further found that Kenkel’s work injury caused him permanent 
disability. She highlighted that both Dr. Zlab and Dr. Tyler opined that Kenkel sustained a permanent 
impairment due to his hearing loss and tinnitus, and that Dr. Tyler recommended certain permanent work 
restrictions. Deputy Commissioner Fitch concluded that Kenkel had an industrial disability of fifteen 
percent, noting the following factors: (1) that Dr. Zlab and Dr. Tyler arrived at similar impairment ratings; 
(2) that Kenkel’s conditions warranted permanent work restrictions; (3) that Kenkel must use hearing aids 
because of his significant hearing loss; (4) that the hearing aids reduce the impact of the tinnitus and assist 
his hearing; (5) that Kenkel admits he is capable of performing his work duties with the use of hearing aids; 
(6) that he is 58 years old, graduated from high school and received a certification in wastewater treatment; 
(7) that he worked his whole career for the City of Harlan; (8) that he would not be working for a different 
employer if his hearing were better; (9) that his earnings have not currently been impacted; and (10) that he 
sustained significant  hearing loss and impaired hearing function and tinnitus.  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
She further determined that Kenkel’s injury manifested on August 19, 2014– the date of Kenkel’s 
2014 hearing test with the City. Deputy Commissioner Fitch acknowledged that Kenkel “suffered hearing 
loss and tinnitus symptoms long before 2014” but noted that Kenkel “was not provided with copies of his 
audiograms [until this test]” and found that “it was not until August, 2014, that [Kenkel’s] symptoms had 
reached a level which interfered with his activities at home and work.” Deputy Commissioner Fitch also 
noted that it was at this time when Kenkel contacted his personal health insurance company regarding 
coverage for hearing aids and was instructed to look into a possible relationship between his work 
environment and his hearing issues. Deputy Commissioner Fitch highlighted that when Kenkel received 
this information, he reported his claim to the City of Harlan which then further investigated the noise levels 
in the plant. 
Based upon this determination, Deputy Commissioner Fitch found that the City of Harlan failed to 
meet its burden to prove the affirmative defenses of lack of timely notice and the statute of limitations. With 
respect to the City of Harlan’s Iowa Code section 85.23 defense, Deputy Commissioner Fitch found that 
Kenkel provided timely notice because the City of Harlan acknowledged receiving Kenkel’s claim for 
benefits on October 29, 2014, well within 90 days of the August 19, 2014. Similarly, Deputy Commissioner 
Fitch found that Kenkel filed his petition within the two-year statute of limitations in Iowa Code section 
85.26. 
The City of Harlan appealed this decision. Upon a de novo review, the Commissioner reached the 
same conclusions as Deputy Commissioner Fitch and adopted Deputy Commissioner Fitch’s findings of 
fact and conclusions of law as the agency’s final decision. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 
Chapter 17A of the Iowa Code governs judicial review of administrative agency action. The district 
court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law by the agency. Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 
213, 219 (Iowa 2006). The Court “may grant relief if the agency action has prejudiced the substantial rights 
of the petitioner, and the agency action meets one of the enumerated criteria contained in section 17A.19 
(10) (a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care Cntr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 N.W.2d 758, 762 (Iowa 2011)). Where an agency has been “clearly 
vested” with fact-finding authority, the appropriate “standard of review [on appeal] depends on the aspect 
of the agency’s decision that forms the basis of the petition for judicial review”—that is, whether it involves 
an issue of (1) findings of fact, (2) interpretations of law, or (3) application of law to fact. Burton, 813 
N.W.2d at 256. 
The Court must also grant appropriate relief from agency action if such action was “[b]ased upon 
an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation has not clearly been vested by a 
provision of law in the discretion of the agency.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c). With respect to such 
provisions of law, the Court is not required to defer to the agency’s interpretation. Iowa Code § 
17A.19(11)(b). Additionally, the Court must grant relief from agency action that is “[b]ased upon an 
irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable interpretation of a provision of law,” based upon a 
misapplication of law to the facts, or “[o]therwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of 
discretion.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(1)(l–n). 
If “the claim of error lies with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge is to the agency’s 
application of the law to the facts, and the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion 
by, for example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.” 
Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. In other words, the Court will only reverse the Commissioner’s application of 
law to the facts if “it is ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’” Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518 (quoting 
Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007); see also Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (“When 
application of law to fact has been clearly vested in the discretion of an agency, a reviewing court may only 
disturb the agency’s application of the law to the facts of a particular case if that application is ‘irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’”). 
If the alleged error is one of fact, the standard of review is whether the findings are supported by 
substantial evidence.  Harris, 778 N.W.2d at 196; Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 
557 (Iowa 2010). “[A] reviewing court can only disturb those factual findings if they are ‘not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is reviewed as a whole.’” Burton, 813 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)). The Court “is limited to the findings that were actually 
made by the agency and not other findings the agency could have made.” Id. “Evidence is substantial if a 
reasonable person would find the evidence adequate to reach the same conclusion.”  Grundmeyer v. 
Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002) (citing Ehteshamfar v. UTA Engineered Sys. Div., 
555 N.W.2d 450, 452 (Iowa 1996)).  
ANALYSIS 
 
Petitioners make three arguments on appeal. First, Petitioners argue that the Commissioner erred 
in determining that Kenkel sustained an industrial disability. Second, Petitioners argue that Kenkel’s claim 
was barred for lack of timely notice under Iowa Code §85.23. Last, Petitioners argue that Kenkel’s claim 
was barred by the statute of limitations set forth in Iowa Code §85.26. Petitioners’ arguments regarding 
timely notice and the statute of limitations are discussed first as they are dispositive. Moreover, Petitioners’ 
arguments regarding timely notice and the statute of limitations will be discussed together because both 
arguments rest on Petitioners’ claim that the Commissioner erred in determining that Kenkel’s injuries 
manifested on August 19, 2014.  
A. Notice and Statute of Limitations 
The issue is whether the Commissioner erred in determining that Kenkel’s injuries manifested on 
August 19, 2014. “The Commissioner is entitled to a substantial amount of latitude in making a 
determination regarding the date of manifestation since this is an inherently fact-based determination.” 
Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829 (Iowa 1992). Accordingly, the Court will only 
disturb the Commissioner’s finding that Kenkel’s injuries manifested on August 19, 2014, if it is not 
supported by substantial evidence in the record.  
Iowa Code section 85.23 essentially states that a workers’ compensation claim is barred if the 
employee does not provide notice of the injury within ninety days of the occurrence of the injury, unless 
the employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
Iowa Code section 85.26 states in relevant part, “An original proceeding for benefits under this 
chapter or chapter 85A, 85B, or 86, shall not be maintained in any contested case unless the proceeding is 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
commenced within two years from the date of the occurrence of the injury for which benefits are claimed…” 
Iowa Code §85.26.  
For cumulative injuries such as Kenkel’s bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus injuries in this case, the 
cumulative injury rule and the discovery rule are the applicable legal standards for determining when time 
begins to run for the purposes of sections 85.23 and 85.26. See generally Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 
284, 287 (Iowa 2001). In Herrera v. IBP, Inc., the Iowa Supreme Court stated:  
[A] cumulative injury is manifested when the claimant, as a reasonable person, 
would be plainly aware (1) that he or she suffers from a condition or injury, and (2) that 
this condition or injury was caused by the claimant's employment. Upon the occurrence of 
these two circumstances, the injury is deemed to have occurred. Nonetheless, by virtue of 
the discovery rule, the statute of limitations will not begin to run until the employee also 
knows that the physical condition is serious enough to have a permanent adverse impact 
on the claimant's employment or employability, i.e., the claimant knows or should know 
the “nature, seriousness, and probable compensable character” of his injury or condition. 
633 N.W.2d at 288.  
Here, the Commissioner found that Kenkel’s bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus injuries manifested 
on August 19, 2014. The Commissioner was not required to make a finding under the discovery rule in this 
case because (1) Petitioners received Kenkel’s claim for benefits and had notice of his injuries on October 
29, 2014, within the 90 days required by Iowa Code section 85.23 and (2) Kenkel filed his petition with the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner on July 27, 2016, which was within the two-year statute of 
limitations in Iowa Code section 85.26.  
Petitioners’ arguments that Kenkel’s claim is barred for lack of timely notice and by the statute of 
limitations are essentially the same. Petitioners argue that the Commissioner erred in determining that 
Kenkel’s injuries manifested on August 19, 2014. Petitioners argue that, under the discovery rule, Kenkel 
knew or should have known about his injuries years before August 19, 2014. In support of their arguments, 
Petitioners claim that Kenkel admitted to knowing that his hearing problems were serious and work-related 
years before August 19, 2014, citing Ex. 2, p. 5 and a portion of his cross examination on pages 51-55 
multiple times to support this proposition. Petitioners rely primarily on Chapa v. John Deere Ottumwa 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
Works, 652 N.W.2d 187 (Iowa 2002) to support the proposition that Kenkel should have known that his 
injuries were serious and work related years before August 19, 2014.  
Ex. 2, p. 5 is Kenkel’s patient analysis chart dated August 22, 2014 from Hearing Healthcare 
Centers where an audiogram was performed on him. In part, Kenkel reported his hearing loss was gradual, 
that he first noticed his hearing loss in the past five years, that the cause was work, and that he has the most 
difficulty hearing soft voices, people talking fast, and in crowds. The date of this document is August 22, 
2014, which is three days after August 19, 2014, when the Commissioner found that Kenkel’s injuries 
manifested. 
Petitioners point to their cross-examination of Kenkel during arbitration, where Petitioners counsel 
asked Kenkel to elaborate on his answers in the patient analysis chart dated August 22, 2014. Despite 
Petitioners’ contentions, Kenkel did not admit that he knew he had an injury five years prior nor did he 
admit that he was aware that work was the cause of his injuries five years prior. At most, Kenkel’s testimony 
was inconclusive towards these points. Petitioners had the burden of proof for their affirmative defenses. 
On the other hand, Kenkel’s testimony on direct examination was clear that he did not connect his hearing 
loss to work until “this whole claim came up.” [Arbitration Hr’g Tr.at 38:9-12].  
More importantly, the Commissioner was present during Kenkel’s testimony and stated, 
“Claimant’s testimony was clear and consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, deposition 
testimony, and recorded statements. His demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing was excellent and gave 
the undersigned no reason to doubt claimant’s veracity. Claimant is found credible.” [Arbitration Decision 
at 2]. Viewing the record as a whole, substantial evidence supports the Commissioner’s finding that Kenkel 
did not know both that he had an injury and whether it was connected to his work until August 19, 2014.  
In Chapa, the Supreme Court of Iowa affirmed the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner’s 
dismissal of Chapa’s claim. Chapa v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 652 N.W.2d 187, 188 (Iowa 2002). The 
Supreme Court affirmed the commissioner’s decision and found that Chapa knew or should have known 
about the seriousness of his injury and its relation to his work in 1983. Id. at 189-190. In that case, Chapa 
worked at John Deere and was regularly exposed to factory noise. Chapa retired from John Deere on 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
December 31, 1995, and brought his claim for compensation in 1997. Chapa, 652 N.W.2d at 188. The 
Supreme Court found that the record supported the commissioner’s finding, noting that Chapa first noticed 
“a ‘very strange’ ringing in his ears in 1983...The sound awakened him from sleep, affecting his 
concentration at work.” Id. at 189. Chapa felt less alert at work. Id.  
Kenkel’s case differs from Chapa’s in two important ways. First and most important, the record in 
this case shows that Kenkel was not affected by his hearing loss to the extent that Chapa was affected. 
Although Kenkel was aware that his hearing was worsening over the years, Kenkel was not affected to the 
point where his hearing problems were “serious enough to have a permanent adverse impact on the [his] 
employment or employability.” Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 288 (Iowa 2001). To the contrary, 
Kenkel did not seem to have any problems at work. Second, unlike Chapa who brought his claim nearly 
two years after he retired, Kenkel brought his claim while still employed at the City of Harlan.  
In sum, substantial evidence supports the Commissioner’s finding that Kenkel’s injuries manifested 
on August 19, 2014. It is inconsequential exactly when the discovery rule started the clock on sections 
85.23 and 85.26 after August 19, 2014, because Petitioners had notice within 90 days pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.23 and Kenkel brought filed his petition within the two-year statute of limitations provided 
in Iowa Code section 85.26. Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 288.  
B. Industrial Disability 
 
Petitioners claim that the Commissioner erred in determining that Kenkel sustained an industrial 
disability. They contend that the Commissioner “incorrectly assumes that an injured worker who has 
sustained a functional impairment which results in no loss of earning capacity is entitled to an industrial 
disability award.” Petitioners are correct that “industrial disability measures an employee's lost earning 
capacity.” Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 306 (Iowa 2005) (citing Second 
Injury Fund v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 265 (Iowa 1995)). However, Petitioners are incorrect insofar as 
they argue that the Commissioner erred in determining that Kenkel’s earning capacity is diminished because 
Kenkel maintains his current job with City, is able to perform his current job duties with hearing aids, and 
makes the same income.  
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
Substantial evidence supports the Commissioner’s finding. The commissioner must consider many 
factors when determining whether a worker experienced a loss in earning capacity, some of which include: 
“functional impairment, age, education, intelligence, work experience, qualifications, ability to engage in 
similar employment, and adaptability to retraining.” Keystone, 705 N.W.2d at 306 citing Myers v. F.C.A. 
Servs., Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 356 (Iowa 1999). While actual loss of earnings may be considered, 
“compensable disabilities [are] often present despite the fact that the employee has not, as of yet, suffered 
any actual diminution in earnings.” Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 1992). 
Furthermore, a reduction in earning capacity may be found even where the worker’s actual earnings have 
increased. St. Luke's Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 653 (Iowa 2000). As such, Kenkel “[was] not required 
to prove an actual reduction in earnings to establish a loss of earning capacity.” Polaris Indus. v. Sharar, 
2015 Iowa App. LEXIS 382 (Iowa Ct. App. Apr. 22, 2015). 
In finding that Kenkel sustained an industrial disability, Deputy Commissioner Fitch not only 
weighed Kenkel’s impairment rating but she also considered that Kenkel’s conditions warranted permanent 
work restrictions. In assigning an industrial disability of fifteen percent, she addressed the factors that 
influenced her award, considering Kenkel’s age, education, work experience, qualifications, and workplace 
restrictions, in addition to the other factors noted above. While Petitioners identify factors that could have 
lowered Kenkel’s industrial disability assessment, the Court finds ample evidence in the record to support 
the Commissioner’s ultimate findings. Because the Commissioner vis a vis Deputy Commissioner Fitch 
considered the proper factors in assessing the claimant's industrial disability and because those findings are 
supported by substantial evidence, this Court finds no basis to reverse the Commissioner's determination 
that Kenkel sustained an industrial disability of fifteen percent. See Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. 
Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 307 (Iowa 2005).  
CONCLUSION 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, the decision of Deputy Commissioner Fitch, as affirmed by the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, is hereby AFFIRMED. 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

13 
 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the Petition for Judicial Review is hereby DENIED and 
DISMISSED. 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that costs shall be assessed to Petitioners. 
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV058600
CITY OF HARLAN AND EMCASCO VS STEVE KENKEL
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-03-09 18:44:53     page 14 of 14
E-FILED  2020 MAR 09 6:44 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
