Case Number: 5066232
Case Title:  BOWSER, MICHAEL V. NESTLE USA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bowser Michael-5066232d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL BOWSER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5066232 
NESTLE USA, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY   : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  :      Head Notes:  1108.50, 1402.50, 1403.30 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                            1801, 2803, 2907, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  :             
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Michael Bowser, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Nestle USA, Inc., employer and Indemnity Insurance 
Company of North America, insurance carrier as defendants.  Hearing was held on 
September 17, 2019 in Waterloo, Iowa. 
It should be noted that on September 4, 2019, the undersigned issued a ruling on 
claimant’s motion to bifurcate.  The ruling stated that issue of permanent partial 
disability and the extent of claimant’s permanent disabilities would not be ripe for 
determination at the September 17, 2019 hearing and therefore were bifurcated and 
would be heard at a later date.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.    
Michael Bowser and James Payne were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits 1-5, claimant’s exhibits 1-11, and 
defendants’ exhibits A-E.  Because exhibit A is a First Report of Injury it is admitted for 
the limited purposes allowed under section 86.11, Code of Iowa.  All exhibits were 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-07  16:15:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
received without objection.  However, it should be noted that claimant’s exhibit 6, a 
report from Dr. Naylor, was served late.  Prior to the hearing, the parties reached an 
agreement that if claimant’s exhibit 6 was entered into evidence then the defendants 
would be allowed to have a reasonable amount of time to obtain an independent 
medical examination (IME).  The undersigned accepted the parties’ agreement.  The 
evidentiary record was left open for the defendants to obtain the IME report.  The report 
was filed on October 15, 2019 and marked as Exhibit E; this exhibit was also accepted 
into the record.           
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on November 18, 2019, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on July 28, 2017. 
2. Whether claimant’s claim is barred by operation of section 85.23, Code of 
Iowa for failure to provide timely notice of his injury. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits as a result of the 
alleged July 28, 2017 work injury. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of past medical expenses under 
section 85.27, Code of Iowa. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of alternate medical care under 
section 85.27, Code of Iowa. 
6. Whether penalty benefits are appropriate. 
7. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the record, 
finds: 
 
Claimant, Michael Bowser (“Bowser”), was 60 years old at the time of hearing.   
He asserts that he sustained a work injury to his right shoulder on Friday, July 28, 2017 
while working for Nestle, USA, Inc.  (“Nestle”).  At the time of the alleged injury Bowser 
was working as a bag filling operator.  Bowser typically worked the third shift; however, 
on the date of the alleged injury Bowser was working the day shift.  During the second 
part of Bowser’s shift, he needed to perform a major cleanup on the line.  He needed to 
clean the sifter, which is a large steel bowl.  While he was cleaning the sifter, Bowser’s 

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
brush caught on something in the sifter which caused his right arm to turn in the 
opposite direction.  He heard a pop and instantly felt a paralyzing pain in his right arm 
and shoulder.  He was eventually able to free his shoulder and continue working.  He 
saw the supervisor Jim Payne (“Payne”) before he went home and told him about the 
injury and that he felt something pop in his shoulder.  Payne advised him to tell Jim 
Wilson (“Wilson”), the third shift supervisor about the injury the following week.  
(Testimony) 
 
Bowser returned to work, on the third shift, the following week and reported the 
injury to Wilson right away.  Bowser notified Wilson that his shoulder was still bothering 
him and that he could not do things like he did before.  Wilson said he would discuss the 
matter with Chris Martin, the safety director at Nestle, and get back to Bowser.  When 
Bowser did not hear back from Wilson, he kept periodically reminding Wilson of his 
injury because he wanted treatment.  Wilson finally got back to Bowser and told him 
there was a physical therapy appointment for him; his first therapy appointment was on 
September 19, 2017.  (Testimony)    
 
On September 19, 2017, Bowser went to therapy at Rock Valley.  He reported he 
injured his right shoulder at Nestle while cleaning a machine with a brush.  He was 
unable to remember the exact date, but knew it occurred on a Friday.  (Joint Exhibit 4, 
pp. 1-7)    
Bowser believes that Nestle paid for the physical therapy because he never 
received any type of bill for the therapy.  There are also copies of payments from Nestle 
to Rock Valley Physical Therapy Center in evidence.  (Testimony; JE4, pp. 1-7; 
Claimant’s Exhibit 11)     
 
At the hearing, Payne testified on behalf of Nestle.  Payne is a packaging 
supervisor for the day shift.  According to Payne, if an employee is hurt on the job, the 
employee is required to report the injury in a timely fashion.  The supervisor then 
records any injuries in an injury log that is kept in the supervisor’s office.  Payne does 
not recall Bowser reporting a right shoulder injury to him on July 28, 2017.  However, he 
concedes that just because he does not remember Bowser reporting the injury, that 
does not mean that Bowser did not report the injury.  According to Bowser, Nestle does 
not pay for someone’s medical treat if it is not for a work-related injury.  (Testimony)   
 
Bowser’s testimony that Nestle arranged for and paid for his physical therapy in 
September of 2019 is unrebutted.  Payne testified that Nestle does not pay for 
someone’s medical treatment if it is not for a work-related injury.  I find that Nestle 
arranged for and paid for his physical therapy in September of 2019.  Thus, I find that by 
at least September 19, 2017, Nestle had notice of Bowser’s July 29, 2017 work injury. 
 
Bowser continued physical therapy with Rock Valley.  On September 27, 2017 
Bowser reported that he felt a little better.  The note stated: “I remembered just today 
when this happened.  It was July 28, 2017.  I set camper up for this coming weekend.”  
(JE4, p. 10) At hearing, Bowser explained that the week before this September 27 

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
appointment, he went into Nestle Human Resources and had them look up the last 
week that he worked days.  He knew his injury had occurred on a Friday, so that is how 
he surmised that the date of injury was July 28, 2017.  (JE4)  In their post-hearing brief 
defendants refer to a camper incident in September of 2017.  However, I do not 
interpret the September 2017 therapy note to demonstrate that there was any sort of an 
injury or incident surrounding a camper in 2017.      
 
Bowser continued with his therapy until January 4, 2018.  At that time, he 
reported that he had been off of work for three weeks.  His shoulder had plenty of rest 
and was not bothering him.  (JE4, pp. 25-26)   
 
On March 26, 2018, Bowser returned to Rock Valley for additional physical 
therapy for his shoulder injury that happened at work the prior year.  He attended 
therapy until April 11, 2018.  (JE4, pp. 27-38) 
Unfortunately, the therapy Bowser received was not helpful.  After Bowser 
started his therapy he bumped into Martin at work and told him he was still having 
problems with his shoulder and a lot of pain.  He also told Martin that he thought the 
therapy was aggravating his shoulder and that he wanted to see a doctor.  Martin just 
gave him a mad look and walked away.  (Testimony)   
Bowser eventually sought treatment with his primary care physician’s office 
where he saw Randy Wirtz, ARNP.  On August 1, 2018, Bowser went in for a diabetic 
check and reported that he had injured his right shoulder a year ago at work.  Nestle 
sent him to physical therapy, but his shoulder was still giving him some pain.  (JE2, pp. 
1-3)       
Bowser returned to Randy L. Wirtz, ARNP on September 12, 2018 with neck 
pain.  (JE2, pp. 4-6) 
On May 2, 2019, Bowser saw Randy L. Wirtz, ARNP.  He reported that he was 
still having pain in his right shoulder and difficulty raising it above his head.  When he 
did raise his arm above his head, his right shoulder pops and the pain increases.  He 
reported that he had injured his shoulder July 28, 2017 at work.  He has continued to 
have pain in the right shoulder since the injury and has had difficulty raising his right 
arm above his head.  Randy L. Wirtz, ARNP recommended an MRI of the shoulder.  
(JE2, pp. 7-9)        
A right shoulder MRI was performed on May 9, 2019.  The impression from the 
MRI report states: 
1.  [r]etracted full-thickness tears of the supraspinatus and subscapularis 
tendons.  Pronounced fatty atrophy of the subscapularis muscle. 
2. Thinning of the infraspinatus tendon, with articular surface partial-
thickness tearing. 
3. Long head biceps tendon rupture. 

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
4. 5.5 cm fat signal intensity mass within the deltoid muscle compatible 
with a lipoma. 
5. Severe osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular joint. 
(JE3, pp. 1-2) 
On June 12, 2019, Bowser saw Richard W. Naylor, D.O. for right shoulder pain.  
He told Dr. Naylor about the work injury.  Dr. Naylor noted that he did undergo therapy 
with no relief of his symptoms, but he continued to work through the pain.  Dr. Naylor 
noted the MRI results from May 9, 2019.  It was decided that they would proceed with 
surgical care.  (JE1, pp. 1-3) 
On July 10, 2019, Dr. Naylor performed arthroscopic surgery on Bowser’s right 
shoulder.  The post-operative diagnoses were right shoulder impingement with biceps 
stump symptomatic, rotator cuff tear full-thickness, SLAP tear, moderate to severe 
degenerative changes acromioclavicular joint.  (JE1, pp. 4-5) 
Bowser returned to see Dr. Naylor on July 23, 2019; he was doing well at that 
time.  Dr. Naylor kept him off work.  He indicated that Bowser would not be able to 
return to full duty until 9 months after the July 10, 2019 surgery.  (JE1, pp. 7-9)     
It is noted that Bowser did have some conservative treatment for his right 
shoulder prior to the July 29, 2017 injury.  In August of 2003 he reported some right 
shoulder pain.  He was instructed to take ibuprofen and given a handout with some 
shoulder exercise.  In December of 2005 he received a steroid injection for deltoid 
bursitis shoulder pain.  In April of 2009 he reported shoulder pain of a one-month 
duration.  He was given Nabumetone and told to return if he did not improve.  (JE5) 
On April 30, 2019, at the request of his attorney, Bowser saw F. Manshadi, M.D. 
for an IME.  Dr. Manshadi noted, “on July 28, 2017 he had a work injury at Nestle.  At 
the time he was cleaning a sifter and was reaching with his right arm all the way down 
to the bottom of it when he heard a pop and also had severe pain in his right shoulder.”  
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 1)  Dr. Manshadi opined that Bowser’s right shoulder injury was causally 
related to his job activities at Nestle.  He felt that the job activities were a substantial 
contributing factor to the development of the right shoulder injury.  Dr. Manshadi opined 
that Bowser was not at MMI.  He recommended additional treatment including 
diagnostic studies including an MRI of the right shoulder and then subsequent 
treatment.  Dr. Manshadi recommended he avoid any activity which requires shoulder 
height or overhead activities, and no lifting over 20 to 30 pounds with the right upper 
extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 4)    
On August 26, 2019, Dr. Naylor opined that Bowser’s preexisting right shoulder 
issues were materially exacerbated by the July 28, 2017 work injury when he heard a 
pop.  (Cl. Ex. 6) 

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On October 8, 2019, Theron Q. Jameson, D.O. signed a letter, which was written 
by the attorney for the defendants, indicating he agreed with the statements in the letter.  
Dr. Jameson reviewed records dated from December of 1980 through July 23, 2019, but 
did not examine Bowser.  Dr. Jameson did not find any evidence of any injury to 
Bowser’s shoulder joint as he alleged occurred on July 29, 2017.  Dr. Jameson felt it 
was possible that Bowser sustained a bicep injury on July 29, 2017, but that was not 
typically surgically repaired and did not result in any permanent impairment under The 
Guides.  (Def. Ex. E) 
The first issue to be addressed is causation.  There are several physicians who 
have rendered their opinions in this case.  Claimant relies on the opinions of Dr. 
Manshadi and Dr. Naylor, while defendants rely on the opinion of Dr. Jameson.   
Defendants argue that Dr. Manshadi only provided his opinion related to a 
cumulative injury.  However, I do not find this argument to be persuasive.  In his report, 
Dr. Manshadi noted the specific job activities that Bowser was engaged in on July 28, 
2017.  He then opined that it was Bowser’s job activities that were a substantial 
contributing factor to the development of his right shoulder injury.  Defendants’ 
interpretation of Dr. Manshadi’s opinion is too narrow.  I find that Dr. Manshadi causally 
connected Bowser’s right shoulder injury to his July 28, 2017 work activities.   
Defendants contend Dr. Naylor’s opinion is flawed because he does not address 
what defendants characterize as inconsistencies in the medical records.  I do not find 
this argument to be persuasive.  In their post-hearing brief defendants refer to a camper 
incident in September of 2017.  However, I do not interpret the September 2017 therapy 
note to demonstrate that there was any sort of an injury or incident surrounding a 
camper in 2017.   
Defendants rely on the opinion of Dr. Jameson who was not provided the 
opportunity to interview or examine Bowser.  It is unknown whether Dr. Jameson had a 
complete history or not.  Exhibit E merely states Dr. Jameson reviewed some medical 
records dated between December 1980 and July 23, 2019; there is no indication what 
facilities those records came from or how many records there were.  Furthermore, Dr. 
Jameson does not provide any rationale for the basis of his opinions.  I do not find the 
opinions of Dr. Jameson to be persuasive.     
Prior to the July 28, 2017 work injury, Bowser did have some problems with his 
right shoulder.  However, he had not sought any treatment for his right shoulder since 
2009.  On July 28, 2017, he was performing his work duties when he heard a pop and 
instantly felt a paralyzing pain in his right arm and shoulder.  He testified that he has 
had problems with his right shoulder since the injury.  Based on the record as a whole 
and the opinions of Dr. Manshadi and Dr. Naylor, I find that Bowser’s right shoulder 
injury and subsequent treatment, including the surgery, is causally connected to the July 
28, 2017 injury.   

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
Bowser seeks payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 3.  The requested expenses were not authorized by the defendants, as this was 
a denied claim.  Defendants contend that the requested expenses and mileage are not 
causally connected to the work injury.  I found that Bowser’s right shoulder injury is 
causally connected to the July 28, 2017 work injury.  I find that the medical expenses 
and medical mileage sought by claimant were necessitated by the work injury.  Thus, I 
find defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 
3 and medical mileage set forth in claimant’s exhibit 2.   
Claimant indicates he is seeking ongoing medical care for his work injury.  The 
issue of permanency was bifurcated because the parties indicated to the undersigned 
that the claimant was not anticipated to be at MMI at the time of the arbitration hearing.  
As noted above, I found Bowser has not reached MMI.  Claimant has demonstrated that 
his ongoing right shoulder problems are causally connected to the July 28, 2017 work 
injury.  Therefore, I find defendants are responsible for ongoing medical treatment 
consistent with section 85.27, Code of Iowa.   
Claimant argues that penalty benefits are appropriate in this case because 
defendants failed to demonstrate any reasonable basis for the denial of the claim.  
Claimant contends that Nestle unreasonably denied that the injury was reported in a 
timely fashion and unreasonably denied that the injury arose out of Bowser’s 
employment.  In this case, defendants denied that Bowser sustained an injury that 
arose out of and in the course of his employment and raised the notice defense.  
Defendants denied payment of any weekly benefits.  Claimant has established that 
there has been a denial of benefits.  Defendants argue that the denial was reasonable 
and the basis was conveyed to the claimant via letters from defendants.  (Def. Exs. B-C) 
Defendants presented evidence from Payne that he does not recall receiving notice of 
the injury from the claimant and there was no record of the injury in the supervisor’s log.  
There is conflicting information in the file regarding when Nestle had notice of the injury.  
Therefore, I conclude that defendants had a reasonable basis for the denial, and 
penalty benefits are not appropriate.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.14(6)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Bowser’s right injury arose out of 
and in the course of his employment on July 28, 2017.  Prior to the July 28, 2017 work 
injury, Bowser did have some intermittent problems with his right shoulder.  However, 
he had not sought any treatment for his right shoulder for years.  On the date of the 
injury, he was performing his work duties when he heard a pop and instantly felt a 
paralyzing pain in his right arm and shoulder.  The evidence demonstrates he has had 
problems with his right shoulder since the injury.  I conclude Bowser’s right shoulder 
injury and subsequent treatment, including the surgery, is causally connected to the July 
28, 2017 injury 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 
N.W. 91 (1940). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I concluded that defendants failed to prove 
by a preponderance of the evidence, that Bowser did not provide Nestle with notice of 
his injury within 90 days of July 28, 2017.  Thus, claimant’s claim is not barred by 
operation of section 85.23, Code of Iowa.      

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
Bowser is seeking weekly workers’ compensation benefits for the time that he 
has been off of work.  When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period 
of recuperation from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is 
entitled to temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by 
the injury.  Those benefits are payable until the employee has returned to work, or is 
medically capable of returning to work substantially similar to the work performed at the 
time of injury.  Section 85.33(1). 
Bowser is seeking benefits from July 10, 2019 through the present.  The parties 
agree that Bowser has been off work since July 10, 2019 and that if the defendants are 
liable for the alleged injury, Bowser is entitled to benefits for this period of time.  
Because I found defendants liable for the July 28, 2019 injury, defendants are liable for 
weekly benefits during this timeframe.  Because the issue of permanency is not yet ripe 
for determination, the benefits will be classified as temporary total disability benefits until 
such time as claimant demonstrates entitlement to healing period benefits.       
Bowser is seeking payment of past medical expenses and medical mileage.  The 
employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, 
podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies 
for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The employer 
shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those 
services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening October 1975). 
I conclude claimant carried his burden of proof to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that I find that the medical expenses and medical 
mileage sought by claimant were necessitated by the work injury.  Thus, I find 
defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 3 
and medical mileage set forth in claimant’s exhibit 2.   
Likewise, I conclude defendants shall furnish reasonable medical services and 
supplies for Bowser’s July 28, 2017 work injury.  Defendants shall also be responsible 
for reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services.  
Claimant also asserts a claim for penalty benefits.  Claimant asserts that the 
employer unreasonably denied payment of weekly benefits and that penalty benefits 
should be assessed pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13.     
Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides:   
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall 

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that 
were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse.   
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts:   
(1)  The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits.   
(2)  The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits.   
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said:   
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.”   
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260.   
The supreme court has stated:   
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason to 
the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236.   
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that a 
reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261.   

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the employer to 
investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; Kiesecker v. 
Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 1995); or (b) the 
employer had a reasonable basis to contest the claim the “fairly 
debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260 (holding 
two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical report reasonable 
under the circumstances).   
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or 
excuse.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from 
application of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner 
required to apply penalty).   
  If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid.   
Id.   
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.     
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to consider 
factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238.   
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does not 
make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it clear 
that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner could 
reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See Christensen, 
554 N.W.2d at 260.   
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).     

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Davidson v. Bruce, 593 
N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999).  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 338 (Iowa 2008).     
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).   
In this case, claimant established that the employer paid no weekly workers’ 
compensation benefits to claimant after the date of injury.  Claimant established a denial 
of weekly benefits.  Therefore, claimant established a prima facie case for penalty 
benefits.   
Defendants denied payment of any weekly benefits.  Claimant has established 
that there has been a denial of benefits.  Defendants argue that the denial was 
reasonable and the basis was conveyed to the claimant via letters from defendants.  
(Def. Exs. B-C) Defendants presented evidence from Payne that he does not recall 
receiving notice of the injury from the claimant and there was no record of the injury in 
the supervisor’s log.  There is conflicting information in the file regarding when Nestle 
had notice of the injury.  Therefore, I conclude that defendants had a reasonable basis 
for the denial, and penalty benefits are not appropriate.   
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set out in claimant’s 
exhibit 1.  I find claimant was generally successful in his claim and therefore it is 
appropriate to assess costs against the defendants.  I find that the $100.00 filing fee is 
an appropriate cost.  I find the fees for obtaining medical records and bills are not 
appropriate costs under 876 IAC 4.33.  I find that the costs of the reports from Dr. 
Manshadi and Dr. Naylor are appropriate costs under 876 IAC 4.33(6).  However, Dr. 
Manshadi’s bill does not provide a breakdown of how much of his bill is for the 
examination and how much is for the report.  Therefore, I find that it is not appropriate to 
award any of the expense of Dr. Manshadi as a cost.  I do not see a bill for just a report 
from Dr. Naylor.  Therefore, I exercise my discretion and do not award that as a cost.  
Thus, defendants are assessed costs totaling one hundred and no/100 dollars 
($100.00).     
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred eighty-nine 
and 69/100 dollars ($589.69).   

BOWSER V. NESTLE USA, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
Defendants shall pay temporary total benefits commencing on July 10, 2019 and 
continuing through the present and into the future until the first factor set forth in Iowa 
Code section 85.33(1) is established to have occurred. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) as set 
forth in the hearing report.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
Defendants are responsible for past medical expenses and medical mileage as 
set forth above. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this 7th day of February, 2020. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Timothy Wegman (via WCES) 
Joshua Moon (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
              ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
