Case Number: 1654713.01
Case Title:  CAYLER, TODD V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Cayler Todd-1654713.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TODD CAYLER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 1654713.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
     ARBITRATION 
 
 
  :                            
HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO., 
  : 
 
         DECISION 
 
 
  :                               
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                                 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
CONTINENTAL INDEMNITY CO.,  
  : 
Head Notes:  1108.50, 1402.40, 1803, 
 
 
  : 
 
 
 2907, 4000.2 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Todd Cayler, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Hydrite Chemical Company, employer and Continental 
Indemnity Company, insurance carrier, as defendants.  Hearing was held via Zoom in 
the Des Moines, Iowa venue on May 16, 2023.       
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Claimant, Todd Cayler, was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The 
evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits 1-5, claimant’s exhibits 1-15 and 
defendant’s exhibits A-B and D-K.  Defendants’ exhibit C was withdrawn because it was 
a duplicate of one of claimant’s exhibits.  All exhibits were received without objection.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on June 9, 2023, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Aug-31  08:28:19     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 2 
 
 
1. The nature and extent of permanent partial disability benefits claimant is 
entitled to receive as the result of the stipulated August 12, 2018 work injury.   
2. Whether an award of penalty benefits is appropriate in this case. 
3. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses. 
4. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Todd Cayler, was 61 years old at the time of hearing.  He began 
working for Hydrite Chemicals (“Hydrite”) as an MBS Operator on October 8, 2012.  
Hydrite Chemicals is in the business of manufacturing chemicals.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 50; Tr. 
pp. 20-21) There is no dispute that on August 12, 2018, Mr. Cayler sustained a work-
related inhalation injury.  The central dispute in this case is the nature and extent of 
permanent disability that he sustained as the result of the injury.  (Hearing Report)   
As an MBS Operator, Mr. Cayler’s duties at Hydrite included gathering and 
adding raw materials into a reactor to manufacture various chemicals.  This involved 
monitoring chemicals during the mixing process and providing samples to the laboratory 
to confirm the chemical was within specifications.  Physically he was required to go up 
and down stairs 30 to 40 times per day to a mezzanine where control valves were 
located.  The job required the ability to stand or walk for up to 10 hours in an 8–12-hour 
workday; lift and carry up to 100 pounds several times per day.  The duties required the 
ability to climb ladders up to 30 feet in height on an occasional basis.  He used a fork 
truck to pull approximately 20 super sacks.  At times he would have to dump 50-pound 
bags by hand.  He would also take samples to the lab for approval and then adjust the 
raw materials in the mix as needed.  His job also included general housekeeping to 
keep areas clean.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2; Def. Ex. B, p. 11; Tr. pp. 21-23) 
 
The stipulated date of the work injury in this case is August 12, 2018.  On the 
weekend of August 11 and 12, Mr. Cayler was working to fix a chemical, CREST, that 
was rejected the prior weekend.  At the direction of Mr. Cayler’s supervisor air was 
being added to the tank where the chemicals were mixed which was “very unorthodox.” 
(Tr. p. 25) There was a scrubber system that was designed to suck in all the fumes; 
however, the system was unable to keep up resulting in fumes and heavy air in the 
area.  Mr. Cayler could tell something was not right because the air was heavier, 
smelled pungent, and several people asked if there was something they needed to do 
different.  He estimates he was in this environment for 7-8 hours each day of the 
weekend; more than any other employee.  He was not feeling well by the end of his shift 
on Sunday.  (Tr. pp. 24-30)   
By Tuesday August 14, 2018, Mr. Cayler felt even worse.  He went to urgent care 
where he reported nausea, dizziness with cough, and headache starting the previous 
day.  Examination noted wheezes and rales.  Mr. Cayler was diagnosed with bacterial 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 3 
 
 
bronchitis, which can take 2-3 weeks to resolve. He was prescribed a course of 
antibiotics.  (JE 2, pp. 5-6)  
It should be noted that on February 14, 2018, prior to the work injury, a 
Respirator Employer Report from Unity Point stated Mr. Cayler was able to use a 
respirator because he had no medical condition that would put him at an increased risk 
of material health impairment from using a respirator.  He also had no medical condition 
that placed him at increased risk of material health impairment from exposure to 
hazardous materials.  He had a normal physical exam.  (JE1, pp. 1-3) 
Mr. Cayler saw his primary care physician, Brian Sankey, D.O. on August 16, 
2018.  He reported cough, fevers, and chills despite the antibiotics.  Examination noted 
rales in left lower lobe.  Dr. Sankey diagnosed pneumonia and prescribed two new 
antibiotics.  He took Mr. Cayler off work August 16 and 17.  He could return to work on 
August 18 with restrictions of light duty in a well-ventilated area and no lifting greater 
than 25 pounds.  (JE3, pp. 7-9) Mr. Cayler texted a copy of the return-to-work 
information to Hydrite.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 26; Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 80-81)  
On August 18, 2018, Mr. Cayler reported to Joe Horak, a supervisor, that he 
thought his condition was caused by exposure to the fumes and vapors of CREST at 
work.  A few days later he also reported this to Damion Fischels, his direct supervisor.  
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 37; Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 84-85; Tr. pp. 32-34) Mr. Cayler followed up with Hydrite 
to see if he should continue to treat with his own doctor or if they wanted him to see a 
workers’ compensation doctor.  He was advised to continue to treat with his own doctor 
because they were still investigating.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 82; Tr. p. 44) 
Mr. Cayler went to Mercy One on August 28, 2018, where he saw Jessica 
Sherman, ARNP.  He reported continued cough, shortness of breath, and wheezing.  
He is constantly clearing his throat and coughing due to irritation. He provided the 
history of the fumes at work and provided MSDS sheets to ARNP Sherman.  Listed 
under inhalation on the MSDS are dizziness, cough, shortness of breath, sore throat, 
irritation and esophageal irritation.  ARNP Sherman did not note any wheezing but did 
note that his lungs sounded a little tight, mildly decreased air movement.  Mr. Cayler 
was referred to David Visokey, D.O. in pulmonology.  (JE3, pp. 10-12) 
Dr. Visokey saw Mr. Cayler that same day.  He prescribed an inhaler, 
Prednisone, and Robutussin.  He was to return in one week.  (JE3, pp. 13-15) On 
August 29, 2018, Dr. Visokey issued a note stating Mr. Cayler needed to be on light 
duty with no chemical exposure until reevaluated on Tuesday, September 4, 2018.  This 
was due to a chemical exposure that caused an irritated respiratory tract.  (JE3, pp. 16-
17) Mr. Cayler provided a copy of this note to Hydrite.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 28-29) 
On September 4, 2018, Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Visokey.  He reported feeling 
approximately 50 percent better.  He still has a cough, but it is less.  He feels he has a 
hard time getting air out.  Dr. Visokey noted a cough and toxic inhalation injury.  The 
doctor noted that this all fit for a work-related exposure and inhalation injury.  He was to 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 4 
 
 
continue the treatment plan and light duty with no chemical exposure until his next 
appointment.  (JE3, pp. 18-21) 
Mr. Cayler saw Dr. Sankey on September 11, 2018, he reported that he was 
slowly improving.  He was off the prednisone but still used the Breo inhaler.  His work 
was limiting his exposure.  The assessment was toxic inhalation injury.  Mr. Cayler was 
instructed to continue with the Breo 200 daily.  He was to continue work with restrictions 
and return in one month.  (JE3, pp. 22-25)   
On October 9, 2018, Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Visokey.  He reported he was 
doing better.  He does have a hard time with certain smells and fumes.  He has no 
trouble with inhaler.  Mr. Cayler was instructed to continue with his Breo inhaler and 
given a prescription for a rescue inhaler for his wheeze.  Dr. Visokey issued a note 
stating that Mr. Cayler needed to continue with respiratory limitations.  No exposure to 
fumes, gases, or smells until patient is seen back on November 5, 2018. (JE3, pp. 27-
30) 
On November 8, 2018, Mr. Cayler saw Dr. Visokey.  He reported he was feeling 
much better than when he first saw him.  He had no respiratory complaints, but he did 
have a sore throat.  He did not have any cough or issues with the inhaler.  His 
spiro/complete pulmonary function test was normal.  Dr. Visokey’s assessment included 
cough and toxic inhalation injury. Mr. Cayler was released to return to work with no 
restrictions.  He was advised to wear respiratory protection per protocol.  Dr. Visokey 
felt this was due to an inhalational injury from work.  (JE3, pp. 31-33) 
Due to side effects, Mr. Cayler tried to wean himself off the medication 
prescribed by Dr. Visokey.  The side effects included agitation and irritability.  However, 
his breathing became worse.  (Tr. p. 51)     
On June 13, 2019, Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Sankey.  He reported that since he 
was released by Dr. Visokey he has had a lower threshold for developing wheezing and 
cough and feels he always has a chronic cough.  Dr. Sankey noted that his symptoms 
could be related to a chemical exposure that was now hiding as sensitivity to certain 
things.  A chest x-ray revealed poor inspiratory volume with crowding of the 
bronchovascular markings bilaterally.  There was no evidence of an acute 
cardiopulmonary abnormality.  He recommended a referral to an ENT. (JE3, pp. 34-36) 
Mr. Cayler saw Benjamin Erhardt, M.D., an ENT, on June 25, 2019.  Dr. Erhardt 
noted Mr. Cayler had a history of a toxic inhalation injury in August 2018 and 
subsequently developed chemical pneumonitis.  His lung issues improved with inhalers, 
but he has always suffered from a chronic cough and deep throat irritation.  Dr. Erhardt 
adjusted Mr. Cayler’s medications. (JE3, pp. 37-39) 
On April 28, 2020, Mr. Cayler, through his counsel, sent a missive to defendants 
advising that claimant had retained counsel.  The letter requested information from the 
defendants regarding his workers’ compensation claim.  (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 132-133) 
Defendants, through their counsel, responded with a missive on May 18, 2020, stating it 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 5 
 
 
appeared to defendants that claimant has sustained a respiratory condition due to a 
bacterial infection not related to work.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 134) Claimant, through his counsel, 
responded to defendants in a June 3, 2020 letter.  Claimant advised he felt his condition 
was work related.  Claimant also advised that he did not know the extent of his 
permanent impairment or the extent to which he would require future medical treatment.  
(Cl. Ex. 7, p. 136) 
After November 2018 Mr. Cayler had minimal treatment.  Mr. Cayler admitted he 
did not realize his breathing was not 100 percent until 2020.  At that time he requested 
additional treatment through workers’ Compensation.  Defendants sent him to see 
Gregory A. Hicklin, M.D.(Tr. pp. 51-52) 
At the request of the defendants, Mr. Cayler saw Dr. Hicklin for an independent 
medical evaluation (IME) on June 19, 2020.  Dr. Hicklin opined that Mr. Cayler had 
occupational asthma and acute airway injury brought on by exposure to chemicals in 
the workplace in August 2018.  Dr. Hicklin felt his condition had been undertreated and 
stated Mr. Cayler should contact his personal physician about further treatment for his 
occupational asthma.  He also felt Mr. Cayler had obstructive sleep apnea and evidence 
of some variable extrathoracic airway obstruction, consistent with accessory 
oropharyngeal soft tissue.  He recommended that Mr. Cayler speak with his sleep 
doctor and have adjustment of his positive airway pressure to treat his sleep apnea.  Dr. 
Hicklin stated that Mr. Cayler’s exposure resulted in the need for a rescue inhaler and 
the treatment provided by Dr. Visokey.  He indicated that when Mr. Cayler was on 
medication, at the time of his pulmonary function testing in November 2018, it seemed 
like he was at maximum medical improvement.  However, since he reduced his 
medication, he has deteriorated, and Dr. Hicklin felt he was not currently at MMI.  Dr. 
Hicklin cited that AMA Guides, Fifth Edition and assigned 10 percent impairment of the 
whole person.  Dr. Hicklin felt he could improve with more treatment and the treatment 
is related to the work injury. He felt that Mr. Cayler also had some conditions, including 
severe untreated sleep apnea, that were not related to the work injury.  (Def. Ex. K, p. 
93; JE4, pp. 59-63)   
Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Visokey on August 18, 2020.  He reported that since 
his last visit he had been diagnosed with prostate cancer and was septic.  He had only 
been on the Symbicort for a few days before this occurred.  After his hospitalization, 
they did not restart his Symbicort, so he has not been taking it.  Dr. Visokey 
recommended he go back on Symbicort and return in 6 weeks.  Dr. Visokey noted that 
the inhalation injury led to this asthma.  (JE3, pp. 44-46) 
On September 29, 2020, Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Visokey.  Since his last visit 
the Symbicort has made a significant difference.  His wheezing is resolved, and his 
cough is much improved.  He is not feeling as short of breath, and he has not had any 
issues with his inhaler.  He reported it has been a long time since he felt like this.  Dr. 
Visokey felt his response to Symbicort is consistent with asthma.  Dr. Visokey opined 
that Mr. Cayler has asthma due to toxic inhalational injury.  He recommended follow-up 
in six months.  (JE3, pp. 47-49) 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 6 
 
 
Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Visokey on October 6, 2021.  Since his last visit he has 
been doing extremely well.  He has been using Symbicort with no issues or side effects.  
He has not used his rescue inhaler at all.  No missed days of work, no wheezing, no 
sputum production.  The doctor’s assessment was moderate persistent asthma without 
complication.  No changes were made to his medications.  He was to return in one year.  
(JE3, p. 50-52) 
Mr. Cayler saw Dr. Sankey on December 21, 2021 for an annual exam.  He 
denied any chest pains or shortness of breath.  (JE3, pp. 54-55) 
On August 3, 2022, Mr. Cayler returned to Dr. Visokey.  He had been compliant 
with his inhaler and has had no problems.  He was to follow-up in one year.  (JE3, pp. 
56-58) 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Cayler saw Sunil Bansal, M.D. for an 
independent medical examination on August 12, 2022.  As the result of that examination 
and review of records provided to him Dr. Bansal issued a report over seven months 
later, on April 5, 2023.  At the time of the exam, Mr. Cayler reported he was using 
Symbicort daily.  He experiences shortness of breath when climbing a flight of stairs or 
rushing.  He tries to take things slowly.  He can walk about 7500 yards without 
experiencing shortness of breath.  At the time of the examination, Mr. Cayler was no 
longer working for Hydrite.  His current job involves operating heavy equipment and 
driving trucks.  He is not exposed to any fumes at his new workplace.  Mr. Cayler has 
decided to avoid the chemical aspect of his prior work and focus solely on driving.  He 
currently does not have to load or unload.  Dr. Bansal diagnosed occupational asthma 
which he opined developed from his acute exposure to a chemical mixing procedure.  
Dr. Banal stated he developed chemical pneumonitis followed by occupational asthma 
necessitating steroid inhaler use.  He placed Mr. Cayler at MMI as of August 12, 2022, 
the date of his evaluation.  Dr. Bansal cited Tables 5-9 and 5-10 of the Fifth edition of 
the AMA Guides and assigned 12 percent whole person impairment.  He felt Mr. Cayler 
would require maintenance pulmonary treatment with steroid inhalers.  He could have 
flare ups which require additional inhaler treatment with a rescue inhaler.  Additionally, 
he would require maintenance follow up with a pulmonologist.  Dr. Bansal permanently 
restricted Mr. Cayler to no carrying greater than 25 pounds, 20 yards.  No prolonged 
walking more than 30 minutes at a time.  He is also to avoid multiple steps, stairs, 
ladders, or hills.  Additionally, any work environment must be free of air contaminants 
such as dust and extreme heat or cold as well as fumes relating to the CREST chemical 
compounds such as phosphoric acid, citric, and lactic acid.  (Cl. Ex. 1)   
On September 6, 2022, at the defendants’ request, Mr. Cayler attended an IME 
with Jason Mohr, D.O., a board-certified pulmonologist.  Dr. Mohr opined that Mr. Cayler 
has mild intermittent reactive airway disease that is a direct result of his exposure in 
2018.  He believed the work exposure resulted in the need for a long-acting beta 
agonist and inhaled corticosteroid as well as a short acting inhaler.  He felt Mr. Cayler 
had reached MMI on his current medications.  Dr. Mohr stated, “[w]ith regards to 
permanent pulmonary impairment based upon the AMA guidelines for respiratory 
assessment of impairment, his diffusion capacity on his pulmonary function testing to 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 7 
 
 
qualify him in class I indicating up to a 10% impairment.”  (JE4, p. 66) He assigned 
permanent restrictions as follows:  no exposure to potential aerosols that may trigger his 
disease this may be broadened and expanded to dusts as well.  He felt future treatment 
could involve admission to hospital for acute exacerbation of his reactive airway disease 
that may be brought on either by exposure to chemicals or respiratory infection.  (JE4, 
pp. 64-66) 
On April 12, 2023, Dr. Mohr issued a missive as a rebuttal to the opinion of Dr. 
Bansal.  He reiterated that his opinions continued to be that Mr. Cayler has reactive 
airway disease secondary to his exposure, also defined as occupational asthma on 
August 11, 2018 to a chemical called CREST.  Dr. Mohr updated his evaluation of 
impairment.  He noted that at the time of his evaluation in April 2023 he was on 
Symbicort.  Dr. Mohr felt that based on the AMA Guides this now placed Mr. Cayler in 
group 2 which changes his whole person impairment from his previously stated 10 
percent to 11 percent.  Dr. Mohr only partially agreed with the restrictions set forth by 
Dr. Bansal.  He stated, 
I partially agree with the restrictions and that he needs to avoid any 
potential triggers for his asthma.  However being that he is controlled on 
inhaled corticosteroid I find no reason to add restrictions to physical 
activity as this is nonspecific to his asthma and may be due to 
deconditioning, obesity or other contributing factors.  Typically a patient 
with controlled asthma as he is has no limitations in terms of physical 
activity unless there is a potential trigger for bronchospasm in close 
proximity.   
(Def. Ex. A, p. 1) 
 
Dr. Hicklin, Dr. Bansal, and Dr. Mohr have all provided their opinions regarding 
permanent impairment.  Based on the AMA Guides, fifth edition, table 5.9, Dr. Hicklin 
assigned 10 percent impairment of the person as a whole.  Dr. Hicklin set forth the 
specific basis for his impairment rating. (JE4, p. 62)  Dr. Bansal relies on the table 5.9 
and table 5.10 to assign 12 percent whole person impairment.  Dr. Bansal did not set 
forth his specific basis for his impairment rating.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) In September 2022, 
Dr. Mohr assigned 10 percent impairment of the whole person.  (JE4, p. 66) In April 
2023, Dr. Mohr revised his rating to 11 percent of the whole person.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) 
Unfortunately, Dr. Mohr did not specify which edition or which portion of the Guides he 
utilized.  I find Dr. Hicklin’s rating to carry the greatest weight.  Thus, I find Mr. Cayler 
sustained 10 percent impairment of the whole person as the result of the August 12, 
2018 work injury. 
 
I find that Mr. Cayler also has permanent restrictions as the result of the work 
injury.  I find the restrictions set forth by Dr. Mohr in April 2023 to be the most well-
reasoned and consistent with the record as a whole.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  Thus, I find, that 
as the result of the work injury, Mr. Cayler is permanently restricted to avoid potential 
triggers for his asthma.  

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 8 
 
 
 
At the time of the injury Mr. Caylor was paid $22.00 per hour, plus an additional 
$1.50 per hour for the weekend shift.  He typically worked 12-hour shifts on the 
weekend shift, which was Friday, Saturday, and Sunday.  When there was mandatory 
overtime, which happened often, he would work on Thursday.  Working the weekend 
shift when his kids were younger allowed him to avoid daycare costs.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 55; 
Cl. Ex. 9, pp. 146-47; Tr. pp. 23-24).   
 
After the injury Mr. Cayler returned to work with Hydrite at the same hourly rate 
as he was paid at the time of the injury.  There does not appear to be a dispute that he 
worked fewer overtime hours after the injury than he did prior to or at the time of the 
injury.  Mr. Cayler testified that while he did receive some overtime after the injury, he 
was not offered as many overtime hours as he was prior to the injury.  According to Mr. 
Cayler, there were times when he was not offered overtime, even when it was 
mandatory for other employees.  Prior to the injury, overtime was a significant 
component of his earnings.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 142; Tr. pp. 49-50) Thus, Mr. Cayler contends 
his total hours were less after the injury than they were at the time of the injury.  (Tr. p. 
50; Cl. Ex. 8, p. 141-142) 
A review of the wage summary supports Mr. Cayler’s unrebutted testimony that 
he was offered fewer overtime hours after the injury.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144) During the 
sixteen biweekly pay periods prior to the date of injury he worked overtime in all but two 
pay periods.  During that same timeframe he averaged approximately $403.00 in 
overtime per pay period.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144) The pay statements indicate Mr. Cayler was 
paid overtime at the rate of $35.25 per hour.  (Def. Ex. G) Thus, prior to the injury, 
claimant was averaging 11 hours of overtime per pay period.  During the fifteen full pay 
periods after the injury, claimant worked overtime during only nine of the pay periods.  
During that same timeframe, he averaged approximately $238.00 in overtime per pay 
period.  Thus, after the injury claimant was only offered approximately 6 hours of 
overtime per pay period.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144; Def. Ex. G) The evidentiary record 
demonstrates that his total hours after the injury were fewer than before the injury.  I find 
that his overtime hours after the injury were approximately half of what they were prior 
to the injury.  I also find that in the three weeks prior to his last day worked he was 
offered no hours of overtime.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144; Def. Ex. G) There is no evidence that 
the reduction in total hours was due to a slowdown in work, nor is there any evidence 
that claimant was offered any hours that he declined.  The only evidence in this case is 
that Mr. Cayler was not offered as many overtime hours by the employer after the work 
injury.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 142; Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144; Def. Ex. G; Tr. pp. 49-50) I find that after the 
work injury, Hydrite did not offer Mr. Cayler the same or greater hours as they did prior 
to the work injury.     
Defendants do not argue that Mr. Cayler’s total hours remained the same or 
greater after the injury.  Rather, defendants argue that if one considers claimant’s gross 
wages combined with bonuses, then claimant’s average weekly pay increased after the 
work injury.  For the reasons set forth below, I do not find this argument to be 
persuasive.  I find that after the work injury, the employer did not offer the claimant the 
same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than he did prior to the work injury.  

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 9 
 
 
Mr. Cayler voluntarily resigned from Hydrite on March 9, 2019.  Mr. Cayler 
testified that after his injury he was treated differently by Hydrite.  After the injury, in an 
attempt to avoid chemical exposure, Mr. Cayler applied for three different positions at 
Hydrite.  He was not offered any of these positions; they were offered to individuals with 
less seniority than he had.  According to Mr. Cayler, he was given a lame excuse why 
he was not offered any of the three positions he applied for after the injury.  Additionally, 
Mr. Cayler testified that Hydrite stopped offering him overtime, even when it was 
mandatory for the other employees.  He resigned from Hydrite in March 2019 after he 
realized Hydrite would not move him to a position that would allow him to avoid 
chemical exposure.  Mr. Cayler also admitted he left Hydrite to get off the weekend shift 
so he could be more involved with his family.  (Tr. pp. 47-59) 
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Cayler continued to struggle with breathing and 
had difficulty going up and down stairs multiple times.  He also had difficulty with 
bending down too many times, walking inclines, or walking fast.  He needs to be upwind 
of heavy fumes, bonfires, burning leaves, grills/smokers, and dust.  He has more 
difficulty breathing in humid weather.  He needs to take breaks while doing tasks such 
as yard work.  (Tr. pp. 53-56) 
After voluntarily resigning from Hydrite, Mr. Cayler began working full-time as a 
production operator for ConAgra in March 2019.  His job involved running a machine 
that filled and sealed sunflower seeds.  He was paid $20 per hour.  He was able to 
perform his job duties without difficulty.  Unfortunately, he was terminated two months 
later for excessive absences during his probationary period due to a family tragedy.  (Tr. 
pp. 59-60; Cl. Ex. 8, p. 142, Ex. B, p. 8)   
Mr. Cayler obtained his Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) in 2019.  He believed 
obtaining his CDL would allow him to avoid physical activities that cause him to become 
winded, and to avoid environmental irritants that flare up his symptoms.  (Tr. p. 61)   
In October 2019 Mr. Caylor went to work for Watco Transloading, a company that 
transloads vehicles and cargo ship containers and ships them back and forth.  He works 
as a driver/heavy equipment operator.  Most of his time is spent driving a semi-truck.  
The only time he operates heavy equipment is if he needs to change out some 
attachments and move snow around.  His job does not require much physical activity 
and he is in clean air.  He does not get much overtime, maybe two hours here or there.  
At the time of hearing, he was still working for Watco and was earning $19.50 per hour. 
(Tr. pp. 59-62; Cl. Ex. 8, p. 142; Def. Ex. F, p. 36)   
Mr. Cayler is a high school graduate.  He earned a certificate in massage therapy 
from the Carlson College of Massage Therapy in 1996.  In 2000 he earned an 
intermediate EMT certificate from Hawkeye Community College.  He also has a EMT 
license, but has never worked as an EMT.  (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 138-39; Testimony, pp. 17-18) 
Mr. Cayler has little computer experience, does not have any training on programs such 
as Microsoft Word or Excel, and types with one finger.  (Tr. p. 18) 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 10 
 
 
Prior to working for Hydrite, Mr. Cayler worked for John Deere in 2012.  He 
worked in the foundry and was paid $17-$18 per hour.  That employment ended 
because he did not enjoy working in the foundry.  He does not believe he could 
physically return and perform this type of work due to the dust and fumes he would be 
exposed to in this job.  From 2010-2012, Mr. Cayler worked at Flint Hills Resources, an 
ethanol plant, as a distillation operator and was paid $18.25 per hour.  He does not 
believe he could physically perform this job because it involved a lot of walking and 
stairs.  From 2008-2010 Mr. Cayler worked as a delivery driver for Sadler Power Train.  
He delivered parts and was paid $12.50 per hour.  He does not believe he could 
physically perform this work because he was required to help in the shop to rebuild 
brakes and he could not handle the brake dust and it involved extensive walking.  From 
2007-2008, Mr. Cayler worked as a bartender and cook at a Pub.  He believes he could 
perform this work because smoking is no longer allowed indoors.  He earned $400 per 
week.  He has worked as a massage therapist and even owned his own massage 
therapy business.  He does not believe he could return to this type of work due to the 
amount of bending required.  Additionally, he let his license lapse.  He has experience 
working in a plumbing warehouse as a picker.  He does not believe he could perform 
this type of work because he would need to be on a fork truck and the job also requires 
a lot of bending.  He also has experience working in a grocery store for 8 to 9 years.  He 
started as a part-time night stocker and advanced to assistant manager.  He does not 
feel he is physically capable to stocking shelves, performing heavy lifting, or walking.  
He does believe he could perform the assistant manager work.  Mr. Cayler’s work 
history is set forth in his answers to interrogatories.  (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 139-142; Tr. pp. 62-
67)   
At the time of the injury and after the injury Mr. Cayler was paid $22.00 per hour, 
plus $1.50 for the weekend shift, plus overtime hours.  Following the injury he returned 
to work and performed his job for approximately several months.  He voluntarily left that 
employment.  I find his restrictions preclude him from a significant number of jobs that 
he previously performed.  I also find that he has sustained a loss of future earning 
capacity as a result of the work injury.  Unfortunately, he has restrictions.  He has lost 
access to a portion of his pre-injury employment opportunities.  Through his continued 
employment he has demonstrated a willingness to work and retraining.   
Considering Mr. Cayler’s age, educational background, employment history, 
ability to retrain, length of healing period, permanent impairment, and permanent 
restrictions, and the other industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme 
Court, I find that he has sustained a 25 percent loss of future earning capacity as a 
result of his work injury with the defendant employer.  As stipulated by the parties, these 
benefits shall commence on November 8, 2018. 
Next, Mr. Cayler alleges penalty benefits are appropriate in this case.  I find 
claimant only missed two days of work following the injury and he was released to 
return to work without restrictions on November 8, 2018.  (JE3, p. 33) There is no 
evidence in the record that Mr. Cayler made a claim for any indemnity benefits prior to 
his voluntary resignation.  He continued to work for the defendant-employer without 
restrictions until he voluntarily resigned in March 2019.  (Def. Ex. D)  During this 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 11 
 
 
timeframe, he had minimal medical treatment.  Mr. Cayler admitted he did not realize 
that his breathing was not 100 percent until 2020.  (Tr. pp. 51-52)  I find that during this 
timeframe Mr. Cayler was not making a claim for any temporary or permanent indemnity 
benefits.   
I further find payment of permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits was delayed.  
On July 14, 2020, defendants paid claimant 50 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits.  (Def. Ex. J, p. 83) This payment was based on the impairment rating dated 
June 19, 2020 which was issued by Dr. Hicklin.  I find defendants failed to 
contemporaneously convey the basis for the delay in payment to the claimant at the 
time of the delay.   
Mr. Cayler is seeking payment of past medical benefits as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 14.  There is no dispute that defendants are entitled to a credit for payments 
made under a group health insurance plan.  Defendants dispute liability for some of the 
expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 14.   
Defendants dispute that they are responsible for the expenses connected to the 
sleep study performed on November 28, 2018.  (Cl. Ex. 14, pp. 161, 165, 186) These 
costs include the expenses associated with the visit with Dr. Visokey on November 28, 
2018, as well as the PSG test cost at Mercy One Waterloo Medical on November 28, 
2018.  (Cl. Ex. 14, pp. 161, 186) Dr. Hicklin opined that Mr. Cayler’s severe sleep apnea 
is not related to the workplace injury.  (JE4, p. 63) Based on the opinion of Dr. Hicklin, I 
find that the work injury did not necessitate the evaluation and treatment of sleep apnea.  
Therefore, I find defendants are not responsible for these expenses.   
Defendants also dispute responsibility for the November 11, 2020 CT of the 
thorax, which was necessitated due to a pre-existing lung nodule.  (Cl. Ex. 14, pp. 162, 
198).  Dr. Hicklin noted that claimant’s lung nodule and any heart issues were unrelated 
to the work injury.  (JE4, p. 63) Based on the opinions of Dr. Hicklin, I find that the work 
injury did not necessitate the evaluation and treatment of the pre-existing lung nodule.  
Therefore, I find defendants are not responsible for these expenses.  
I find that defendants are responsible for all remaining expenses contained in 
claimant’s exhibit 14.  
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  I find that claimant was 
generally successful in his claim.  I exercise my discretion and find that an assessment 
of costs against the defendants is appropriate in this case.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties have stipulated that claimant sustained permanent disability as the 
result of the work injury.  The central dispute in this case is the nature and extent of 
permanent partial disability benefits claimant is entitled to receive as the result of the 
work accident.  Claimant contends he should be compensated on an industrial disability 
analysis.  Defendants contend that claimant does not qualify for the industrial disability 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 12 
 
 
analysis and that his compensation should be limited to permanent disability benefits 
based solely on the functional impairment method.   
Both parties agree claimant should be compensated pursuant to Iowa Code 
Section 85.34(2)(v) which states: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same of greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity.  Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee 
who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with 
the same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability.   
In this case, claimant returned to work with the same employer until he voluntarily 
resigned on March 6, 2019.  The central dispute is whether claimant’s permanent 
disability benefits should be based on his functional impairment or loss of earning 
capacity.  The parties dispute whether, prior to his voluntary resignation, Mr. Cayler was 
offered work for which he received or would receive the same or greater salary, wages, 
or earnings than he received at the time of the injury.  Unfortunately, the Iowa 
Legislature did not provide any guidance as to how or when to measure whether the 
claimant is receiving or is being offered the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings 
than what he received at the time of the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) has been 
interpreted by the Commissioner in McCoy v. Menard, Inc., File No. 1651840.01 (App. 
Dec. April 9, 2021).  McCoy stands for the proposition that the phrase “receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages or earnings” must include both the 
hourly wage and the actual hours worked.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant’s total hours were less 
after the injury than they were at the time of the injury.  I conclude that his overtime 
hours after the injury were approximately half of what they were prior to the injury.  
There is no evidence that the reduction in total hours was due to a slowdown in work, 
nor is there any evidence that claimant was offered any hours that he turned down.  The 
only evidence in this case is that claimant was not offered as many overtime hours by 
the employer after the work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 141-142; Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144; Def. Ex. G; 
Tr. pp. 49-50) Thus, I conclude that after the work injury, the employer did not offer the 
claimant the same or greater hours as they did prior to the work injury.     

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 13 
 
 
Defendants do not argue that claimant’s total hours remained the same or 
greater after the injury.  Rather, defendants argue that if one considers claimant’s gross 
wages combined with bonuses, then claimant’s average weekly pay increased after the 
work injury.  Unfortunately, the Iowa Legislature did not provide any guidance about 
bonuses in the context of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  The undersigned is unaware 
of any decisions from this agency that address whether bonuses are to be considered in 
the context of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  The undersigned acknowledges that this 
section uses the term “earnings” and not “gross earnings” or “spendable weekly 
earnings.”  The legislature set forth definitions of the latter two in section 85.61; 
unfortunately, there is no statutory definition of “earnings.”  Because there is no defined 
method to determine claimant’s earnings after the injury and there is no indication in the 
statute whether bonuses should or should not be included in this determination, it is 
reasonable to look to other portions of chapter 85 for guidance.   
Iowa Code section 85.36 sets forth the basis for calculating a claimant’s gross 
earnings which then forms the basis for determining the weekly workers’ compensation 
rate.  The undersigned recognizes that the basis for a claimant’s weekly workers’ 
compensation is not designed to completely replace wages; rather it is designed to 
amount to roughly eighty percent of a claimant’s average spendable weekly earnings.  
Nonetheless, the law surrounding how bonuses are to be treated can still provide 
guidance in this case.  See Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(3), 85.31(1),85.37, 85.61.  
When calculating a claimant’s gross earnings, irregular bonuses are to be excluded 
from the calculation.  See Iowa Code section 85.61(3); See also Noel v. Rolscreen Co., 
475 N.W.2d 666 (Iowa Ct. App. 1991); Burton v. Hilltop Care Center, 813 N.W.2d 250, 
266 (Iowa 2012). 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3).   
The evidence in this case surrounding the basis for any bonus is scant.  
According to a wage summary for pay dates January 11, 2018 through March 8, 2019, 
claimant received 5 bonuses.  The only information provided is the date and the amount 
of the bonus.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 144) There are three pay statements in evidence for three of 
the five bonuses.  On pay date November 2, 2018, claimant was paid $1,500.00 for 
“Referral Bonus.”  (Def. Ex. G, p. 49) On pay date December 14, 2018, claimant was 
paid $1,500.00 for “Referral Bonus.” (Def. Ex. G, p. 46).  On pay date February 8, 2018, 
claimant was paid “Holiday Bonus” for 32 hours in the amount of $704.00.  (Def. Ex. G, 
p. 42) There is no additional information surrounding the basis for these bonuses.  I find 
there is not enough evidence in this case to determine if the bonuses received by 
claimant were regular bonuses.  I conclude defendants have not demonstrated that the 
bonuses claimant received were regular bonuses.  Therefore, I conclude the bonuses 
should not be included in determining whether claimant was offered work for which he 
received or would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than he 
received at the time of the injury.  It is also noteworthy that the parties stipulated to the 
weekly rate of compensation in this case.  A review of the rate calculation submitted by 
the parties reveals that there were no bonuses included in the calculation of the 
claimant’s rate. (Def. Ex. H) It seems inherently unfair to exclude any bonuses when 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 14 
 
 
determining claimant’s weekly rate but include bonuses when determining post-injury 
earnings.  Thus, I find that after the injury the claimant returned to work with the same 
employer, but he was not offered the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings that he 
received at the time of the injury.  As such, claimant’s compensation is not limited to his 
functional impairment.     
 
     
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Claimant returned to work for the same employer but did not make the same or 
greater wages, salary, or earnings as he did prior to the injury.  He voluntarily left that 
employment in March 2019.  He was hired by Con Agra as production operator.  He 
was paid $20 per hour.  He ran a piece of machinery that filled and sealed sunflower 
seeds.  He was able to perform this job without difficulty.  Unfortunately, due to a family 
tragedy, he had to miss work during his probationary period which resulted in his 
termination.  Subsequently he obtained his CDL and was hired by Watco Transloading.  
At the time of hearing, he was still working full-time as a truck driver earning $19.50 per 
hour.  At Watco he does not get much overtime; he will only get an hour or two of 
overtime here and there.  (Tr. pp. 60-61) 
Having considered claimant’s age, proximity to retirement, educational 
background, employment history, ability to return to work or retrain, permanent 
impairment rating, permanent restrictions, motivation, and all other factors of industrial 
disability identified by the Iowa Supreme Court, I found that claimant proved a 25 
percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the August 12, 2018 work injury.  
This is the equivalent of a 25 percent industrial disability.  Industrial disability benefits 
are paid as a percentage of 500 weeks.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  Therefore, I 
conclude claimant is entitled to an award of 125 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits.  As stipulated by the parties, these benefits shall commence on November 8, 
2018.   

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 15 
 
 
Claimant is seeking penalty benefits in this case.  Penalty benefits are governed 
by Iowa Code section 86.13(4), which provides: 
 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
(c) In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee.   
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
 
When an employee's claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee's factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute. Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability. Gilbert v. USF 
Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
Claimant contends a penalty is appropriate because the PPD benefits were not 
paid until July 14, 2020.  Defendants argue penalty benefits are not appropriate 
because claimant only missed two days of work and was released to return to work 
without restrictions on November 8, 2018.  (JE3, p. 33) There is no evidence in the 
record that claimant made a claim for any indemnity benefits at that time.  Claimant 
continued to work for the defendant-employer without restrictions until he voluntarily 
resigned in March 2019.  (Def. Ex. D)  
The Court of Appeals rejected the notion that an employer has an affirmative 
duty to determine whether there was an impairment rating where the employee made 
no claim for benefits and was released without restrictions.  Davidson v. Bruce, 594 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 16 
 
 
N.W.2d 833 (Iowa Ct. App. 1999).  The Court of Appeals concluded that an assessment 
of penalty benefits is inappropriate until the employer has been informed that the 
claimant has reached maximum medical improvement and then delays seeking a rating.  
In this case, claimant was returned to work without restrictions and no claim for benefits 
was made.  Therefore, I conclude that penalty benefits are inappropriate.   
Claimant also contends penalty benefits are appropriate because the permanent 
partial disability (PPD) benefits that defendants paid were unreasonably delayed.   
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), 
and Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme 
court said:   
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse. A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee's entitlement to benefits. A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason to 
the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a “reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse” under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner. See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner's finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that a 
reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13. See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the employer to 
investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; Kiesecker v. 
Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 1995); or (b) the 
employer had a reasonable basis to contest the claim—the “fairly 
debatable” basis for delay. See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260 (holding 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 17 
 
 
two-month delay to obtain employer's own medical report reasonable 
under the circumstances). 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that 
are underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless 
the employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or 
excuse. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from 
application of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner 
required to apply penalty). 
 
If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the avoidance of penalty 
if any amount of compensation benefits are paid, the purpose of the 
penalty statute would be frustrated. For these reasons, we 
conclude section 86.13 is applicable when payment of compensation is 
not timely ... or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers' compensation insurer. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235. 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to consider 
factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee's injury and 
wages, and the employer's past record of penalties. Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
(7) An employer's bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does not 
make it so. A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it clear 
that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner could 
reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.” See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260. 
 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996). 
 
Weekly compensation payments are due at the end of the compensation 
week. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 229, 235.  Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest 
payments. Davidson v. Bruce, 593 N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999). Schadendorf v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 338 (Iowa 2008). 
In this case claimant contends penalty is appropriate because payment of 
permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits was unreasonably delayed.  On July 14, 
2020, defendants paid claimant 50 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  (Def. 
Ex. J, p. 83) This payment was based on the impairment rating dated June 19, 2020 
which was issued by Dr. Hicklin.  The stipulated PPD benefits commencement date is 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 18 
 
 
November 8, 2018.  Thus, the first 50 weeks of paid PPD benefits were for the time 
period of November 8, 2018 through October 23, 2019 and had all accrued by the date 
the impairment rating was issued.  I find that 50 weeks at the stipulated rate of $701.22 
amounts to $35,061.00.  I find that the July 14, 2020 payment was late1. 
 
In this case, I found that claimant proved a delay in the payment of PPD benefits. 
I conclude that defendants did not offer a reasonable excuse for the delay in payment of 
benefits.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b)(2).  Defendants did not contemporaneously 
convey their bases for delay of benefits.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c)(3).  Defendants 
bore the burden to establish a reasonable basis, or excuse, and to prove the 
contemporaneous conveyance of those bases to the claimant. Defendants failed to 
carry their burden of proof on the penalty issues, and a penalty award is appropriate.  
Iowa Code section 86.13(4). 
 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237. In this 
regard, the Commission is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty 
imposed with a maximum penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, 
benefits. Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).  In 
exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length of the 
delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding the 
employee's injury and wages, and the employer's past record of penalties. Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996). In this case, the 50-week 
delay of permanent disability benefits was not egregious and defendants voluntarily paid 
the impairment rating in full within weeks of receiving the rating.   
Having considered the relevant factors and the purposes of the penalty statute, I 
conclude that a section 86.13 penalty in the amount of $1,000.00 is appropriate in this 
case. Such an amount is appropriate to punish the employer for delay in payment of 
benefits under these facts and should serve as a deterrent against future conduct.  
As noted above, Mr. Cayler is seeking payment of past medical benefits as set 
forth in claimant’s exhibit 14.  There is no dispute that defendants are entitled to a credit 
for payments made under a group health insurance plan.  Iowa Code section 85.38(2). 
Defendants dispute liability for some of the expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 14.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
                                                 
1 The 50 weeks were paid at a higher, incorrect weekly rate of $704.79. 

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 19 
 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude the expenses associated with the 
visit with Dr. Visokey on November 28, 2018, as well as the PSG test cost at Mercy One 
Waterloo Medical on November 28, 2018 are not causally connected to the work injury.  
(Cl. Ex. 14, pp. 161, 165, 186; JE4, p. 63) Dr. Hicklin opined that Mr. Cayler’s severe 
sleep apnea is not related to the workplace injury.  Based on the opinion of Dr. Hicklin, I 
find that the work injury did not necessitate the evaluation and treatment of sleep apnea.  
Therefore, I find defendants are not responsible for these expenses.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude the expenses associated with the 
November 11, 2020 CT of the thorax, was necessitated due to a pre-existing lung 
nodule.  (Cl. Ex. 14, pp. 161, 198).  Dr. Hicklin noted that claimant’s lung nodule and 
any heart issues were unrelated to the work injury.  (JE4, p. 63) Based on the opinion of 
Dr. Hicklin, I find that the work injury did not necessitate the evaluation and treatment of 
the pre-existing lung nodule.  Therefore, I find defendants are not responsible for these 
expenses. I conclude defendants are responsible for all remaining expenses contained 
in claimant’s exhibit 14.  
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing the 
case.  876 IAC 4.33.  I conclude that an assessment of costs against the defendants is 
appropriate. 
First, claimant seeks costs in the amount of $103.00 for the filing fee.  I find this 
is an appropriate cost under 4.33 (7).  Second, claimant seeks costs in the amount of 
$80.00 associated with obtaining a copy of claimant’s deposition transcript.  I find this is 
an appropriate cost under 4.33(2).  Third, claimant seeks costs in the amount of 
$550.00, associated with obtaining a transcription of the recorded statement of Todd 
Cayler.  I find that is an allowable cost under 4.33(2).  Based on the above findings of 
fact, I conclude defendants are assessed costs totaling seven hundred thirty-three and 
no/100 dollars ($733.00). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of seven hundred one and 
22/100 dollars ($701.22).   
Defendants shall pay 125 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of November 8, 2018. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.    

CAYLER V. HYDRITE CHEMICAL CO. 
Page 20 
 
 
Defendants shall pay penalty benefits in the amount of one thousand and no/100 
dollars ($1,000.00). 
Defendants shall pay these medical providers, reimburse claimant, reimburse all 
third-party payers, or otherwise satisfy and hold claimant harmless for medical 
expenses as set forth above. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ____31st _ day of August, 2023. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin Roth 
 (via WCES) 
Lindsey Mills  
 (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
