Case Number: 5039943.03
Case Title:  THORNTON, TOBY V. CLAYTON CNTY RECYCLING
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Thornton Toby-5039943.03m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TOBY THORNTON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
            File No. 5039943.03 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
       ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE  
 
 
  :                            DECISION               
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AMERICAN INTERSTATE INSURANCE  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
              Headnote: 2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Toby Thornton.   
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on July 17, 2025. Claimant 
appeared personally and through his attorney Tiernan Siems.  Defendants appeared 
through their attorney Caitlin Kilburg.  The proceedings were digitally recorded. That 
recording constitutes the official record of this proceeding.  
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023 Order, the undersigned has been 
delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
Prior to the hearing, claimant submitted exhibits 1-7, consisting of 10 pages.  
Claimant’s exhibits 1-5 were submitted with the filing of claimant’s petition on July 7, 
2025.  Claimant’s exhibits 6 and 7 were emailed to the undersigned prior to the hearing 
on July 17, 2025.  Defendants objected to claimant’s exhibit 6.  Claimant’s exhibit 6 
contains excerpts from the deposition of Joseph Quinn in another legal matter. (Cl Ex. 
6).  That matter is a bad faith action filed by the claimant against insurer, American 
Interstate Insurance Company, in the United States District Court for the Southern 
District of Iowa.  (Id. at 1).  Mr. Quinn’s deposition was taken on May 13, 2025. (Id.).  
The proposed exhibit contains several short excerpts from Mr. Quinn’s testimony. (Id.).  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jul-21  12:58:38     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 2 
 
Defendants objected to the exhibits due to relevance, lack of context, and unfair 
surprise as counsel was not present at the deposition and was not aware of the 
transcripts existence until claimant submitted the exhibit. (Id.).  Defendants’ objection 
was overruled and exhibit 6 was admitted into the record.  There were no objections to 
defendants’ exhibit A.   
The official hearing record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1-7, consisting of 10 pages 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A, consisting of 10 pages  
 Claimant’s Petition and Addendum 
 Defendants’ Answer and Addendum 
 
Claimant testified at the hearing.  Counsel for both parties provided argument.   
ISSUES 
The issues presented for resolution are whether the claimant is entitled to 
alternate medical care in the form of: 
 A new conversion van 
 Temporary transportation 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
 
This is the second alternate care action filed by claimant for a new van.  On May 
15, 2025, claimant filed a prior alternate care action requesting the agency order 
defendants replace his current conversion van, as well as order van repairs to be 
completed at Meyer’s Automotive until the replacement van was available. (See Petition 
in File No. 5039943.03). In that hearing, claimant introduced testimony from Andrew 
Meyer, a personal acquaintance and local mechanic in Monona, Iowa, where claimant 
lives. (See Alt Care Decision, File No. 5039943.02, May 30, 2025; see also Cl Ex. 3).  
Mr. Meyer testified that he inspected claimant’s van on May 23, 2025. (Id.).  He stated 
that during that inspection he discovered an issue with the unibody frame of the van; it 
had rusted causing a portion of the subframe to hang down unattached. (Id.).  Meyer 
thought repairing the unibody frame would be a difficult process. (Id.). Meyer testified 
that in his opinion claimant’s current van was not safe to operate for long distances. 
(Id.).   
 
On May 30, 2025, at 3:09 p.m., the undersigned issued an alternate care 
decision.1  (Alt Care Decision, File No. 5039943.02, May 30, 2025).  That decision 
found that claimant’s counsel had not complied with the requirements of Iowa Code 
section 85.27, as it pertained to Mr. Meyer’s findings and the unibody frame issue. Iowa 
                                                 
1Judicial notice is taken of the factual findings made in the undersigned’s prior alternate care 
action. Those findings will not be repeated in this decision.   
 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 3 
 
Code section 85.27(4) requires an employee notify defendants of the reason for his or 
her dissatisfaction with care (or appliances) before applying to the agency for alternate 
medical care. According to the statute, this requirement is intended to give the parties 
an opportunity to reach an understanding, before asking the agency to intervene.  
Claimant did not notify defendants of the unibody frame issue or ask them to fix that 
issue prior to filing his first alternate care petition on May 15, 2025.  Given this, the 
unibody frame issue was not properly before the agency in that proceeding.  The 
decision found that without considering that evidence, claimant had not met his burden 
to prove that his current van was unreasonable and needed to be replaced even after 
repairs. (Id.).  The decision, however, ordered defendants to authorize repair of the 
van’s CV boots and engine oil cooler with a mechanic located in Monona, Iowa, within 
the next 14 days.  (Id.).   
 
The parties have submitted numerous pages of correspondence into the hearing 
record for this new action. The undersigned will try to summarize those 
communications. According to the evidence, on May 30, 2025, at 6:27 p.m., claimant’s 
counsel sent defendants’ counsel an email that read: 
In light of Mr. Meyer’s findings and the unsafe condition of the vehicle, Mr. 
Thornton needs to have the van replaced immediately. Per the Deputy’s 
order and prevailing Iowa Law, there is no dispute that the conversion van 
is a medical appliance subject to replacement.  
Please treat this email as Notice of Mr. Thornton’s dissatisfaction of care.  
Accordingly, please advise as to whether your client will voluntarily replace 
the van or will continue to force litigation to obtain benefits to which he is 
entitled.  
(Ex. A, p. 1).   
 
The next email in the record is dated Tuesday, June 3, 2025, at 1:24 p.m. (Ex. A, 
p. 1).  It is from defendants’ counsel to claimant’s counsel. (Id.).  It states, “My client has 
authorized Birdnow Chevrolet to perform the requested repairs.  They have confirmed 
they are capable of the same and have all the claim information. Would you like me to 
schedule the appointment or would Mr. Thornton care to so that he can work around his 
schedule?” (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel responded: 
     Until the frame, sub frame and rear suspension are fixed, the van is not 
safe to drive. I assume Birdnow will be addressing these issues.  If that’s 
accurate, can Birdnow pick up the van? Also, can you please address my 
email about replacement and temporary transportation in the meantime? 
(Id.).  Defense counsel responded to that email on June 4, 2025. (Id.).  In this email 
defense counsel indicates that defendants would arrange to have the van taken to 
Birdnow. (Id.).  It also asks for a list of claimant’s upcoming authorized medical 
appointments so that defendants can arrange for transportation to those appointments. 
(Id.). Claimant’s counsel responded that day, indicating claimant had an appointment 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 4 
 
with Dr. Rogge on July 2, 2025, at 2:45 p.m., as well as a wheelchair fitting appointment 
in Cedar Rapids, for which they did not yet have a date. (Id.).   
 
The next email in the record is dated June 10, 2025, at 6:43 p.m. (Ex. A, p. 2).  It 
is from defendants’ counsel. (Id.). It reads:  
By way of update, the van has been towed successfully to Birdnow. 
Unbeknownst to my client, they were able to squeeze the van in early since 
it was already there and have this afternoon reported that they believe the 
current damage is to the aftermarket pieces. Thus, while they believe the 
damage is repairable, they cannot repair it. As such, the van is set to be 
inspected by Chris Roche, Automotive Engineer, on June 12, 2025.  
My client has the previously noted appointment for July 2, 2025 arranged 
for transportation.  Please let me know if there are any other appointments 
that necessitate transportation.  
(Id.).  After receiving this email, claimant’s counsel called and emailed Lori Welch at 
Birdnow.  (See Claimant’s Application for Rehearing). It is unclear what claimant’s 
counsel and Ms. Welch discussed during this phone call. However, on the morning of 
June 11, 2025, Ms. Welch forwarded claimant’s counsel a message from the service 
manager at Birdnow Chevrolet. That message stated, 
 
After inspection of the rear suspension, this vehicle is unsafe and 
either needs repairs by upfitter or sent to salvage.  There is nothing we can 
do here to repair this modification that was an upfitter modification.  
(Id.).  On the afternoon of June 11, 2025, claimant’s counsel forwarded Ms. Welch’s 
email to defendants’ counsel. (Ex. A, p. 3).  In that email, claimant’s counsel writes,  
 
Per the email exchange below, Birdnow believes that the vehicle is 
unsafe. I don’t read the email below to suggest that repairs are appropriate; 
rather, the service manager has indicated that it “either needs repairs by 
upfitter [Siebert?] or sent to salvage.” 
 
In light of this additional inspection, please treat this email as another 
request for replacement of the conversion van. Should your client fail to 
confirm replacement immediately, my client will have no alternative but to 
file yet another alternate medical care petition.  
(Id.).  On June 12, 2025, at 8:29 a.m., defendants’ counsel sent an email response.  
That email reads in pertinent part,  
The van either needs repaired or sent to salvage. They also indicated that 
they cannot make the repairs. Therefore, as I told you Tuesday, Chris 
Roche, an Automotive Engineer, will look at the van today so that my client 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 5 
 
can make a decision as to how they want to proceed. My client has already 
begun that process in case replacement is the route they decide to go.  
(Id.).  At 9:47 a.m., claimant’s counsel sent Lori Welch an email.  That email 
reads: 
Thanks for the email and the phone call.  I did have one other question:  did 
Craig or anyone at Birdnow tell the insurance company that the rust damage 
to the undercarriage is repairable? I’m just trying to understand why the 
insurance company has scheduled yet another inspection if Birdnow or 
anyone else thought the van could be repaired.  
(Claimant’s Application for Rehearing).  Ms. Welch replied that afternoon telling 
claimant’s counsel that the “upfitter company would be the ones responsible to repair” 
the van. (Id.).  
 
According to defendants’ counsel, Mr. Roche is an automotive engineer that  was 
hired to inspect the upfitter parts on claimant’s van.2 (Hearing Testimony; Ex. A, p. 6).  
The upfitter in this case, the Bruan Corporation, added the ramp and wheelchair locking 
mechanisms to claimant’s van. (See Alternate Care Decision, File No. 5039943.02).  Mr. 
Roche examined the van’s unibody frame on June 12, 2025. (Hearing Testimony).  He 
determined it would be very costly to fix the unibody frame.3 (Id.). After hearing from Mr. 
Roche, defendants decided it would be more cost-effective to replace the van. (Hearing 
Testimony).   
 
On June 13, 2025, at 3:50 p.m., claimant’s counsel sent defendants’ counsel a 
new email.  This one reads as follows: 
 
I didn’t hear back from you after your 3rd inspection of the conversion 
van. I had hoped that we could move this forward more quickly, particularly 
considering that Toby has missed one or more medical appointments in light 
of the unsafe condition of the van.  Also, I don’t know if I saw any response 
about temporary transportation.  Would you please get back to me right 
away on these issues?  
Finally, please see the email exchange I had with Lori Welch at 
Birdnow. I’m still trying to determine who told you that the van was reparable 
per your email on June 10.  Any insight would be appreciated.  
Again, please treat this as notice that Mr. Thornton is dissatisfied with 
the medical appliances, to wit the conversion van.  This needs to be 
replaced immediately and Mr. Thornton should be working with Siebert 
Mobility to make that happen as soon as possible.  
                                                 
2 An upfitter specializes in customizing vehicles to meet customer’s individual needs. (Hearing Testimony).   
3 Mr. Roche’s report from that date is not in evidence.  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 6 
 
(Ex. A, p. 4).  Approximately a half hour later, defendants’ counsel sent the following 
response email, 
 
I seriously don’t understand the disconnect here other than your 
continued desire to complicate matters evidenced by your series of 
unnecessary calls (which by the way makes people really hesitant to work 
on Toby’s van).   
 
Lori told me it would need to be repaired by someone else or sent to 
salvage.  This is the same thing I have told you repeatedly and the same 
thing she has told you repeatedly  
. . .  
 
My client has the right to inspect the vehicle, consider cost of repair 
vs. replacement, and make a decision.  I already told you my client has 
started the process of obtaining a replacement van in case that is the route 
that is needed.  
There is absolutely no reason why your client should have missed 
any appointments unless you failed to tell me about them. I have asked 
repeatedly for a list of all appointments so that my client can line up 
transportation. I have been told of one appointment in July and 
transportation has been lined up.  
If there are any other appointments you have not told me about, 
please let me know.  
(Ex. A, p. 4).  On June 13, 2025, at 4:27 p.m., claimant’s counsel sent another email 
that stated “Is the van being replaced? If not, we will file the Alt Med Care Petition.” (Cl 
Ex. 4).  Defendants’ counsel wrote back  at 4:41 p.m. on that date, stating “Yes, it 
appears at this point that replacement is the most cost-effective and most appropriate 
option.” (Id.).  
 
On June 17, 2025, claimant’s counsel sent defendants’ counsel a new email. (Cl 
Ex. 5).  This email indicated that the claimant had located a van he wanted at Rollx 
Vans in Savage, Minnesota. (Id.).  The email indicates that the lower floor and ramp of 
the van were finished, and that Rollx could complete the remainder of the conversion 
work as soon as defendants approved the vehicle’s purchase. (Id.).  The email also 
indicated that claimant wanted to go to the grocery store, run errands, and go other 
places outside his home. (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel asked for suggestions for temporary 
transportation while claimant waited for a replacement vehicle. (Id.).  On June 18, 2025, 
defendants’ counsel wrote back asking for information about the vehicle’s price and 
Rollx’s proposed timeline for completing the conversions. (Id.).  Later that day, 
claimant’s counsel wrote back indicating that claimant was scheduling a free demo of 
the van with Rollx to confirm he wanted it. (Id.).   

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 7 
 
On June 19, 2025, the parties exchanged another series of emails.  Those 
included emails from claimant’s counsel informing defendants that claimant had a 
urology appointment in Lacrosse, Wisconsin on June 23, 2025. (Ex. A, p. 5). Claimant’s 
counsel sent another email asking for an update on temporary transportation outside of 
medical appointments. (Id.).  There are also two emails from defendants.  (Id.).  The first 
requests the address of claimant’s urology appointment. (Id.).  The second email reads 
“Below please find the details for the van my client will move forward with purchasing 
once they have the final paperwork from Siebert, which Matt Strabala expects to send 
by tomorrow at the latest.  Siebert estimates 3-4 weeks for all modifications and 
adaptions, due to parts needing to be ordered, delivered and installed.”  (Id.).  Below 
this is a list of features included in the 2025 Chrysler Pacifica Select van defendants 
chose. (Id.). On June 20, 2025, defendants’ counsel sent claimant’s counsel an email 
confirming that transportation had been lined up for claimant’s medical appointment on 
June 23, 2025. (Ex. A, p. 6).   
On June 19, 2025, claimant filed an application for rehearing of the alternate care 
decision.  (See Claimant’s Application for Rehearing). That application sought a reversal 
of the agency’s May 30, 2025 decision.  (Id.).  As support for this request, claimant 
attached copies of emails exchanged between the parties dated June 11, 2025, through 
June 13, 2025. (Id.).  Those emails documented the results of defendants’ inspection of 
the unibody frame issue raised by claimant during the May 28, 2025 alternate care 
hearing, as well as their agreement to buy claimant a new van after being allowed to 
inspect the van’s frame. (Id.).  On July 2, 2025, the undersigned issued a re-hearing 
decision.  (Rehearing Decision, July 2, 2025).  That decision found that claimant’s 
attempt to introduce new evidence into the record after the hearing record had already 
closed was improper; it denied claimant’s request for rehearing on the issue of whether 
he was entitled to a new van at the time of the original alternate care hearing. (Id.).  
Further, it noted that it appeared the defendants had already agreed to buy claimant a 
new van, so the request was moot.4 (Id.).    
On or about June 20, 2025, defendants purchased a new van for the claimant. 
(Testimony).  However, on June 26, 2025, Chrysler issued a recall of that van because 
of an issue with the airbags. (Id.; Ex. A, pp. 7-9). Defendants then purchased a second 
van for the claimant that was not subject to the recall. (Id.).   
On June 27, 2025, claimant’s counsel sent defendants’ counsel an email asking 
for a response to claimant’s request for temporary transportation pending delivery of his 
new van. (Ex. A, p. 7).  On June 29, 2025, claimant’s counsel asked for a copy of Mr. 
Roche’s report. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel emailed him a copy of Mr. Roche’s report. 
(Id.).  
On July 3, 2025, at 11:32 a.m., claimant’s counsel sent another email stating 
“Please allow this email to serve as notice of dissatisfaction of care for failing to provide 
temporary transportation. Unless I hear from you, we will have no choice but to file a 
                                                 
4 In his application for rehearing, claimant also requested an additional order clarifying the scope 
and timing of van repairs. (See Application for Rehearing).   

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 8 
 
Petition for Alternate Medical Care.” (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel sent defendants’ counsel 
another email at 4:56 p.m. (Id.).  This email is entitled “Alt Med Care Petition,” and 
states “Please see attached filed this afternoon.” (Id.).  At around 7:00 p.m. on July 3, 
2025, defendants’ counsel faxed claimant’s attorney a letter.  (Id. at 8). The pertinent 
portion of that letter reads as follows, 
I would ask you to withdraw your Alternate Medical Care Petition as 
a misrepresentation of facts to the Court. You know that a new van has been 
ordered and estimated delivery is mid-July.  You know that my client has 
volunteered temporary transportation to any and all medical appointments 
at every turn, including last minute requests that required my client to call 
no less than seven facilities in a 24 hour period to accommodate, which they 
are happy to do to ensure your client gets the care he needs.  You also 
know that my client authorized the Ordered repairs consistent with the 
Alternate Medical Care Decision with an automotive shop in Monona, Iowa 
within 14 days. The irony is that the repairs had been authorized since 
October 2024, but you concealed that fact from your client for at least six 
months and in the interim the van deteriorated to the point the facility 
declined to conduct the authorized repairs. . . . . 
Everything you seek in the Petition that was filed today has already 
been offered to your client and your misrepresentations warrant dismissal  
of the petition.  
(Id.). Claimant actually filed his application for alternate medical care on Monday, July 7, 
2025. (See Petition in File No. 5039943.03).  In the petition, claimant once again 
requested a new conversion van, as well as temporary transportation. (Id.).   
 
On July 8, 2025, Siebert Mobility confirmed defendants’ purchase of the second 
van for claimant. (Ex. A, p. 9).  According to Matt Strabala, the van was at Braun’s 
location in Indiana and needed to be moved to Siebert’s location in Iowa. (Id.). Mr. 
Strabala stated that once his facility received the van, they would get it undercoated and 
install the necessary adaptive equipment. (Id.). On July 10, 2025, defendants’ counsel 
forwarded claimant’s counsel proof of the purchase and asked what claimant wanted 
done with his old van, which was still at Birdnow Chevrolet. (Id.). The new van arrived at 
Siebert’s on July 15, 2025. (Id. at 10).  It was undercoated that day. (Id.).  On July 15, 
2025, defendants’ counsel sent claimant’s counsel an email. (Id. at 10).  In that email, 
defendants counsel stated their belief that claimant was not entitled to transportation for 
personal errands under Iowa Code section 85.27.  (Id.).  Defense counsel stated there 
are no decisions from the Iowa Supreme Court compelling an employer to provide a 
claimant with transportation of personal errands. (Id.).  The email stated prior decisions 
have only extended to the provision of a suitable handicapped van, not repairs or 
temporary transportation, and the language of Iowa Code section 85.27 only covers 
travel for medical needs. Defendants stated claimant’s desire to go on personal errands 
was not a matter of medical necessity. (Id.).  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 9 
 
 
At the alternate care hearing, claimant testified that defendants have already 
purchased a new van for him to drive. (Testimony).  He indicated that he has been in 
contact with Matt Strabala at Siebert Mobility about that van. (Id.).  He testified that the 
van conversions are scheduled to be completed by the end of next week. (Id.).  Siebert 
Mobility has indicated they will come and pick him up when the van is completed so that 
they can finalize the easy locks for his wheelchair and he can sign paperwork. (Id.).  
Then the van will be his. (Id.).  Claimant testified that he has left his residence 15 times 
since June 10, 2025. (Id.).  He estimated that when he has access to his van, he 
generally leaves his residence three to four times a week to pick up prescriptions, get 
groceries and socialize. (Id.).  Claimant stated that increased isolation is affecting his 
mental health. (Id.).  
 
Claimant testified that Susan Rubendall has delivered prescription medications to 
his house twice in the last month, as well as groceries. (Testimony).   Ms. Rubendall is a 
home health aide. (Id.). Defendants pay Susan Rubendall to provide care to claimant. 
(Id.).  Claimant testified that he has never asked defendants for transportation to 
Walgreens to pick up his prescriptions. (Id.).  Nor has he asked Walgreens to deliver the 
medications. (Id.).  Claimant testified that defendants have provided him with 
transportation to three doctor appointments; two with urology and one with his primary 
doctor. (Id.).  
 
Claimant stated that his current van is unsafe to drive. (Testimony).  He has used 
his motorized wheelchair to go to Casey’s and grab some groceries or to go over to a 
friend’s house, but he feels uncomfortable taking it long distances because the 
sidewalks in Monona are uneven and he thinks there is an issue with the battery. (Id.).  
He testified it does not stay charged for very long. (Id.).  Claimant estimates the battery 
can last approximately 10 miles before needing to be charged. (Id.). Claimant has not 
notified One Call of the battery issue but has spoken to someone named Mark Peters 
about it. (Id.).  Claimant testified that he wants defendants to provide him with a 
temporary vehicle until he receives his new van so that someone else can use it to drive 
him around to doctor’s appointments and run daily errands. (Id.).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted compensability for a workplace 
injury has a right to control the care provided to the injured employee.  Ramirez-Trujillo 
v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016).  The relevant statute provides 
as follows: 
(1) The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85A, shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies therefor and shall allow reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for such services. The 
employer shall also furnish reasonable and necessary crutches, artificial 
members and appliances but shall not be required to furnish more than one 
set of permanent prosthetic devices.  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 10 
 
…. 
 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the 
right to choose the care. . . . The treatment must be offered promptly and 
be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(1),(4).   
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id. An 
application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant is 
dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical 
care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather, 
the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably 
suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. See 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment and seeking 
alternate care, claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is 
unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 6.904(3)(e); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.  Ultimately, 
determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Long, 
528 N.W.2d at 123. 
Claimant’s petition seeks a replacement conversion van. The evidence, however, 
clearly shows that defendants have already purchased a replacement van.  Defendants 
notified claimant’s counsel of their agreement to purchase a new van on June 13, 2025. 
Thus, the notification was sent before claimant filed his application for rehearing on 
June 19, 2025, and before he filed his second alternate care petition on July 7, 2025. 
During the hearing, claimant confirmed that defendants have already purchased a new 
van, and he plans on picking it up next week. Defendants have already purchased the 
van claimant is requesting in this action. They have met their burden to provide 
reasonable care/appliances under the law.  Claimant’s request for a new van is denied 
as moot.  There is no justiciable issue for the agency to rule on at this time.  
At hearing, claimant’s counsel argued that this proceeding was necessary 
because claimant desires an order from the agency confirming that a conversion van 
qualifies as a medical appliance under Iowa Code section 85.27, that defendants are 
legally required to provide him with the same, and that they have not done so. 
(Testimony).  He wants this order “for the future.” (Id.).  This request is unnecessary in 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 11 
 
this agency action and problematic.  Every controversy brought before this agency is 
time and fact specific.  The undersigned cannot issue a blanket order that conversion 
vans themselves qualify as medical appliances under Iowa law, as each case has its 
own facts and circumstances.  See e.g., Manpower Temporary Services v. Sioson, 529 
N.W.2d 259 (Iowa 1995); but see, Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 
1996).  The language of Iowa Code section 85.27 authorizes expedited legal 
procedures so that qualifying claimants can get reasonable and necessary medical care 
that is covered by the statute.  The statute is not a vehicle for claimants to seek advisory 
opinions, nor a means to procure evidence for lawsuits filed in other jurisdictions.  
Claimant’s request for an additional order is denied.  
Claimant’s petition also asks for temporary transportation for daily errands until 
the new van is delivered to him next week. (See Petition).  During the hearing, claimant 
clarified that he wants defendants to provide him with a temporary, non-modified 
vehicle, so that someone else can use it to drive him around for errands and socializing. 
(Id.). The evidence shows that defendants are already providing him with transportation 
to medical appointments as required under Iowa Code section 85.27.  In his addendum, 
claimant argues that he is also entitled to temporary transportation for his own personal 
use.  (See Claimant’s Addendum, p. 2).  He, however, does not provide any legal 
authority for that assertion and the undersigned is not aware of any prior court or 
agency decisions extending the reach of Iowa Code section 85.27 to temporary 
transportation for personal errands and socializing. Claimants bear the burden of proof 
in alternate care proceedings. Claimant has failed to show that his request for 
temporary transportation for his personal use falls within the statutory authority of Iowa 
Code section 85.27(4). Under this record, claimant’s request is denied.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant’s petition for alternate care is DENIED.   
Signed and filed this __21st _ day of July, 2025. 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Tiernan Siems (via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg (via WCES) 
 
