Case Number: 5056493.01
Case Title:  STUART, DEBRA V. DICKTEN MASCH PLASTICS
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Stuart, Debra-5056493.01.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 23-0018 
Filed October 25, 2023 
 
 
DEBRA STUART, 
 
Plaintiff-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
DICKTEN MASCH PLASTICS, LLC and EMPLOYERS PREFERRED INS. CO., 
 
Defendants-Appellees. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Michael D. Huppert, 
Judge. 
 
Debra Stuart appeals from the district court’s ruling on judicial review 
affirming the workers’ compensation commissioner’s denial of her review-
reopening petition.  REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH INSTRUCTIONS. 
 
 
John P. Dougherty of Lawyer, Dougherty & Palmer, P.L.C., West Des 
Moines, for appellant. 
 
Nathan R. McConkey of Huber, Book, Lanz & McConkey, PLLC, West Des 
Moines, for appellees. 
 
 
Heard by Bower, C.J., and Buller and Langholz, JJ.

 
2
LANGHOLZ, Judge. 
 
Under Iowa’s workers’ compensation statutes, an injured worker receiving 
benefits can seek to reopen her award or settlement to obtain more benefits by 
showing a change in her condition—even a purely economic change—proximately 
caused by her original injury.  See Iowa Code § 86.14(2) (2020); E.N.T. Assocs. v. 
Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 829 (Iowa 1994).  But what if the claimed economic 
change is that the worker cannot find work after being laid off in a plant closure by 
an employer who had been accommodating her disability?  The workers’ 
compensation commissioner here concluded that when a worker loses her job in 
a plant closure, she cannot show the required economic change regardless of any 
other factors preventing her from finding a new job.  And so, the commissioner 
denied Debra Stuart’s review-reopening petition. 
 
But the Iowa Supreme Court has not interpreted our statute to establish any 
such bright-line rule.  A worker may be entitled to reopening—even where one 
cause of the economic change is unrelated to the injury—so long as the continued 
inability to work is proximately caused by the injury.  We thus reverse and remand 
for the commissioner to apply the proper legal standard to decide whether Stuart 
has shown that she is entitled to reopening here. 
I. 
 
Over ten years ago, Debra Stuart fell and injured herself while working at 
Dickten Masch Plastics, LLC.  She eventually settled her claim for workers’ 
compensation benefits with Dickten Masch and its insurance carrier, Employers 
Preferred Insurance Company.  The parties entered into an agreement for 
settlement that Stuart was entitled to permanent partial disability of thirty-five 

 
3
percent of the body as a whole, resulting in weekly benefits of $403.38 for 175 
weeks.  See Iowa Code § 85.35(2).  And the settlement was approved by the 
commissioner.   
 
Stuart kept working full-time at Dickten Masch after her injury.  But instead 
of her previous lead operator role, she worked in a less physically demanding job 
inspecting light parts.  Generally, other employees would bring boxes of the parts 
to her for inspection while she remained seated.  Or she would wheel herself in 
her chair over to a box and drag it to where she needed it with her cane.  Dickten 
Masch allowed her—but not other employees—to take breaks to get up and walk 
around every thirty or forty-five minutes.  
 
According to Stuart, Dickten Masch created this job for her as an 
accommodation to her disability.  And she said she would not have agreed to the 
settlement if she could not continue working in the accommodated job.  But the 
settlement agreement included no text addressing her continued employment or 
accommodation by Dickten Masch. 
 
About three years after the settlement, Dickten Masch closed the plant 
where Stuart worked, and she lost her job.  Stuart then filed a review-reopening 
petition seeking to increase workers’ compensation benefits.  In briefing and at a 
contested case hearing, she argued that her economic condition had changed 
because she lost her heavily accommodated job and could not find new 
employment.  She pointed to her more than two dozen applications that resulted 
in only three responses, all of which were fruitless once the employers learned of 
her disability.  Dickten Masch countered with expert opinion from a vocational 
rehabilitation counselor that she was still employable and had not been applying 

 
4
for suitable jobs.  Stuart also argued that her physical condition had changed, 
serving as an alternate basis for reopening her settlement.  But she does not 
advance that claim on appeal.   
 
The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner rejected both arguments 
and denied Stuart’s review-reopening petition.  The deputy acknowledged that a 
purely economic change could be a basis for reopening and that Stuart had shown 
that her economic condition had changed.  But the deputy explained that “the 
reason her employment ended was because the entire plant closed and this was 
not related to the original work injury.”  And the deputy reasoned that any 
accommodation in her lost job was irrelevant because her “ability to earn in the 
competitive job market without regard to the accommodation furnished by one’s 
present employer was to be taken into account” when she entered into the 
settlement.  Thus, the deputy concluded that “the facts and circumstances related 
to her earning capacity remain the same and were known at the time of the original 
settlement” and Stuart failed to show “an economic change of condition related to 
the work injury.”  The deputy did not weigh or analyze Stuart’s or Dickten Masch’s 
other evidence about Stuart’s current ability to find a job after her layoff. 
 
Stuart appealed to the workers’ compensation commissioner, and he 
affirmed the deputy’s decision without further analysis.  Stuart then brought this 
judicial review proceeding in district court.  She mainly argued that the 
commissioner “misinterpreted controlling case law” interpreting the review-
reopening statute in denying her petition because she was laid off in a plant 
closure.  The district court also affirmed.  This appeal followed. 

 
5
II. 
A judicial review proceeding is appellate in nature—even in the district court.  
See Black v. Univ. of Iowa, 362 N.W.2d 459, 462 (Iowa 1985).  And on appeal, we 
apply the same statutory standard of review of the agency action as the district 
court.  See Carreras v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 977 N.W.2d 438, 444 (Iowa 2022).  
A court “shall reverse” an agency action “if it determines that substantial rights of 
the person seeking judicial relief have been prejudiced because the agency action 
is . . . [b]ased upon an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose 
interpretation has not clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of 
the agency.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c); see also Green v. N. Cent. Iowa Reg’l 
Solid Waste Auth., 989 N.W.2d 144, 147 (Iowa 2023) (“In reviewing the 
commissioner’s interpretation of a statute, we apply a correction-of-errors-at-law 
standard.”).  Yet when reviewing the “application of law to fact,” a court must 
reverse only when the action is “[b]ased upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable application.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(m). 
 
At the start, we must resolve the parties’ dispute over which of these two 
standards of review applies here.  Dickten Masch contends that Stuart’s “true 
contention on appeal is that the Agency’s application of the relevant law to the 
facts of this case was in error.”  But Stuart’s main argument on judicial review—
and the one on which we decide this appeal—is that the commissioner 
misinterpreted the requirements of the review-reopening statute as interpreted by 
governing supreme court precedent.  This is a pure legal question properly 
reviewed for correction of errors at law under section 17A.19(10)(c), without any 
deference to the district court’s or commissioner’s decisions.  See Green, 989 

 
6
N.W.2d at 147; Carreras, 977 N.W.2d at 444; see also Iowa Ins. Inst. v. Core Grp. 
of Iowa Ass’n for Just., 867 N.W.2d 58, 65 (Iowa 2015).  
III. 
 
Section 86.14 of the Iowa Code authorizes the workers’ compensation 
commissioner “to reopen an award for payments or an agreement for settlement” 
if “the condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase 
of compensation so awarded or agreed upon.”  Iowa Code § 86.14(2).1  In a 
review-reopening proceeding to increase benefits, the injured worker has the 
burden to show—by a preponderance of the evidence—a change in her condition 
that was “proximately caused by the original injury.”  E.N.T. Assocs. v. Collentine, 
525 N.W.2d 827, 829 (Iowa 1994).  “A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor 
in bringing about the result.”  Blacksmith v. All-Am., Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 354 
(Iowa 1980).  “It only needs to be one cause; it does not have to be the only cause.”  
Id. 
 
The change in condition can be physical or economic.  See Collentine, 525 
N.W.2d at 829.  So “proof of change in physical condition” is not required.  Id.  As 
our supreme court has explained, “industrial disability is the product of many 
factors, not just physical impairment.”  Id.  “Other factors include age, education, 
experience, and inability, because of the injury, to engage in employment for which 
the employee is fitted.”  Id.   
 
1 A 2017 statutory amendment also gives a right to reopen to certain workers who 
were awarded compensation for a permanent partial disability and return to work 
with the same employer if the worker is later terminated.  See 2017 Iowa Acts 
ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v) (2023)).  The parties do not 
argue that this statute has any applicability here.  So we do not consider how—if 
at all—it would affect the analysis in a case in which it does apply. 

 
7
 
Thus, a physician whose income was reduced after he decided he could no 
longer safely perform surgeries was entitled to increase his benefits in a review-
reopening proceeding.  See id. at 829–30.  So too was a truck driver whose 
employer transferred him to a lower-paying dock job after deciding he was 
disqualified from driving because of his original injury.  See Blacksmith, 290 
N.W.2d at 354.  And when a worker’s benefit award was originally reduced by ten 
percent expressly because of an employer’s promised accommodated 
employment, and the employer instead placed him on disability retirement, the 
worker was entitled to reopen the award to receive the extra ten percent benefits.  
See Gallardo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 482 N.W.2d 393, 396–97 (Iowa 
1992).  But a worker’s change in condition caused by her personal decisions 
unrelated to her original injury—including caring for grandchildren and closing her 
unprofitable business—does not justify reopening.  Simonson v. Snap-On Tools 
Corp. 588 N.W.2d 430, 435–36 (Iowa 1999).  
This much of the governing law is largely agreed.  But the parties’ views 
diverge on the effect of the supreme court’s decision in U.S. West 
Communications, Inc. v. Overholser, 566 N.W.2d 873 (Iowa 1997).  And this 
dispute is the crux of the case.  
In Overholser—as here—a worker sought to increase her benefits from 
those agreed to in a settlement based on a change in economic condition after she 
lost her job in a larger layoff.  See Overholser, 566 N.W.2d at 874.  The 
commissioner agreed with the worker and increased her five percent permanent 
partial disability to thirty-five percent, reasoning that the original settlement 

 
8
reflected her employer’s continued accommodation that was lost in the layoff.  See 
id.  The supreme court disagreed.  See id. at 876–77. 
In a close review of the evidentiary record before the commissioner, the 
court held that substantial evidence did not support the commissioner’s 
conclusions.  See id.  First, the court decided that “[t]he record does not support 
the contention that her work was modified in any way to accommodate her injury 
or that she received sheltered employment which distorted her true earning 
capacity.”  Id. at 877.  The court explained that the worker stayed in the very same 
job performing the same duties without any accommodation for several years after 
the injury and that if any accommodation was even made, it happened only after 
the worker later suffered an unrelated injury and then transferred to a different 
position.  See id. at 876–77.  The court thus found the record distinguishable from 
Gallardo, where the prior award included an explicit statement that the disability 
rating was adjusted downward because of a promised accommodation.  See id. at 
876 (citing Gallardo, 482 N.W.2d at 396). 
 
Second, the court decided the worker “failed to prove by a preponderance 
of evidence that her decreased earning capacity was proximately caused by her 
initial injury.”  Id. at 877.  The court reasoned that “[t]he only change in [the 
worker’s] condition between the time of the settlement and her appeal was her 
termination pursuant to the layoff.”  Id.  The court also found it “[s]ignificant[]” that 
the worker had neither “been refused employment” nor been unable “to obtain a 
job because of her physical condition.”  Id.  And it explained, “[h]er inability to 
secure employment after the layoff was not due to her back injury” but because of 

 
9
unrelated factors “including her subsequent injuries, the downsizing by U.S. West, 
her lack of seniority, and her job seeking skills.”  Id. 
Before the commissioner and in this judicial reviewing proceeding, Stuart 
has argued that Overholser sets “a template for analysis” of a review-reopening 
proceeding involving a worker who claims a change of economic condition after 
losing an accommodated position in a general layoff.  She recognizes that the facts 
in Overholser did not support reopening there.  But she seeks to have the same 
fact-intensive analysis applied here to decide whether she was receiving an 
accommodation that affected the disability rating in her settlement and whether her 
inability to secure work after the layoff was caused by her injury.   
Dickten Masch, on the other hand, contends that Stuart’s argument ignores 
“that the plain language contained in the Overholser decision specifically states 
that a general layoff unrelated to a work injury cannot be the basis for review-
reopening.”  In essence, Dickten Masch seems to read Overholser as establishing 
a bright-line rule that if the change in a worker’s economic condition is caused even 
in part by a general layoff, she can never be entitled to review-reopening.  No 
further analysis needed. 
And the commissioner apparently agreed.  The deputy commissioner—
whose ruling the commissioner adopted—did not make any findings about whether 
Stuart was being accommodated by Dickten Masch or whether any 
accommodation affected the benefits agreed to in the settlement.  Nor did the 
deputy weigh the competing evidence about Stuart’s ability to find work after her 
layoff to decide whether her current inability to work was proximately caused by 
her original injury.  Instead, the deputy simply found that Stuart’s employment 

 
10 
ended “because the entire plant closed and this was not related to the original work 
injury.” 
Stuart is correct that this short-circuiting of the proper review-reopening 
analysis was an error of law.  The supreme court in Overholser did not establish a 
bright-line rule that a worker’s loss of a job in a general layoff is an absolute 
disqualification from showing the required change of economic condition.  Rather, 
Overholser demonstrates the opposite: that the commissioner must look at the full 
record to determine whether the worker’s “inability to secure employment after the 
layoff . . . was proximately caused by her initial injury.”  Overholser, 566 N.W.2d at 
877.  It matters not that one cause—the general layoff—is unrelated to the original 
work injury.  Because a proximate cause “only needs to be one cause; it does not 
have to be the only cause.”  Blacksmith, 290 N.W.2d at 354. 
So the commissioner’s finding that Stuart’s layoff was unrelated to her 
original injury is not the end of the proper analysis.  The commissioner still must 
decide whether Stuart’s original injury was another proximate cause of her inability 
to find work after the layoff.  And that decision requires the commissioner to weigh 
the competing evidence presented about the causes of Stuart’s lack of success in 
her job search.  For example, Stuart’s evidence from multiple witnesses that she 
had been “heavily accommodated” by Dickten Masch—if found credible by the 
commissioner—may help show lack of transferability of Stuart’s skills and thus the 
cause of her current inability to find work.2 
 
2 Dickten Masch contends that any accommodation is irrelevant because it should 
not have been factored into the original settlement.  See Murillo v. Blackhawk 
Foundry, 571 N.W.2d 16, 18 (Iowa 1997) (holding that an employer’s 
accommodation is only supposed to “be factored into the award determination to 

 
11 
In her briefing, Stuart seems to argue that we should go on and decide these 
questions in her favor now.  But that would overstep our proper appellate role in a 
judicial review proceeding.3  As we have explained, the commissioner did not 
complete all the necessary fact-finding to decide whether Stuart can reopen her 
settlement.  And this is not a case in which those facts can be decided as a matter 
of law.  See Armstrong v. State of Iowa Bldgs. & Grounds, 382 N.W.2d 161, 165 
(Iowa 1986) (holding that it was improper for the court to decide facts on judicial 
review unless “the relevant evidence is both uncontradicted and reasonable minds 
could not draw different inferences from the evidence”); cf. Blacksmith, 290 N.W.2d 
at 354.  The commissioner should have the chance to make these findings and 
decide whether Stuart is entitled to increased benefits under this proper standard 
in the first instance.  See Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 393 (Iowa 
2009) (reversing and remanding to the commissioner “to determine on the record 
already made whether [the worker] has met the burden of proof required for a 
review-reopening petition” after clarifying the proper standard for that decision).  
Stuart does not seek a new evidentiary hearing.  And given the well-
developed record already made by the parties, it is appropriate for the 
commissioner to decide based only on the existing evidentiary record.  See id.  
 
the limited extent the work in the newly created job discloses that the worker has 
a discerned earning capacity”).  But that is a different question than whether the 
loss of an accommodation can be a change of economic condition justifying 
reopening.  See Gallardo, 482 N.W.2d at 396–97 (holding that it can).  And it does 
not undermine the relevance of the now-lost accommodation on deciding whether 
the worker’s inability to find a job is caused by other employers’ unwillingness to 
provide similar accommodations required by the original injury. 
3 At oral argument, Stuart’s counsel also conceded that the agency record is 
lacking the necessary factual findings by the commissioner to decide whether 
Stuart has proven that she is entitled to an award of increased benefits.   

 
12 
We thus reverse the judgment of the district court and the decision of the 
workers’ compensation commissioner and remand to the district court with 
instructions to remand to the commissioner to apply the correct legal standard to 
the existing evidentiary record on Stuart’s review-reopening petition. 
REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH INSTRUCTIONS. 
 
