Case Number: 22012066.01
Case Title:  TYSON, MARK V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Tyson Mark-22012066.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARK TYSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                      File No. 22012066.01 
BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                      Head Note No. 1803 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Mark Tyson, filed a petition for arbitration on August 16, 2023, 
against Barr Nunn Transportation, employer, and Ace American Insurance Company, 
insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Niko Pothitakis.  The defendants 
were represented by Sasha Finke. 
The matter came on for hearing on September 10, 2024, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconferencing.  The record in this case is voluminous.  It consists of Joint Exhibits 1 
through 15; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 11; and Defense Exhibits A through H.  The 
claimant testified at hearing, in addition to defense witnesses, Amber Bauer and Wendy 
Hansen.  Gale Sweeney Christensen served as the court reporter for the proceedings.  
The matter was fully submitted on November 8, 2024 after helpful briefing by the 
parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The primary issue in this case is whether the claimant’s stipulated work injury 
resulted in any temporary or permanent disability, and if so his extent of 
entitlement to benefits, including the commencement date. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-28  13:40:26     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 2 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination (IME). 
4. Costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on October 19, 2022. 
3. The parties submit the appropriate weekly rate of compensation is $1,288.60. 
4. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Mark Tyson was 66 years old as of the date of hearing.  He is divorced 
with three adult children.  He testified live and under oath at hearing.  His testimony is 
generally credible.  The defendants attacked his credibility on a number of fronts and 
those specific issues shall be discussed in more detail in the body of this decision. 
Mr. Tyson was born and raised in Florida.  He graduated from high school in 
1975.  After high school he earned two associate degrees (general education and 
marketing/management) from a junior college and later attended courses for some time 
at the University of South Florida.  He has also taken classes at a trade school for 
electrical work and truck driving.  The record reflects he has been a hard worker for his 
entire life.  He started working odd jobs such as cutting grass and running errands and 
he worked throughout high school and college.  His most significant employment prior to 
truck driving was in manufacturing.  He worked for approximately 23 years for Tropicana 
Orange Juice Manufacturing.  He performed a few different jobs for Tropicana, however 
the majority of his career he operated a forklift.  He became trained as an over-the-road 
truck driver in approximately 2000.  He worked for four different trucking companies 
before securing employment with Barr-Nunn in December 2016, an Iowa trucking 
company in Granger, Iowa.  He testified that he earned approximately $120,000.00 per 
year for Barr-Nunn.  He testified that he was usually gone for three months at a time 
and his geographical area included the northeast, midwest and south through Florida.  
(Transcript, page 44-46) 
Mr. Tyson testified that he had no prior work injuries or significant chronic health 
issues prior to his work injury with Barr Nunn.  The only surgery he ever had was a 
trigger finger surgery.  He was diagnosed with diabetes and hypertension and used 
medication to control these conditions.  He further testified that he had intermittent joint 
pain which was located primarily in his ankles and knees.  The joint pain has been 
controlled with anti-inflammatory medications.  He did acknowledge intermittent back 
pain prior to the injury.  His primary care medical records from MCR Health from 2019 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 3 
forward are in evidence and reflect some complaints of joint pain.  There are, however, 
very few references to back pain in these records.  (Joint Exhibit 5, pages 112-163)  Mr. 
Tyson described his prior health conditions at hearing as having little or no impact on 
his ability to work or drive. 
In addition, because of his diabetes, Mr. Tyson underwent a Department of 
Transportation (DOT) physical once per year to ensure his fitness for driving.  He 
testified that he never had any problems passing his physical.  In 2016, when he began 
working for Barr Nunn, Mr. Tyson underwent a performance screening.  He was found 
to be fully healthy, with no restrictions on his abilities to lift or drive.  (Jt. Ex. 15, p. 2)  
His DOT physicals are in evidence and confirm his testimony.  (Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 5, 9-10, 
14-35)  Most significantly, he underwent a DOT physical on or about October 13, 2022, 
just prior to the work accident in this case.  No back or neck problems were noted and 
he was certified without restriction.  (Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 38-39) 
The defendants contend that Mr. Tyson had ongoing, chronic back pain prior to 
his stipulated work injury.  There is at least one reference from a 2019 record to 
“chronic” back pain prior to October 2022.  (See Jt. Ex. 5, p. 112)  A number of these 
records, however, specifically show that he was not having any back pain at his visits.  
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 116, 129, 138, 154, 163)  He was also on medications for his osteoarthritis.  
When reviewing all of Mr. Tyson’s prior medical records, it appears that he simply 
suffered from occasional, intermittent back pain, rather than ongoing chronic low back 
pain.  Based upon the record before me, he certainly did not have any chronic, disabling 
symptoms which significantly interfered with his ability to work or his activities of daily 
living. 
On October 19, 2022, Mr. Tyson was driving near Anderson, Indiana for Barr-
Nunn.  He testified that while driving through a construction area a truck coming from 
the opposite direction came toward him causing him to veer to the right, striking a 
construction wall.  (Tr., pp. 48-49)  He was traveling approximately 30 to 35 miles per 
hour at the time.  Defendants’ Exhibit C is a video from his truck.  It shows the accident 
and impact.  The fuel tank on the right side of his truck was damaged and leaking fuel, 
necessitating that the truck be towed.  The fact of a work injury itself, is stipulated. 
The primary question in this case is whether this stipulated work injury is a cause 
of any temporary or permanent disability.  While Mr. Tyson declined ambulance 
assistance immediately after the accident, he was treated at the emergency room the 
same day.  His main symptom at the emergency room was right neck and shoulder 
pain.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 17)  X-rays were taken of his right shoulder and cervical spine and 
he was diagnosed with a cervical strain and shoulder pain.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19)  There is 
no mention in this record of low back pain.  Mr. Tyson testified that he was having some 
back pain that day.  (Tr., p. 54)  He was quickly directed to Concentra for authorized 
workers’ compensation treatment.  His first treatment with Concentra documented low 
back pain and right shoulder pain. 
Mechanism of injury:  He reports his R arm was on the sterring [sic] wheel 
and it jerked clockwise, causing pain in his R ant shoulder.  He reports he 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 4 
went to ED where they did xrays and did not find any fractures.  He states 
he has pain down his entire R shoulder to between his R 1st and 2nd digit 
metacarpals.  He reports tingling and burning in this area as well. He 
denies any numbess [sic]. He reports pain in his entire cervical spine.  He 
also reports pain across his entire low back and B posterior thighs but not 
below his knees. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 30)  He was restricted from driving and placed on light duty.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
28)  He continued to follow up with Concentra with low back and right shoulder pain 
thereafter.  He underwent some physical therapy and was treated with medications and 
light-duty (office work) for a short period.  Despite only being treated at Concentra for 
approximately 7 weeks, there are more than 80 pages of medical records from 
Concentra.  (Jt. Ex. 4)  It is evident that Mr. Tyson did not have a particularly good 
relationship with his providers at Concentra.  His physical therapy was eventually 
discontinued due to “lack of progress.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 93)  At one point, one of his 
providers quoted him as saying he did not want to return to truck driving, he wanted to 
“sit on his ass.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 86)  I have thoroughly reviewed all of the Concentra 
records. 
On December 9, 2022, a physicians’ assistant at Concentra documented the 
following: 
Based on a careful exam of the patient, as well as the information 
obtained about their job duties and mechanism of injury, it does not 
appear that the presenting complaints arose out of their job duties in the 
course of the patient performing those duties. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 111)  This opinion is confusing because it makes no reference to the 
stipulated work injury, however, I interpret it to mean that the P.A. opined that the truck 
accident was not causally connected to the ongoing condition in his low back and right 
shoulder.  Mr. Tyson was specifically instructed to follow up with his personal primary 
care provider. 
Mr. Tyson returned to his home in Florida and sought care, first for his low back.  
He initially treated with a pain management physician, John Hill, M.D.  After some 
unsuccessful pain management care, he was ultimately referred to Michael King, M.D., 
for his low back.  In February 2023, Dr. King documented the following: 
He states in October 2022 – he was the driver of his vehicle when he was 
forced into another lane, hitting a construction wall.  He did have a WMC 
claim but this was denied. 
2. low back pain 
Onset: 4 months ago. Severity level is moderate.  The problem is 
worsening.  It occurs persistently.  Location of pain is lower back.  Pain 
radiates to the lower extremities bilaterally to the knees.  The patient 
describes the pain as sharp, shooting and stabbing.  Symptoms are 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 5 
aggravated by bending, changing positions, daily activities, lying/rest, 
rolling over in bed, sitting, twisting and walking. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 253)  Dr. King noted that physical therapy had not improved his condition.  
He recommended fusion surgery for spinal stenosis and herniated disc at L4-L5.  (Jt. 
Ex. 8, p. 256)  Surgery occurred on March 6, 2023.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 284)  A second 
surgery was performed due to infection on May 5, 2023.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 268)  Mr. Tyson 
testified that the surgery helped with the radicular symptoms which is documented in the 
records. He reported to Dr. Hill that his radiating leg pain had resolved.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 
271)   
Following his recuperation from the back surgery in September 2023, he was 
referred to a shoulder specialist, Stephen Raterman, M.D., for his right shoulder.  He 
underwent an MRI which showed various tears in his right shoulder.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 301)  
Right shoulder surgery took place on November 1, 2023.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 309)  Mr. Tyson 
last saw Dr. Raterman on April 9, 2024.  At that visit, Mr. Tyson requested examination 
and evaluation of his left shoulder, which he apparently also related to the work injury.  
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 317) 
Several physicians prepared expert medical reports for this hearing.  On May 31, 
2023, Dr. King signed a statement opining that Mr. Tyson sustained a herniated disc in 
his low back which necessitated surgical correction.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  He opined that the 
October 19, 2022 truck accident aggravated the condition in his lumbar spine which 
caused his need for surgery.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) 
Mr. Tyson underwent three medical examinations in June 2024.  Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., performed an independent medical examination (IME) under section 85.39 in 
June 2024.  He prepared a report dated July 30, 2024.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23)  Dr. Bansal 
met with, took history from, and thoroughly examined Mr. Tyson.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 15-17)  
In addition, he reviewed medical records and provided a fairly detailed summary of the 
records he reviewed.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 3-13)  Dr. Bansal opined that Mr. Tyson had 
sustained a herniated nucleus pulposus L4-L5 in his lumbar spine and a right shoulder 
rotator cuff tear.  He opined that both of these conditions were caused or materially 
aggravated by the October 19, 2022 work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 17-19)  For the lumbar 
spine, he assigned a 21 percent whole body impairment rating per the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition.  For the right shoulder, he assigned a 6 percent whole body rating and for 
the left, he assigned a 5 percent whole body rating. 
The defendants secured an expert opinion from Trevor Schmitz, M.D., on or 
about June 27, 2024.  Dr. Schmitz is a respected orthopedic surgeon in Des Moines.  
He reviewed appropriate records and examined Mr. Tyson.  When asked for a diagnosis 
of Mr. Tyson’s condition, Dr. Schmitz opined “Mr. Tyson has a longstanding history of 
axial low back pain.  …  He is now status post an L4-L5 lumbar fusion complicated by 
an infection requiring an irrigation and debridement.”  (Def. Ex. F, p. 7)  Regarding 
causation, he offered the following opinion: 
Answer:  The October 19, 2022, date of injury is not a substantial causal, 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 6 
contributing, or aggravating factor in development of the medical 
condition, which I diagnosed in the preceding question.  It should be noted 
that Mr. Tyson had a post-accident MRI, which demonstrates no evidence 
of structural damage.  He has no evidence of any acute findings, but 
rather has degenerative changes only. … 
With regards to [sic] the fact that this could have aggravated the 
underlying degenerative changes, I do not think there is any evidence of 
this.  Mr. Tyson was having significant increasing pain all over his body 
prior to the accident.  It is apparent he had significant degenerative 
changes.  He has an examination today, in clinic, that is wholly 
inconsistent with any known anatomic source for his pain and in addition, 
it should be noted that he had significant discrepancies with regards to 
[sic] his physical examination with nonanatomic pain behaviors following 
the accident. 
(Def. Ex. F, p. 7)  Dr. Schmitz also asserted Mr. Tyson was discharged from physical 
therapy due to noncompliance.  Interestingly, Dr. Schmitz then diagnosed Mr. Tyson 
with a mild myofascial strain or sprain and possibly a temporary aggravation of his 
underlying lumbar degenerative changes, but opined these would have healed up by 
November 21, 2022.  He assigned zero impairment and no restrictions from the work 
injury.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 8) 
Justin Khoriaty, M.D., examined Mr. Tyson’s bilateral shoulders and prepared a 
report dated June 26, 2024.  For the right shoulder he diagnosed tendinitis of his 
supraspinatus and tendinosis of his biceps tendon.  (Def. Ex. E, p. 8)  He opined that 
this condition was degenerative and was likely temporarily aggravated by the work 
accident.  He opined that this condition was not causally connected to the work injury 
and assigned no impairment or restrictions.  (Def. Ex. E, pp. 8-9)  Regarding the left 
shoulder, he offered similar opinions, noting that he had never complained about left 
shoulder symptoms when he was seen at occupational health following the injury.  (Def. 
Ex. E, p. 7) 
In addition, both Dr. Schmitz and Dr. Khoriarty were deposed and their testimony 
was submitted.  All of this testimony was largely consistent with their written opinions.  
(Def. Ex. H and G)  Their testimony was entirely consistent with their reports.  Both 
opined that Mr. Tyson had disabling chronic conditions in his low back prior to his work 
injury. 
A greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that the work accident on 
October 19, 2022, was in fact a substantial contributing factor to the disability in his low 
back and right shoulder.  I base this assessment on the opinions of Dr. Hill and Dr. 
Bansal, the contemporaneous medical reports, as well as the generally credible 
testimony of Mr. Tyson.  I reject the opinion of Dr. Schmitz who was under the 
impression that Mr. Tyson had ongoing, chronic low back pain prior to the work injury.  
While this is possible, this theory is ultimately not supported when viewing the record as 
a whole.  While it is evident that Mr. Tyson did have intermittent episodes of low back 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 7 
pain, the record simply does not support a conclusion that he had ongoing, chronic, 
disabling back pain prior to his work injury.  For similar reasons, I reject the opinion of 
Dr. Khoriarty regarding the right shoulder.   
This record is clear that Mr. Tyson has a serious objective condition in both his 
low back and his right shoulder which were discovered and diagnosed following his 
work injury.  The question is whether the stipulated work accident substantially 
contributed to his development of those conditions.  Based upon his testimony as well 
as the contemporaneous medical records, I find that it is more likely than not that the 
work injury did, in fact, substantially contribute to those conditions.  The defendants 
argue strenuously that claimant is not credible.  In essence, they argue that Mr. Tyson 
used this relatively minor truck accident to retire and collect disability.  While this is 
possible, I find that this scenario is unlikely.  I agree with the defendants that it is likely 
that Mr. Tyson decided he was going to retire after this work injury.  The record reflects 
he had little interest in returning to driving a truck.  The problem with the defendants’ 
theory is that there is little evidence in the record that Mr. Tyson had any disabling 
condition in his low back or right shoulder prior to the work injury.  In fact, the medical 
notes and DOT physicals suggest the opposite.  This record contains extensive 
amounts of his prior medical records with very few mentions of prior low back problems.  
Moreover, Mr. Tyson’s health condition was reviewed on an annual basis for the 
Department of Transportation where he was regularly cleared without incident.  For the 
defendants’ theory to be correct, he would have had to essentially be covering up 
disabling chronic low back pain for an extended period of time prior to his work injury.  
Again, while this is possible, it is not likely. 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Tyson testified that he continues to have back and 
right shoulder symptoms.  (Tr., pp. 62-66)  He primarily described the low back 
symptoms as being disabling and interfering with his ability to work or engage in 
activities of daily living.  The pain varies based upon his activities.  He testified that he 
would be unable to perform any of his past jobs, including driving a truck in particular.  
He has not looked for work since his injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is whether Mr. Tyson’s admitted accident on 
October 19, 2022, was a substantial causal or aggravating factor in the disability in his 
low back and bilateral shoulders. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 8 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1960). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, by a greater weight of evidence I 
find that Mr. Tyson’s stipulated work injury is a substantial cause of the condition in his 
low back and his right shoulder.  I find that he has failed to prove that his left shoulder 
condition is related. 
Having found that Mr. Tyson sustained disabling conditions in his low back and 
right shoulder, I must determine what benefits he is entitled to from these conditions. 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are:  (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 9 
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
I find that claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from October 19, 2022, 
through April 9, 2024.  Defendants shall be given a credit for the time he worked light 
duty and for all benefits paid during this period. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
I have reviewed the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 3.  Claimant 
is entitled to payment of these expenses for all treatment related to his low back and 
right shoulder. 
The next issue is the extent of his permanent disability.  His conditions are 
appropriately evaluated under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v), as a whole body injury for 
loss of earning capacity. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 10 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Mr. Tyson has suffered a forty 
percent loss of earning capacity.  At the time of hearing, he was 66 years old with a 
fairly serious low back condition following two surgeries.  He has recommended 
restrictions for his low back of not lifting more than 20 pounds.  He has never attempted 
to work within these restrictions.  He has a manual labor work history.  He is smart, well-
educated and industrious.  He has significant experience in transportation.  Some of his 
skills were likely transferable.  In other words from this record, I doubt that he is unable 
to work in any position, should he choose to do so.  It is hard to tell from this record his 
precise loss of earning capacity because he has not sought any work.  He made what 
appears to be a rational decision to not seek work and essentially retire.  This decision 
was undoubtedly, at least in part, due to his serious low back condition.  The problem is, 
because he has not sought work it is quite challenging to determine whether he would 
be able to earn significant wages in the competitive job market.  I am not suggesting 
that Mr. Tyson is unmotivated or that this is, in any way, a punishment for failing to seek 
work. On the contrary, it is evident in this record that Mr. Tyson has been a hard worker 
since he was a child.  He has worked hard his entire life.  The evidence, however, 
strongly suggests that he is not permanently and totally disabled.  The fact that he has 
not sought any employment opportunities when he is not permanently and totally 
disabled makes it difficult to assess his true level of industrial disability.  To this extent, 
the absence of evidence in the record is interpreted in favor of the employer. 
Having found that a greater weight of evidence supports a finding of a 40 percent 
loss of earning capacity, I conclude the he is entitled to 200 weeks of compensation at 
the stipulated rate. 
The final issue is IME expense and costs. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 11 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including 
convenience fees incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of 
notice and subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or 
agency by the party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses 
or of obtaining doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the 
witnesses, doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the 
witness is called or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be 
paid in accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of 
any cost shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner 
before it is taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be 
reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it 
shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the Iowa 
Rules of Civil Procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to 
implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons engaged 
in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report or 
evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report under 
our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
I find that claimant is entitled to the IME expenses and costs set forth in 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 12 
Claimant’s Exhibits 9 and 10. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendants shall pay healing period payments from the date of injury through 
April 9, 2024, consistent with this decision.   
Defendants shall pay the claimant two hundred (200) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of one thousand two hundred eighty-eight and 60/100 
($1,288.60) per week commencing April 10, 2024. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the weeks previously worked and/or paid 
consistent with this decision. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3, consistent with this decision. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
The costs, including IME expenses, set forth in Claimant’s Exhibits 9 through 10 
are taxed to defendants. 
Signed and filed this ___28th ___ day of March, 2025. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nicholas Pothitakis  (via WCES) 
 
Sasha Finke   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 

TYSON V. BARR NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 13 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
