Case Number: 20700989.01
Case Title:  DAVIS, CHRISTOPHER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Davis Christopher-20700989.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CHRISTOPHER DAVIS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 20700989.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS,   : 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Head Note No: 1100 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Christopher Davis, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from John Deere Davenport Works, self-insured employer, as 
defendant, as a result of an alleged injury sustained on April 13, 2020.  This matter 
came on for hearing before Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. 
Fitch, on September 21, 2021, via internet-based videoconferencing, using CourtCall.  
The record in this case consists of joint exhibits 1 through 5, claimant’s exhibits 1 
through 7, defendant’s exhibits A through N1, and the testimony of the claimant.  The 
parties submitted post-hearing briefs, the matter being fully submitted on October 27, 
2021. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment on April 13, 2020; 
 
2. Whether claimant’s claim is barred for failure to give timely notice under Iowa 
Code section 85.23; 
 
3. Whether claimant’s claim is barred as an untimely claim under Iowa Code 
section 85.26; 
 
                                                 
1 Defendant was extended the option to submit the deposition of Nathaniel Marxen post-hearing. 
By email correspondence dated September 22, 2021, defendant’s counsel declined the offer to submit 
the additional evidence. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-23  10:10:04     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability and, if so, the 
extent; 
 
5. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and, if so, the 
extent; 
 
6. Whether defendant is responsible for medical expenses claimed in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 6;   
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39; and 
 
8. Specific taxation of costs as identified in Claimant’s Exhibit 7. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record and 
his deposition testimony. Claimant’s demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing was 
excellent and gave the undersigned no reason to doubt claimant’s veracity.  Claimant is 
found credible. 
Claimant was 32 years of age at the time of hearing. He graduated high school 
and subsequently completed some college-level general education coursework, but did 
not obtain a degree. In 2010, he successfully obtained a MIG welding certification. 
(Claimant’s testimony) Claimant began work at defendant in December 2010. Claimant 
has remained employed as a CNC/robotic welder since that time; however, he has been 
assigned to different departments over that period. (Claimant’s testimony; CE1, p. 1)  
While working welding and grinding frontend loaders, claimant began to 
experience some symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome in his right hand and wrist. 
(Claimant’s testimony)  
On April 1, 2015, claimant presented to UnityPoint Health and was evaluated by 
Latha Balamuniswamy, M.D, who noted complaints of right hand pain with some 
occasional numbness and tingling. Dr. Balamuniswamy noted no specific injury, but 
commented that claimant had been a welder for 4.5 years and performed repetitive 
work. On examination of the right wrist, Dr. Balamuniswamy found full range of motion, 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 3 
 
no swelling, no ecchymosis, no ganglion, and no paresthesia during the visit. Dr. 
Balamuniswamy diagnosed wrist pain and paresthesia. Claimant was advised to use a 
wrist split, ice, Advil, and rest the wrist. Dr. Balamuniswamy provided claimant a work 
note for that date and issued a referral for orthopedic evaluation at ORA Orthopedics. 
(JE1, pp. 5-6) 
Pursuant to Dr. Balamuniswamy’s referral, claimant presented to ORA 
Orthopedics on April 3, 2015. Claimant indicated he sought evaluation for worsening 
right hand and finger numbness of a 3 to 4 week duration. He identified symptoms of 
pain, numbness, tingling, weakness, and stiffness, with the problems interfering with his 
ability to work. (JE2, p. 7) Michael Turner, M.D., evaluated claimant for complaints of 
atraumatic onset of numbness and paresthesias in the thumb, index, long, and ring 
fingers of the right hand, with an additional complaint of nighttime paresthesias. Dr. 
Turner noted claimant worked as a welder and difficulty using the right hand had 
resulted in claimant taking April 2, 2015 off work. Examination of the right upper 
extremity revealed positive Phalen’s and Tinel’s testing. (JE2, p. 9) Dr. Turner assessed 
early onset of right carpal tunnel syndrome. He prescribed a Medrol Dosepak and night 
splinting, with claimant to follow up in 3 weeks’ time. (JE2, p. 10) 
On April 28, 2015, claimant returned to Dr. Turner. Claimant reported “great 
improvement” in nighttime pain symptoms. Claimant denied difficulties working as a 
welder and denied paresthesias or the need to brace at work. Examination of the right 
upper extremity revealed full range of motion of the elbow, wrist, and digits; no evidence 
of muscle wasting; overall neurovascularly intact; and negative Phalen’s and Tinel’s at 
the wrist. Dr. Turner assessed early onset right carpal tunnel syndrome, improved with 
splinting and Medrol Dosepak. (JE2, p. 11) Dr. Turner recommended continued night 
splinting and use of over-the-counter Aleve, as necessary. In the event of return of 
paresthesias, Dr. Turner noted an EMG/NCV study would be indicated. Claimant was 
released to return on an as-needed basis. (JE2, p. 12) Dr. Turner authored a return-to-
work slip, releasing claimant to return to work with no restrictions, but noted he may 
need to wear a right arm brace. (JE2, p. 13) 
Claimant testified his right-sided symptoms improved and although he may have 
experienced some symptoms at work, the symptoms did not interfere with his ability to 
work. Thereafter, he began duties in another department, performing reclaim welding 
work. He testified his right-sided symptoms remained about the same and did not cause 
him to miss any work; however, he then began to experience worsening left-sided 
symptoms. (Claimant’s testimony)  
On June 9, 2015, claimant presented to defendant’s occupational health services 
and an incident report was created. Claimant described pain and numbness of his left 
hand and wrist. (JE3, p. 30) He was seen on June 10, 2015 by Debra Slater, RN. RN 
Slater noted complaints of pain, numbness, and tingling of the left hand. Claimant 
reported an onset of symptoms after beginning his job assignment one month prior. 
Thereafter, claimant was seen by Lester Kelty, M.D. Dr. Kelty noted claimant worked as 
a welder and left-handed symptoms began 2.5 to 3 weeks prior. Dr. Kelty noted a 
patient history of right carpal tunnel syndrome. On examination, Dr. Kelty recorded 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 4 
 
negative Phalen’s and Tinel’s testing, as well as a question of altered sensation of the 
third digit. Dr. Kelty’s note concluded with the statement, “Safety to see.” No diagnosis 
or treatment plan was delineated in Dr. Kelty’s June 10, 2015 notation. (JE3, p. 31) 
Claimant testified Dr. Kelty informed claimant his injury did not happen at defendant and 
to return to work; he offered no medical treatment or recommendations. (Claimant’s 
testimony)  
Claimant returned to work and in approximately September 2015, he transferred 
to another department to weld dump truck parts. During this period, claimant testified his 
carpal tunnel symptoms remained, but were not as severe and he did not seek any 
medical treatment. From September 2015 until February 2020, claimant remained in the 
same department, although automation did change some requirements of his duties. 
During this time, claimant did not miss work due to his conditions and testified he did not 
think the conditions were serious in nature. (Claimant’s testimony) 
In February 2020, claimant testified his symptoms suddenly worsened. He began 
to experience bouts of paralysis in his left arm and would wake from sleep due to 
severe pain. The symptoms impacted his ability to care for himself. Claimant testified 
his work duties at the time involved welding and grinding on dump truck bins, which 
regularly required grinding of poor robotic welds. Claimant believes these duties caused 
his bilateral symptoms. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant represents that on February 17, 2020, claimant informed his supervisor, 
Jayson Norton, that he suffered with pain and periods of paralysis of his bilateral upper 
extremities, wrists, hands, and fingers due to his work duties. He indicated the 
symptoms interfered with his sleep and required medical attention. (Claimant’s 
testimony; CE2, p. 3) Claimant testified Mr. Norton did not advise claimant to report to 
the onsite clinic or to seek medical treatment; he simply asked claimant to keep him 
updated. (Claimant’s testimony) Claimant’s coworker, Nathaniel Marxen, was present at 
the time of the conversation. (CE2, p. 3) Mr. Marxen authored a written statement 
confirming claimant advised Mr. Norton of his symptoms and further indicating that Mr. 
Norton did not advise claimant to report his injury. (CE3, p. 7)  
On February 21, 2020, claimant returned to ORA Orthopedics. On intake forms, 
claimant noted complaints of pain, numbness, tingling, weakness, swelling, and 
stiffness. Claimant described the pain as sharp and throbbing, with radiation in the 
arms. (JE2, p. 14) Claimant was evaluated by board certified orthopaedic surgeon, 
Scott Collins, M.D., who noted a chief complaint of bilateral arm pain, numbness, 
tingling, and weakness. (JE2, p. 16; DEI, p. 24) Claimant reported the symptoms began 
February 15, 2020, with a current pain level of 7 on a 10-point scale. On physical 
examination, Dr. Collins found positive carpal compression tests bilaterally, as well as 
weakness of the left triceps and bilateral wrist extensors. Dr. Collins assessed bilateral 
upper extremity radiculopathy and recommended a cervical spine MRI due to weakness 
on physical examination. Pending completion of the MRI, Dr. Collins prescribed a 
Medrol Dosepak. (JE2, p. 16) 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 5 
 
On approximately February 26, 2020, claimant sent a text message to 
supervisor, Mr. Norton, advising he had undergone an MRI. (CE2, p. 3; CE3, p. 10) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Collins on March 6, 2020, at which time, Dr. Collins 
reviewed claimant’s cervical MRI and found no identifiable pathology to explain 
claimant’s symptoms. Dr. Collins ordered a course of physical therapy, prescribed 
Relafen, and ordered an EMG of the bilateral upper extremities. (JE2, p. 18) 
On April 17, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Collins for EMG review. Dr. Collins 
opined claimant’s EMG demonstrated bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, left worse than 
right. Dr. Collins recommended bilateral carpal tunnel releases. (JE2, p. 19) Claimant 
testified Dr. Collins inquired what type of work claimant performed; claimant replied he 
was a welder at defendant, but did not further discuss his duties. Claimant testified that 
upon this discussion and learning of his need for surgery, he then realized the 
seriousness of his conditions. (Claimant’s testimony) 
On May 15, 2020, claimant completed defendant's “weekly indemnity (‘WI’) 
disability” application. Thereon, claimant indicated he sought benefits as a result of 
carpal tunnel syndrome. He represented the condition did not arise out of and in the 
course of his employment. The application signature block, signed by claimant, notes 
the applicant was submitting a claim for weekly non-occupational disability benefits. Dr. 
Collins completed the physician statement of the application. Dr. Collins noted claimant 
would be unable to work from May 15, 2020 through July 31, 2020 due to bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome with surgical releases. (CE4, p. 13; DEA, p. 1) 
Claimant underwent right carpal tunnel release by Dr. Collins on May 15, 2020. 
(JE4, p. 49) In the pre-operative note, Dr. Collins noted complaints of right hand pain, 
numbness, tingling, stiffness, weakness, and dropping of items. Dr. Collins indicated 
claimant was having significant difficulties at work. (JE4, p. 47)  
Left carpal tunnel release followed on June 19, 2020. (JE5, p. 50) 
On July 8, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Collins for evaluation. At that time, 
claimant reported he was doing well, but described the recovery process as slower on 
the left arm than it had been with the right arm. Claimant also reported some minimal 
residual numbness, but denied numbness and tingling. Dr. Collins released claimant to 
normal activities, as tolerated. He recommended use of ice, heat, and activity 
modification. (JE2, p. 22) 
Claimant returned to ORA Orthopedics on August 7, 2020. On that date, he was 
examined by Andrea Black, PAC. PAC Black described claimant as doing well and 
happy with his progress. Claimant reported incisional area pain, primarily left-sided. He 
also reported improved numbness, but some residual numbness of the left middle 
finger. Claimant denied numbness, tingling, or swelling. On examination, PAC Black 
found slightly altered sensation to light touch of the volar surface of the left middle 
finger, but otherwise intact sensation to light touch. PAC Black found intact and well-
healing incisions and full, active range of motion of the hands. Following examination, 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 6 
 
PAC Black released claimant to return to work without restrictions and to return to clinic 
as needed. Claimant was advised to massage over the incision areas to help 
desensitize scar tissue and use ice, heat, and activity modification. (JE2, pp. 23-24)  
Defendant paid claimant WI benefits from May 18, 2020 through August 9, 2020. 
Claimant returned to work on August 10, 2020. His weekly benefit rate was $599.00. 
(CE4, p. 14; DEB, pp. 2-3; DEC, p. 4)  
Claimant testified he returned to work on August 10, 2020. He returned to the 
same department, but to different duties, as bin welding was moved to third shift. As 
claimant did not want to work third shift, his duties changed to welding on frames. 
Claimant testified his primary duty is welding and described the work as ergonomic. He 
noted he no longer must grind in awkward positions and only rarely uses grinders and 
hammers. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant testified the surgeries improved his symptoms and resulted in less pain 
and a halt of paralysis. Despite the improvement, claimant testified he continued to 
experience some symptoms of pain, numbness, cramping, and weakness. (Claimant’s 
testimony) 
Claimant incurred medical expenses in treatment of his bilateral carpal tunnel 
conditions. Per Claimant’s Exhibit 6, charges totaled $5,323.36. (CE6, pp. 29-36) 
On October 29, 2020, claimant filed an original notice and petition in arbitration, 
seeking workers’ compensation benefits as a result of an alleged April 13, 2020 injury. 
(Agency File; DED, p. 5) As a result, defendant completed a first report of injury form, 
identifying defendant first had knowledge of claimant’s alleged April 13, 2020 injury on 
November 2, 2020. (DEE, p. 6) 
On November 5, 2020, claimant presented to defendant’s onsite clinic and was 
examined by Brian Dugan, RN. RN Dugan noted subjective complaints of bilateral 
forearm and wrist pain, as well as numbness to the hands. He noted claimant was 
status-post surgical releases. On examination, RN Dugan noted stable vital signs and 
claimant was ambulatory and steady. In the plan section of the visit note, RN Dugan 
noted only, “Injury first occurred 2/2020. f/u to be determined.” (DEF, p. 10) 
Thereafter, it appears claimant was evaluated at defendant’s onsite clinic by 
Christine Deignan, M.D.2 (DEF, p. 8) Dr. Deignan served as defendant's medical 
director from 2007 to 2016 and workers’ compensation medical director from 2013 to 
2016. From 2017 onwards, Dr. Deignan performed independent medical evaluations. 
(DEN, p. 66) Dr. Deignan noted claimant presented to the clinic on November 5, 2020 
and reported he sustained bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome relating to his work activities 
                                                 
2 Dr. Deignan’s visit note is dated November 9, 2020 at 10:30 a.m.; however, the content of the 
note indicates claimant initially presented on November 5, 2020. The visit note also indicates a jobsite 
visit would be scheduled. The resulting jobsite notes are dated November 9, 2020 at 9:44 a.m. It appears 
Dr. Deignan did not record her visit note until after conclusion of the jobsite evaluation on November 9, 
2020. As a result, it is unclear the date and time Dr. Deignan evaluated claimant. (See DEF, pp. 8-10) 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 7 
 
as a welder. Claimant related his symptoms to gripping grinders and hammers. Dr. 
Deignan noted claimant was right hand dominant. She noted claimant reported the 
“same symptoms” five years prior; at that time, he related the symptoms to work 
activities, but believed the condition was “denied as work related.” Thereafter, claimant 
treated conservatively for carpal tunnel syndrome with Dr. Turner and improved. In 
February 2020, bilateral hand pain and numbness began to interrupt sleep. Claimant 
began a course of treatment with Dr. Collins, including surgical releases. After surgery, 
symptoms improved, with the exception of stiffness of the left hand. Dr. Deignan noted 
claimant was capable of fully opposing all fingers on the right hand, but had difficulty 
reaching the left thumb to the left fifth finger. Claimant also reported reduction in right-
sided grip strength. (DEF, p. 8) Dr. Deignan performed a physical examination and 
assessed bilateral carpal tunnel, treated surgically with good result. She indicated a 
jobsite visit would be scheduled. (DEF, p. 9) 
The resulting jobsite visit note was recorded on November 9, 2020. Dr. Deignan 
noted the attendance of Mike Perry, safety analyst, and Jason Norton, supervisor. Also 
in attendance was claimant, who was observed and interviewed. Dr. Deignan observed 
claimant welding and claimant identified his tools, including a 5-pound hammer, a 
grinder, and two sanders. (DEF, p. 9) Thereafter, Dr. Deignan offered the following 
conclusions: 
Conclusions: The job activities are not such that bilateral hands are 
exposed to work activities that would produce symptoms of bilateral carpal 
tunnel. [Claimant] was aware of the bilateral carpal tunnel for 9 months 
before reporting an injury or illness to the company. He sought treatment 
and was off on WI during the surgery and recovery without reporting to the 
company any claim for work relatedness. 
(DEF, pp. 9-10)  
Dr. Deignan continued: 
In my medical opinion this case should be disputed based on: 
 
1. His job is one dealing with large parts welding and grinding. Grind time 
per part, according to the supervisor, averages about 2 hours with a 
range of 30 min to 4 hours. 1-2 dump truck parts are made per shift. If 
parts come to the weld station and the parts are not fitting together well 
the operator has the option of sending those to the repair department.  
2. 5 pound hammer is used at approximately 11 locations per side or 22 
times per part (with 1-2 parts made per day[)]. 
3. Employees [sic] symptoms of bilateral numbness and tingling in the 
hands were first reported about 5 years ago at which time they were 
disputed as work related and he treated with Dr. Turner under his 
personal medical insurance. 
4. [Claimant] gave a history on November 9, 2020 in OHS that he has 
been having symptoms of recurrent bilateral numbness and tingling in 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 8 
 
his hands “for years”. He sought medical treatment with Dr. Scott 
Collins February 2020 without reporting an injury or illness to the 
company. He proceeded to have surgery on right carpal tunnel and left 
carpal tunnel without reporting an [sic] claim of work relatedness to the 
company. 
(DEF, p. 9)  
On November 19, 2020, defendant’s counsel authored correspondence to 
claimant’s counsel. Thereby, counsel represented defendant’s first notice of an alleged 
April 13, 2020 injury was upon receipt of claimant’s petition. Counsel represented an 
investigation had been completed and defendant denied claimant’s alleged bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome injury. Defendant denied the injury arose out of claimant’s work 
and raised defenses of lack of timely notice under section 85.23 and barred by the 
statute of limitations found in section 85.26. (DEG, p. 11)  
On December 15, 2020, defendant’s counsel conferenced with Dr. Collins 
regarding claimant’s conditions. On December 16, 2020, defendant’s counsel sent a 
purported summary of the conversation to Dr. Collins and requested Dr. Collins review, 
sign, and return the summary if Dr. Collins believed it to be accurate. (DEI, p. 20) Dr. 
Collins signed off on the summary on January 12, 2021. (DEI, p. 22) The summary 
briefly noted the history of claimant’s treatment with Dr. Collins, including that claimant 
last saw Dr. Collins on July 8, 2020 and PAC Black on August 7, 2020. Claimant had 
not returned to ORA Orthopedics since that time and had no follow up care scheduled. 
Dr. Collins expressed agreement with PAC Black’s release of claimant from care and to 
return to work without restrictions effective August 7, 2020. Dr. Collins opined claimant 
did not require further treatment or medication following the release on August 7, 2020, 
nor did he expect the need for further care in the future. Dr. Collins opined claimant 
achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of August 7, 2020. (DEI, pp. 20-21) 
With respect to the question of permanent impairment, if any, Dr. Collins agreed with 
counsel’s summary stating: 
You agree with what other orthopedic physicians have also told me – 
when carpal tunnel releases are properly performed, there is typically no 
resulting permanent impairment. While you have not been asked to do a 
formal impairment rating or formal impairment evaluation, with your 
performing successful carpal tunnel releases on each side, it is your 
opinion that [claimant] would not have any residual or resulting permanent 
impairment in either his right arm/right side or left arm/left side. Therefore, 
it is your opinion that [claimant’s] permanent impairment rating from his 
now resolved bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome would be zero. 
(DEI, p. 21) 
With respect to the issue of causation of claimant’s bilateral carpal tunnel, Dr. 
Collins endorsed the following statements: 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 9 
 
You cannot state that [claimant’s] welding job at [defendant] caused 
[claimant’s] bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. It is your opinion that it is 
more likely than not that [claimant’s] welding job at [defendant] did not 
cause [claimant’s] bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. You hold this opinion 
based upon [claimant’s] relatively young age (he is 31 years old) and the 
fact that [claimant] had carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally – on both sides. 
It is your opinion that based on [claimant’s] relatively young age, it would 
have taken longer for [claimant’s] bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome to 
develop had it actually been caused by his job at [defendant]. It is also 
your opinion that the presence of carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally—on 
both sides—makes it less likely that [claimant’s] bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome was actually caused by [claimant’s] job at [defendant] given a 
manual laborer typically does not use his non-dominant arm as frequently 
on the job as he does his dominant arm. If a job actually causes carpal 
tunnel syndrome, it typically does not cause it on the non-dominant 
arm/non-dominant side. 
(DEI, p. 21) 
At the referral of his counsel, on January 29, 2021, claimant presented to board 
certified occupational medicine physician, Sunil Bansal, M.D. for independent medical 
evaluation. (CE5, p. 19) Dr. Bansal issued a report containing his findings and opinions 
dated March 30, 2021. (CE5, p. 28) Dr. Bansal reviewed claimant’s medical records, 
including bilateral hand and wrist evaluations dating to 2015. (CE5, pp. 20-23) Dr. 
Bansal examined claimant’s bilateral upper extremities. Bilaterally, Dr. Bansal noted 
mild tenderness to palpation of the volar aspect of the wrist; positive Tinel’s sign; 
positive Phalen’s sign; loss of two-point discrimination over the thumb, index finger, and 
long finger; and full range of motion of the wrist. (CE5, p. 24)  
Claimant indicated he had worked as a welder at defendant for just over 10 years 
and developed bilateral hand numbness and tingling approximately six years prior. At 
that time, a “company doctor” informed claimant his condition was not work-related. 
(CE5, p. 23) He returned to work and approximately one year prior, significant pain and 
paralysis began to awaken claimant from sleep, at which time claimant sought medical 
treatment. (CE5, pp. 23-24) Dr. Bansal noted claimant’s work as a welder on dump 
truck beds resulted in exposure to a “lot of vibration all day long.” He further noted 
claimant spent the first 3 to 4 hours per shift using a 7-inch grinder to remove incorrect 
robotic welds and anywhere from 1 to 6 hours per shift using welding tools in a variety 
of positions. (CE5, p. 23)  
Following treatment, Dr. Bansal noted claimant continued to report numbness 
and tingling through the bilateral hands. Claimant also reported a lack of sensation 
when rubbing his fingers together and difficulty with fine motor movements and dropping 
objects. Claimant informed Dr. Bansal his welding duties had changed to involve dump 
truck frames, rather than beds of trucks. The new duties involve less vibration and more 
infrequent use of grinders, but continued fine motor movements. (CE5, p. 24)    

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 10 
 
Following records review, history, and examination, Dr. Bansal assessed bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome, status post release. Dr. Bansal agreed with the MMI date of 
August 7, 2020 and did not recommend further treatment. (CE5, p. 27) Utilizing the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Tables 16-10 
and 16-15, Dr. Bansal found a 6 percent right upper extremity impairment and a 4 
percent left upper extremity impairment due to digital sensory deficits. (CE5, pp. 25-26) 
Dr. Bansal recommended restrictions of no lifting greater than 20 pounds occasionally 
or 10 pounds frequently with either hand; and avoidance of vibratory tools. (CE5, pp. 
27-28) In response to inquiry as to whether claimant’s work at defendant represented a 
substantial causal, contributing, or aggravating factor in causing claimant’s impairments, 
Dr. Bansal opined claimant performed job tasks that were capable of increasing carpal 
tunnel pressures. Dr. Bansal highlighted the “significant” pressure on the wrists due to 
repetition, frequent vibration, the positions of the wrists while operating a heavy grinder 
multiple hours per day, and the grabbing, turning, and gripping required when 
performing welding duties. Dr. Bansal found the duties qualified as having a strong 
potential to cause carpal tunnel syndrome. (CE5, p. 27) 
Defendant submitted video evidence of an employee performing the bin welding 
job position. The video evidence covers 24 separate files totaling in excess of six hours 
of content. Included are depictions of welding on dump truck bins, with the employee’s 
arms and body in differing positions and requiring different durations to complete the 
welds, as well as operating a handheld sander and brief use of a hammer. (DEL)  
Claimant testified he reviewed the supplied job videos. He testified the videos 
provided an accurate depiction of welding duties, but he did not recall viewing the 
employee using a grinder. In the bin welding job, claimant testified he spent 1 to 4 hours 
per day operating a 7-inch grinder, which required considerable force to operate. He 
then spent 4 to 7 hours per day welding. As the videos displayed predominantly 
welding, claimant testified the videos did not fairly reflect all of his prior duties. Claimant 
testified he continues to experience some symptoms at work, but he does not have 
difficulty performing his job. (Claimant’s testimony)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of his employment on April 13, 2020. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 11 
 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Three physicians have offered opinions with respect to a potential causal 
connection between claimant’s welding work at defendant and his bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome. Treating surgeon, Dr. Collins, opined he could not state claimant’s welding 
job caused claimant’s condition and more likely than not that the duties did not cause 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Dr. Collins based the opinion upon claimant’s relatively 
young age and the bilateral nature of the condition, which would not be as likely to 
develop in a manual laborer as would the condition on only the dominant side. After 
performing a jobsite review of the welding position, Dr. Deignan opined claimant’s job 
activities were not such that the bilateral hands were exposed to work activities that 
would produce symptoms of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Following an independent 
medical examination, Dr. Bansal opined that claimant’s job activities were capable of 
increasing carpal tunnel pressures. Dr. Bansal highlighted the “significant” pressure on 
the wrists due to repetition, frequent vibration, the positions of the wrists while operating 
a heavy grinder multiple hours per day, and the grabbing, turning, and gripping required 
when performing welding duties. Ultimately, Dr. Bansal found the duties qualified as 
having a strong potential to cause carpal tunnel syndrome. 

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 12 
 
The basis of each medical opinion could be easily critiqued. It is unclear what 
information Dr. Collins possessed regarding the details of claimant’s job duties, as 
claimant testified the two only briefly discussed his work as a welder. Dr. Collins did not 
author the content of his own report; however, Dr. Collins signed off on the content of 
the summary as accurate. Dr. Collins is an orthopedic surgeon with experience treating 
carpal tunnel syndrome; claimant selected Dr. Collins as his treating surgeon and 
expressed no complaints regarding his care. Dr. Deignan offered only conclusory 
opinions with respect to causal connection and did not explain her rationale. Her notes 
mirror legal conclusions and recommendations, as opposed to remaining in the medical 
realm. However, Dr. Deignan is uniquely situated in the best position to offer an opinion 
regarding claimant’s work duties, as she personally observed performance of the duties 
and interviewed claimant onsite. Dr. Bansal’s opinion is somewhat equivocal in nature 
and importantly, he does not specifically state claimant’s work activities more likely than 
not caused or were a substantial, contributing factor in development of bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome. Rather, Dr. Bansal opined the duties were capable of increasing 
carpal tunnel pressures and had a strong potential to cause bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome.  
It is ultimately claimant who bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of 
the evidence that his injury arose out of and in the course of employment. Although I 
find claimant’s claim plausible, the medical opinions do not support a determination that 
claimant has met his burden. Dr. Bansal fell short of opining claimant’s bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome was causally related to his work activities and instead offered a more 
abstract opinion that claimant’s duties had a strong potential to cause bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome. This equivocal opinion is insufficient to allow claimant to prevail when 
compared to the concrete, contrary opinions of Drs. Collins and Deignan, who served as 
treating physician and onsite evaluator, respectively.  
As I find claimant has failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his 
bilateral carpal tunnel conditions arose out of and in the course of his employment, it is 
unnecessary to consider defendant’s defenses under Iowa Code sections 85.23 or 
85.26. It is further unnecessary to consider claimant’s claims for temporary disability, 
permanent disability, or medical benefits. As claimant failed to prove a compensable 
injury, he is not entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39. Finally, as claimant failed to prevail on his 
claim, taxation of costs against defendant is inappropriate under Iowa Code section 
86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings.  

DAVIS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 13 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to claimant pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
Signed and filed this ____23rd______ day of February, 2022. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
MaKayla Augustine (via WCES) 
 
Troy Howell (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such perm ission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
