Case Number: 21000314.02
Case Title:  NEWBURRY, MICHAEL V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Newburry Michael-21000314.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL NEWBURRY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 21000314.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
AGED ASSOCIATION, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND GENERAL  
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1402.60,  
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
    1803.01, 2502, 2907, 3001 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Michael Newburry, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from The Lutheran Home for the Aged Association, employer, 
and Accident Fund General Insurance Company, as defendants.  Hearing was held via 
Zoom on August 1, 2022.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Claimant, Michael Newburry and Doug Wood were the only witnesses to testify 
live at trial.  The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits 1-8, claimant’s exhibits 1-
12 and defendant’s exhibits A-G.  On July 30, 2022, defendants filed “Defendants’ 
Amended Hearing Exhibit List”.  Although this document is captioned as an exhibit list, 
the body of the document actually contains defendants’ objections to claimant’s exhibits 
3, page 5 and 7, page 23.  Under agency rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(d), “[c]ounsel of record 
and pro se litigants shall file all written objections and motions to exclude evidence at 
least seven days before the hearing.  Objections to exhibits are waived if they are not 
filed at least seven days before the hearing.”  I find defendants failed to timely file their 
written objections, therefore the objections are waived pursuant to agency rule 
4.19(3)(d).  All exhibits were received into evidence.  The evidentiary record closed at 
the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-09  14:02:49     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 2 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 16, 2022, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. The nature and extent of permanency benefits claimant is entitled to receive 
as the result of the October 31, 2020 injury.   
2. The appropriate weekly workers’ compensation rate. 
3. Claimant’s entitlement to any underpayment of healing period benefits due to 
the rate dispute. 
4. Whether defendants should be responsible for past medical expenses. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination. 
6. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Michael Newburry, sustained an injury arising out of and in the course 
of his employment with Lutheran Home for the Aged Association (“Lutheran”) on 
October 31, 2020.  (Hearing Report, numbered paragraph 2) 
Mr. Newburry began working for Lutheran in 2004.  He has worked in the kitchen 
as dishwasher, prep cook, and cook.  He also worked in housekeeping waxing and 
stripping floors.  Additionally, he has worked as a floor aide.  At the time of the work 
injury, he worked full-time as a certified nursing assistant (CNA).  His duties included 
taking care of residents, lifting, transferring, bathing, and generally keeping the 
residents happy.  He described the job as physically demanding.  Prior to the October 
31, 2020 work injury, Mr. Newburry worked the third shift weekend package from 6:00 
p.m. to 6:30 a.m.  He received additional pay for working the third shift.  He also 
received additional pay for working the weekend shifts.  At the time of his injury, Mr. 
Newburry’s pay was $29.68 and $26.66 per hour depending on when he worked.  Given 
Mr. Newburry’s education level, the CNA position is the highest paid position claimant 
could obtain with Lutheran.  (Tr. pp. 17- 24; Cl. Ex. 4)        
The evidentiary record does include some treatment records that pre-date the 
work injury.  On August 19, 2007, Mr. Newburry went to the Virginia Gay Hospital 
emergency room with pain in the left side of his back.  He stated the pain began 
yesterday while lifting dry wall and he could not sleep due to muscle spasms.  He rated 
his pain as 10 out of 10.  He has never had any history of back injuries.  The 
assessment was low back sprain.  He prescribed Flexeril, Lortab and Demerol.  He was 
to follow-up with Michelle Elgin, D.O.  (JE1, p.1)  

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 3 
We now turn to the injury at bar.  On October 31, 2020, Mr. Newburry was 
helping transfer a resident when he felt extreme pain in his back that radiated down his 
leg into his foot.  He reported the injury to Lutheran.  (Tr. pp. 27-28)   
On November 6, 2021, Mr. Newburry went to the emergency room at Virginia 
Gay Hospital with complaints of increased low back pain that worsened when lifting at 
work.  He also had increased numbness and weakness in his lower extremities.  Mr. 
Newburry was discharged and encouraged to obtain an MRI.  (JE1, pp. 3-4) 
On December 31, 2020, an MRI of the lumbar spine was performed at Corridor 
Radiology.  The impression was moderate to large left paracentral disc protrusion at L3-
4 which results in severe spinal canal stenosis and mild bilateral foraminal narrowing at 
L3-4.  (JE2, p. 1)    
Mr. Newburry saw Chelsea R. Peoples, PA-C at Virginia Family Medical Clinic on 
November 2, 2020.  He presented with back pain and right hip pain down to his right 
calf which started on Saturday morning, October 31, 2020.  He began having low back 
pain with the radiation of shooting and burning type pain down to his right leg and right 
foot when he was transferring a patient on Saturday morning.  His pain became so 
severe that he could not stand on his right leg toward the end of the shift.  He stayed 
home from work yesterday.  His pain seems to be improving today and he notes only a 
slight radiation of pain from his right leg.  He has no concern with bearing his weight on 
his right leg today.  The assessment was acute right-sided low back pain with right-
sided sciatica.  Mr. Newburry declined imaging and medication at that time.  He was 
given a note to go back to work Wednesday night.  (JE3, pp. 1-4) 
Mr. Newburry was 20 minutes late for his physical therapy appointment on 
November 16, 2020.  The physical therapist explained there was not enough time to 
conduct an evaluation and he would need to reschedule.  (JE5, p. 1) 
On November 20, 2020, Mr. Newburry saw Erica L. Silbernagel, D.O., for 
evaluation of low back pain, lower than his previous pain.  Mr. Newburry did return to 
work but says he “threw out” his back completely after rolling a patient at Lutheran on 
November 13, 2020.  I saw him on November 16 and referred him to physical therapy, 
but he arrived 25 minutes late to his appointment.  His session was rescheduled for 
later in the week, but he did not keep that appointment.  He reports that he reinjured 
himself on November 18, 2020, when he lifted a 30-pound box at home.  He 
immediately felt pain throughout his low back, both of his legs went numb, and he 
dropped the box.  It was the lateral sides of his legs that felt tingly, not the groin or 
medial legs.  Previously, his pain was around L1, but now the pain is more at L5 level.  
Now the pain persists more on the right and he has a lot of pressure in his low back.  
The assessment was acute midline low back pain without sciatica.  He was referred to 
physical therapy.  He was released to return to work with restrictions.  (JE3, pp. 5-7) 
On November 21, 2020, Mr. Newburry saw Brian W. Meeker, D.O., for back pain.  
He reports a lot of aches, pain, and pressure.  He also reports back pain that radiates 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 4 
down his bilateral legs.  He worked yesterday and stated that his knees started to 
buckle.  The assessment was acute right-sided low back pain with right-sided sciatica.    
(JE3, pp. 8-10)   
Mr. Newburry called the Vinton Family Medical Clinic on November 24, 2020 to 
request a copy of his days off work.  The nurse advised Mr. Newburry that Dr. Meeker 
did not say anything about keeping him off work.  He was supposed to attend physical 
therapy yesterday and he did not.  Dr. Meeker had no intention of giving Mr. Newburry 
any restrictions or additional time off work.  Because Mr. Newburry already saw Dr. 
Silbernagel and Chelsea for his problems, he was advised that he needs to stick with 
one provider for work notes.  (JE4, p. 1)   
On February 10, 2021, Mr. Newburry saw Chad D. Abernathey, M.D.  He had a 
four-month history of low back and bilateral leg pain and paresthesia.  Mr. Newburry 
reported that his symptoms alternate from left to right.  Conservative treatment to date 
was unsuccessful so he was referred to Dr. Abernathey for neurosurgical opinion.  Dr. 
Abernathey noted the MRI of the lumbosacral spine demonstrated a broad-based L3-4 
disc extrusion with primary projection to the left.  Mr. Newburry advised Dr. Abernathey 
that he wished to proceed with surgery.  (JE6, pp. 1-2) Dr. Abernathey issued a missive 
to defendants.  He stated his diagnosis is L3-4 disc extrusion consistent with the work-
related incident of October 31, 2020.  He felt the work-related incident of twisting and 
bending while lifting a resident was consistent with that diagnosis. Dr. Abernathey said 
Mr. Newburry would not reach maximum medical until 6 months from the date of 
definitive treatment with surgical intervention.  He could return to work 6-8 weeks 
following surgery.  (JE6, p. 1)   
On March 16, 2021, Dr. Abernathey performed a left L3-L4 partial 
hemilaminectomy, diskectomy.  The postoperative diagnosis was left L4 radiculopathy, 
left L3-L4 disk extrusion.  (JE6, p. 4)  Following surgery, Mr. Newburry attempted to 
return to work as a CNA, but was unable to perform the work due to his physical 
condition.  He tried to perform the CNA work for approximately one month.  (Tr. pp. 60-
61) 
On July 27, 2021, Mr. Newburry returned to Vinton Family Medical Clinic for back 
pain and depression.  He was status post lumbar micro-discectomy on March 16, 2021 
with Dr. Abernathey.  He continued to have back pain and sleeping difficulty due to pain.  
His pain had been worsening since his surgery.  He reported pain in his bilateral hips 
and he experienced cramps from his right calf to his right thigh.  He stated he needs to 
take frequent breaks while driving.  His pain was exacerbated by bending, squatting, 
and twisting.  He works as a CNA and notes his job has been increasingly difficult.  He 
has been back to his regular duties for 2 weeks.  He asked his employer if there is a 
less strenuous job available, but he has been denied any other positions.  Mr. Newburry 
reported depression since his pain has been worsening.  (JE4, pp. 2-3)   
On September 3, 2021, Dr. Abernathey issued a missive to defendants.  Dr. 
Abernathey stated based upon the AMA Guides for chronic pain, decreased range of 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 5 
motion of the lumbosacral spine, previous disc extrusion and subsequent surgery, he 
considers Mr. Newburry to have a 7 percent whole body impairment rating.  He 
considered Mr. Newburry to be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of 
September 3, 2021.  He did not assign any permanent restrictions from a neurosurgical 
standpoint.  (JE6, p. 5) 
Mr. Newburry returned to Vinton Family Medical Clinic on September 20, 2021.  
He reported back pain and sleeping difficulty. The diagnoses were chronic midline low 
back pain without sciatica, chronic bilateral low back pain without sciatica, and acute 
right-sided low back pain with right-sided sciatica.  His back pain was worse on the left 
side.  Last week he felt some pain radiate down his left leg.  Physical therapy 
recommended a 2-week break from physical therapy to determine if his back pain had 
worsened due to therapy.  His back pain also worsened at work.  He has only been able 
to work 7.75 hours per day.  He was noted to have a depressed mood.  He was referred 
to pain management.  (JE4, pp. 4-8)   
Dr. Silbernagel saw Mr. Newburry on October 19, 2021, for low back pain greater 
than 1 year.  He reported that he went to the pain clinic appointment but was told 
workers’ compensation had cancelled the appointment because he had reached MMI.  
Mr. Newburry wants to know what else may be done.  He continues to have low back 
pain at the level of L1 extending down to L5.  He reports the pain wraps around his hips 
and sometimes goes down into the groin.  He also has numbness on his bilateral lateral 
thighs.  The impression was chronic bilateral low back pain without sciatica.  Dr. 
Silbernagel recommended he see physical medicine and rehabilitation.  (JE4, pp. 9-11)  
Mr. Newburry went to the emergency room on November 21, 2021, with chief 
complaint of leg pain.  He noted this was a new complaint with a sudden onset; 
associated symptoms include back pain and weakness.  In March he was at work and 
felt his right knee pop.  He has not sought further opinion, but he is now walking with a 
cane because his right knee feels a little more unstable and he feels his legs are weak.  
The impression was acute pain of the right knee and weakness of both lower 
extremities.  (JE7, pp. 1-4)    
At the request of the insurance carrier, Mr. Newburry returned to Dr. Abernathey 
on December 6, 2021.  He reported low back pain.  He continued to work in a light duty 
capacity.  Dr. Abernathey noted that Dr. Silbernagel ordered an epidural steroid 
injection; however, the insurance carrier canceled that evaluation.  Dr. Abernathey did 
not recommend any aggressive neurosurgical management.  He felt that a pain clinic 
assessment was a reasonable approach if his symptoms persist or worsen.  Dr. 
Abernathey stated he would be available for further neurosurgical consultation if so 
desired.  (JE6, p. 6)  
Mr. Newburry underwent a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) with Daryl Short, 
DPT at WorkWell on April 19, 2022.  Mr. Newburry was found to have given consistent 
effort throughout the testing.  The FCE placed him in the sedentary to light category of 
physical demand up to 15 to 20 pounds on an occasional basis.  He recommended 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 6 
limiting elevated work and/or reaching at shoulder height and higher with material and 
non-material handling activities to an occasional basis.  He should limit stand/walk 
combined for up to 35 percent of the day.  Mr. Newburry should also be allowed to 
change positions between sitting, standing, and walking as needed.  (Cl. Ex. 11) 
On May 2, 2022, Dr. Abernathey signed a letter drafted by claimant’s counsel.  
By signing the letter, Dr. Abernathey indicated that the summary in the letter accurately 
reflected his opinions within a reasonable degree of medical certainty.  Dr. Abernathey 
reiterated that Mr. Newburry reached MMI as of September 3, 2021 and that he 
sustained 7 percent impairment of the whole person based upon the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.  He noted that during activity Mr. Newburry 
continues to experience pain, numbness, and weakness in his legs.  Dr. Abernathey 
adopted the permanent restrictions as set forth in the Functional Capacity Evaluation 
completed at Work Well on April 19, 2022.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 22) 
At the request of the defendants, claimant underwent a Functional Capacity 
Evaluation (FCE) at E3 Work Therapy Services on May 26, 2022.  The report states that 
Mr. Newburry failed to give maximum voluntary effort during the FCE and it was not 
possible to determine safe physical capabilities.  The overall classification of effort was 
invalid.  (Cl. Ex. G) 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Newburry underwent an Independent Medical 
Evaluation (IME) with Stanley J. Mathew, M.D. on June 16, 2022.  Dr. Mathew’s 
impression included chronic low back pain, status post lumbar spine surgery 
laminectomy, lumbosacral radiculopathy, gait and balance dysfunction, lower extremity 
weakness, and chronic pain related depression.  He opined that those diagnoses are a 
direct result of the work injury that occurred on October 31, 2020.  Dr. Mathew stated 
that under the Guides, Fifth Edition, specifically Table 15-3, he assigned 20 percent 
whole person impairment rating.  He also opined that Mr. Newburry’s right lower 
extremity pain and weakness is a direct result of the October 31, 2020 accident.  He 
stated that Mr. Newburry has a lumbosacral radiculopathy which is nerve irritation and 
damage causing weakness to his lower extremities.  Dr. Mathew recommended 
avoiding lifting more than 20 pounds, prolonged standing, walking, bending, lifting, 
squatting, and to avoid heights and ladders.  He believes Mr. Newburry would benefit 
from a chronic pain specialist including oversite of therapy, medication management, 
aqua therapy, injection therapies and pain psychology due to the development of 
chronic pain syndrome.  He placed Mr. Newburry at MMI as of March 16, 2022, which is 
one year post surgery.  (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 24-28)     
On June 22, 2022, Dr. Abernathey signed a letter authored by defendants.  His 
signature indicates that he agreed with the statements in the letter.  Dr. Abernathey 
opined within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Mr. Newburry did not 
require any permanent restrictions.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 1) 
On July 1, 2022, the employer sent a letter to Mr. Newburry via certified mail.  
The letter stated that Dr. Abernathey opined that Mr. Newburry does not require any 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 7 
restrictions.  The employer advised Mr. Newburry that his job as a CNA weekend 
package of 36 hours per week 6:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. Friday, Saturday, and Sunday at 
$27.46 per hour is still available to him.  The letter advised Mr. Newburry, “[i]f you 
expect to appear, please report to the Vinton Lutheran Home at 1301 2nd Ave. Vinton, 
Iowa 52349, on Friday July 15, 2022, at 6:00 a.m.”  (Def. Ex. E, p. 9)     
On July 8, 2022, Dr. Abernathey signed a letter drafted by claimant’s counsel.  
By signing the letter, Dr. Abernathey indicated that the summary in the letter accurately 
reflected his opinions within a reasonable degree of medical certainty.  Dr. Abernathey 
agreed Mr. Newburry should adhere to the restrictions in the sedentary to light category.  
Those restrictions are based the April 19, 2022 Work Well FCE.  Dr. Abernathey opined 
that Mr. Newburry is not able to return as a CNA because he is unable to meet the 
physical demands of the position.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 23)       
Also on July 8, 2022, claimant’s counsel sent a letter to defense counsel advising 
that Mr. Newburry was physically unable to perform the offered work and therefore 
cannot accept the offer of work.  The letter states this was based on the FCE and the 
opinion of the treating physician, Dr. Abernathey.  (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 49)   The record is void 
of any response from the defendants.   
The first issue to be addressed is the nature and extent of permanent disability 
Mr. Newburry sustained as the result of the work injury.  There are two physicians who 
have assigned impairment ratings to Mr. Newburry.   
On September 3, 2021, Dr. Abernathey stated that based upon the AMA Guides 
for chronic pain, decreased range of motion of the lumbosacral spine, previous disc 
extrusion and subsequent surgery, he considered Mr. Newburry to have a 7 percent 
whole body impairment rating.  Dr. Abernathey considered Mr. Newburry to be at MMI 
as of September 3, 2021.  (JE6, p. 5) He reiterated these opinions in May 2022.  (Cl. 
Ex. 7, p. 22) Mr. Newburry’s IME doctor, Dr. Mathew, assigned 20 percent whole person 
impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Table 15-3.  Dr. Mathew placed 
Mr. Newburry at MMI as of March 16, 2022, which is one year post surgery.  (Cl. Ex. 8, 
pp. 24-28)  Based on the opinions of these two physicians, I find Mr. Newburry did 
sustain permanent functional impairment of his body as a whole as the result of the 
injury.  
There are varying opinions regarding appropriate permanent restrictions for Mr. 
Newburry as the result of the work injury.  On May 2, 2022, Dr. Abernathey adopted the 
permanent restrictions as set forth in the Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) 
completed at Work Well on April 19, 2022.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 22) In June 2022, Dr. 
Abernathey indicated Mr. Newburry did not require any permanent restrictions.  In July 
2022, Dr. Abernathey indicated that Mr. Newburry should in fact adhere to the 
restrictions in the sedentary to light category as set forth in the FCE conducted at Work 
Well.  Although Dr. Abernathey’s opinions have flip-flopped, he ultimately adopts the 
FCE restrictions.  Dr. Mathew recommended avoiding lifting more than 20 pounds, 
prolonged standing, walking, bending, lifting, squatting, and avoiding heights and 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 8 
ladders.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 27) I find the restrictions of Dr. Abernathey, the restrictions set 
forth in the Work Well FCE, and the restrictions of Dr. Mathew are all consistent with 
one another.  I find that as the result of the work injury, Mr. Newburry has permanent 
restrictions as set forth in the Work Well FCE.  I further find, based on these restrictions 
and the opinion of Dr. Abernathey, that Mr. Newburry is not physically capable of 
returning to work as a CNA.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 23)  
The parties disagree on the type of permanent partial disability benefits claimant 
should receive as the result of the work injury.  Defendants assert that because they 
offered Mr. Newburry full-time employment as a CNA at the same or greater wages he 
was earning at the time of the injury, his award of permanent partial disability should be 
limited to the impairment rating.  Claimant does not dispute that the job offered was at 
the same or greater wages than what he was earning at the time of the injury.  Rather, 
claimant contends that because he is not physically capable of performing the offered 
work, he is entitled to an award of industrial disability.     
I find at the time of the hearing Mr. Newburry was employed by Lutheran, but he 
was earning less wages then he was at the time of the injury.  I further find that after the 
injury, Lutheran offered Mr. Newburry a CNA job that his physical restrictions prevent 
him from performing.  The treating physician specifically stated that Mr. Newburry is not 
capable of returning to work as a CNA.  The defendants’ argument that offering Mr. 
Newburry work as a CNA qualifies as an offer of work for which he would receive the 
same or greater wages is not persuasive.  Clearly, claimant’s work restrictions prevent 
him from being able to perform the work offered by the employer.  I conclude that the 
defendants did not make an offer of work which would result in the employee receiving 
the same or greater wages then he received at the time of the injury.  Thus, I conclude 
claimant’s compensation shall not be based only upon the functional impairment; rather, 
he is entitled to an award of industrial disability.   
At the time of hearing Mr. Newburry was 37 years old.  He obtained his GED in 
2003.  When Mr. Newburry was still in school, he attended some special education 
classes due to difficulty learning and focusing.  His cumulative grade point average of 
.700 and class rank of 267 out of 272 demonstrates that Mr. Newburry struggled in 
school.  In 2006 he obtained his nursing assistant certificate through Kirkwood 
Community College.  (Tr. pp. 15-17; Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 20-21)  
Prior to working at Lutheran, Mr. Newburry worked at Biaggi’s as a prep cook.  
His duties included portioning out ingredients, filleting fish, and butterflying shrimp.  He 
was paid $9.00 per hour.  His work history also includes working at Kerry Ingredients as 
a forklift operator.  He worked full-time and was paid $9.00 per hour.  He also worked at 
McDonald’s preparing food.  He worked full-time and was paid $6.10 per hour.  (Tr. pp. 
23-26)  Given his permanent restrictions I find it is likely Mr. Newburry could not return 
to many of his prior jobs.   
At the time of his injury, Mr. Newburry’s pay at Lutheran was $29.68 and $26.66 
per hour working the weekend overnight shift differential.  I find that the pay Mr. 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 9 
Newburry was earning at the time of his injury was the highest pay he had ever received 
during his employment history.  Mr. Newburry does not believe he could physically 
return to work as a CNA.  He does not believe he could perform the required walking, 
standing, lifting 50 pounds, sitting for long periods of time, frequent reaching, bending, 
stretching, or finger dexterity.  He agrees with Dr. Abernathey that he should be placed 
in the sedentary to light work category.  He also agrees with Dr. Abernathey that he is 
not physically capable of performing the work of a CNA.  The record is void of any 
doctor placing a limit on the number of hours Mr. Newburry works per day.  (Tr. pp. 35-
37)     
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Newburry was employed at Lutheran as a floor 
aide working at the front desk.  He is paid $17.36 per hour and works approximately 12 
hours per week.  A review of the post-injury paystubs from April 2022 through June 
2022 reveals Mr. Newburry’s gross earnings range from $134.00 to $407.00 per pay 
period.  Mr. Newburry testified that recently he has not been working due to his pain, 
numbness, and tingling.  He has pain in his mid-back and down his hips and legs.  Mr. 
Newburry testified that he uses a cane every time he walks.  The record is void of any 
medical provided prescribing or recommending he use a cane every time he walks.  (Tr. 
p. 38, 59; Cl. Ex. 5)   
Mr. Doug Wood testified live at the hearing.  Mr. Wood is the administrator for the 
Lutheran facility where Mr. Newburry is employed.  The primary person who dealt with 
Mr. Newburry’s restrictions was the director of nursing.  Mr. Wood testified that since the 
injury Mr. Newburry would often leave his shifts early; he typically would only work for 
approximately two hours per day, even though he was scheduled for 12-hours per day.  
He had not seen Mr. Newburry utilize a cane prior to the day of the hearing.  Lutheran is 
willing to have him work full-time as a floor aide.  Mr. Wood admitted that he did not 
know what Mr. Newburry’s medical condition is or what jobs he might be capable of 
performing.  (Tr. pp. 63-71) 
At the time of the injury claimant was paid approximately $26.66 or $29.68 per 
hour, depending on when he worked.  According to the evidence this is the highest 
weekly rate that he ever received.  Although he cannot return to his prior job no medical 
provider has opined that he cannot work.  I find Mr. Newburry’s restrictions preclude him 
from a significant number of jobs.  However, I find that the preponderance of the 
evidence does not show that he is permanently and totally disability.  I find he has 
demonstrated that he has a limited work history with limited skills.  However, I also find 
that he could pursue alternate employment if he so desired.   
I find that Mr. Newburry has sustained a significant loss of future earning capacity 
as a result of the work injury.  Unfortunately, he has significant restrictions and has lost 
access to a significant portion of his pre-injury employment opportunities.   
Considering Mr. Newburry’s age, proximity to retirement, limited educational 
background, limited employment history, limited ability to retrain, length of healing 
period, permanent impairment, permanent restrictions, and the other industrial disability 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 10 
factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that he has sustained a 60 percent 
loss of future earning capacity as a result of his work injury with the defendant 
employer. 
 
We now turn to the appropriate commencement date for the permanency 
benefits.  Based on the opinion of Dr. Abernathey, I find it was medically indicated that 
MMI from the injury had been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment could be determined by use of the Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment as of September 3, 2021.  (JE6, p. 5) Thus, I find permanent 
partial disability benefits shall commence on September 3, 2021. 
 
Regarding the issue of rate, I make the following findings.  The dispute between 
the parties centers on how to calculate Mr. Newburry’s gross average weekly wages.  
Based on the pay stubs in evidence, I find that Mr. Newburry was issued paychecks on 
a semi-monthly pay period basis.  I further find that the amount he was paid was based 
on the hours he worked, and he was paid different hourly rates depending on when he 
worked.  I find that the amount Mr. Newburry was paid for each pay period varied.  The 
parties disagree on whether the pay period ending October 25, 2020, should be 
included in the rate calculation.  A review of the pay stubs in evidence demonstrates 
that during this pay period Mr. Newburry worked 52.75 hours; this is the only pay period 
where claimant worked less than 60 hours.  (Cl. Ex. 4; Def. Ex. B, p. 1) I find that the 
week of October 25, 2020, does not fairly reflect claimant’s customary earnings and 
therefore should not be included in the calculation.  These findings will be applied to the 
appropriate law below.   
 
According to the hearing report, claimant was seeking payment of past medical 
expenses as set forth in claimant’s exhibits 1, 9, and 12.  However, I find that those 
exhibits do not contain any medical bills other than the IME bill which will be addressed 
below.  At the time of hearing, claimant’s counsel clarified that exhibit 12 was 
withdrawn.  There is no mention of past medical expenses in claimant’s post-hearing 
brief.  Thus, I find claimant has not demonstrated entitlement to payment of any past 
medical expenses as the result of these proceedings.  (Tr. pp. 7-8; Cl. Ex. 1 & 9; 
Hearing Report)    
 
We now turn to the issue of whether Mr. Newburry is entitled to reimbursement in 
the amount of $2,500.74 for the IME conducted by Dr. Mathew on June 20, 2022.  (Cl. 
Ex. 9, p. 32) Mr. Newburry sustained a compensable work injury.  I find the defendants 
obtained an impairment rating which Mr. Newburry felt was too low prior to the time of 
Dr. Mathew’s IME.     
 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing 
the case.  I find that Mr. Newburry was generally successful in his claims and that an 
assessment of costs against the defendants is appropriate.  Claimant is seeking an 
assessment of costs totaling $103.00 as set forth in his exhibit 1.  I find that the filing fee 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 11 
is an appropriate cost under subsection 7.  Thus, defendants are assessed costs 
totaling $103.00.    
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
The parties have stipulated that claimant sustained an injury that arose out of 
and in the course of his employment and that the injury resulted in permanent disability.  
Because claimant sustained an injury which extends into the body as a whole, he 
should be compensated pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  The central dispute 
in this case centers around the 2017 amendments to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Act.  Prior to 2017, a claimant who sustained permanent disability to his body as a 
whole was automatically compensated on an industrial disability basis; this changed 
with the 2017 amendments.     
  
The amended law states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those described or 
referred to in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’, the compensation shall be paid 
during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability bears 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 12 
in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed when the 
injury occurred. A determination of the reduction in the employee's earning 
capacity caused by the disability shall take into account the permanent 
partial disability of the employee and the number of years in the future it 
was reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the time of the 
injury. If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee's functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee's earning 
capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v)(emphasis added). 
Claimant contends he was not offered a job he was physically capable of 
performing and therefore should be compensated on an industrial disability basis.  
Defendants contend they offered him work at the same or greater pay he was earning at 
the time of the injury and therefore his award of permanent disability should be based 
only upon his functional impairment resulting from the injury.  Their dispute centers on 
the language from the 2017 amendment.  Neither party provides any authority to 
support their position. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has stated that a statute is ambiguous when 
reasonable persons could disagree as to its meaning.  See Chavez v. MS Technology 
972 N.W.2d 662 (Iowa 2022)(citing Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 
759, 770 (Iowa 2016)). Here, Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) is ambiguous because 
reasonable persons disagree on the statutory meaning of “offered work.” 
The undersigned recognizes that the “interpretation of the workers' compensation 
statutes and related case law has not been clearly vested by a provision of law in the 
discretion of the agency.” Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 558 (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted).  Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518 (Iowa 2012).  
However, to determine the nature of the permanency benefits claimant is entitled to 
receive, it is first necessary to determine whether the employee was offered work for 
which he would receive the same or greater wages.   
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I found that claimant was physically 
restricted from performing the work that was offered to him by the employer.  Claimant 
contends he was not offered work in the proper sense of the word because the 
employer failed to take his physical restrictions into account.  Claimant further argues 
that because he was not offered work with similar or greater wages that he was 
physically able to perform he was not offered a legitimate return to work by the 
employer. 
       

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 13 
Defendants do not contend that claimant was capable of performing the work he 
was offered. Rather, defendants argue that because they offered claimant full-time work 
with the same hours and wages he earned at the time of the injury his permanent 
disability should be based only upon his functional impairment rating. 
The undersigned acknowledges that an argument may be made that the plain 
language of the statue does not specifically state that claimant must be capable of 
performing the offered work.  However, the adoption of the defendants’ application of 
the law would generate absurd results.  Such an application would allow an employer to 
evade any liability for industrial disability merely by offering the employee a job for which 
the employee would receive equal or greater pay even though the employee is not 
capable of performing or perhaps not even qualified to perform the offered job.  The 
Iowa Supreme Court has stated that interpreting statutes requires an assessment of the 
entire statute to ensure interpretation is harmonious with the statutes as a whole rather 
than assessing isolated words or phrases.  Doe v. State, 943 N.W.2d 608, 610 (Iowa 
2020)(citations omitted).  Section 85.34(2)(v) specifically states if the employee “returns 
to work or is offered work . . .”  The sentence in question specifically states if the 
employee returns to work or is offered work, clearly the language contemplates the 
employee actually returning to work and performing the work.  The statutory language 
implies that the employee must be capable of performing the work he is offered.  In this 
case, the employer offered work that claimant is restricted from performing.  Clearly, 
claimant’s work restrictions prevent him from being able to perform the work offered by 
the employer.  I conclude that the offer made by the defendants is not an offer of work 
as contemplated by Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  Thus, I conclude claimant’s 
compensation shall not be based only upon the functional impairment; rather, he is 
entitled to an award of industrial disability.   
 
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the legislature intended the term 
'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and not a mere 
'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total physical 
and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that he has sustained a 60 
percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of his work injury with the defendant 
employer. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 14 
the body as a whole.  Section 85.34(2)(v).  Thus, claimant has demonstrated 
entitlement to 300 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by 
use of the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.  Section 85.34(2).  Based 
on the opinion of Dr. Abernathey, I conclude it was medically indicated that maximum 
medical improvement from the injury had been reached and that the extent of loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment could be determined by use of the Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment as of September 3, 2021.  (JE6, p. 5) Thus, I 
conclude permanent partial disability benefits shall commence on September 3, 2021. 
We now turn to the issue of claimant’s weekly workers’ compensation rate.  
There is a dispute among the parties on how to calculate claimant’s average weekly 
earnings.  Iowa Code section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly 
earnings of the employee at the time of the injury.  Weekly earnings are defined by this 
section as the gross salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been 
entitled had the employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which 
the employee was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or 
employments.  The various subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing 
weekly earnings depending on the type of earnings and employment.  
Mr. Newburry’s paychecks were issued on a semi-monthly basis.  Because he 
was paid on an hourly basis, his pay varied depending on the hours he worked in any 
given pay period.  In this case, both parties contend that claimant’s rate should be 
calculated pursuant to subsection 6.  This subsection states: 
In the case of an employee who is paid on a daily or hourly basis, or by the 
output of the employee, the weekly earnings shall be computed by dividing 
by thirteen the earnings, including shift differential pay but not including 
overtime or premium pay, of the employee earned in the employ of the 
employer in the last completed period of thirteen consecutive calendar 
weeks immediately preceding the injury.  If the employee was absent from 
employment for reasons personal to the employee during part of the thirteen 
calendar weeks preceding the injury, the employee’s weekly earnings shall 
be the amount the employee would have earned had the employee worked 
when work was available to other employees of the employer in a similar 
occupation.  A week which does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous week with earnings that 
fairly represent the employee’s customary earnings.   
Iowa Code section 85.36(6).  
Claimant contends his rate calculation consists of fourteen weeks of pay to 
calculate the rate due to what he contends is the biweekly nature of his paychecks.  (Cl. 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 15 
Ex. 3, p. 5; claimant’s post-hearing brief, p. 12) Claimant utilizes the pay periods ending 
July 10, 2020 through October 25, 2020, but excludes the pay period ending August 25, 
2020 as unrepresentative.  Claimant arrives at an average weekly wage of $1,114.50.  
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 5) 
Defendants disagree with claimant’s rate calculation for a couple of reasons.  
First, defendants contend the week claimant excluded from his rate calculation is 
representative and should be included.  The pay period in question ends on October 25, 
2020.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 14) According to defendants’ rate calculation, claimant worked 
52.75 hours; this is the only pay period where claimant worked less than 60 hours.  
(Def. Ex. B, p. 1)   I conclude that the pay period ending on October 25, 2020, does not 
fairly reflect claimant’s customary earnings and therefore should not be included in the 
calculation.  Thus, I conclude the weeks included in claimant’s rate calculation are 
appropriate.   
Second, defendants contend that claimant is paid bimonthly and therefore, 
claimant’s calculation incorrectly assumes that each pay period was exactly two weeks.  
Thus, in their calculation defendants use different weeks than the claimant in their 
calculation and they contend that they “correctly divided the average weekly wage by 
13.1429 because the earning from July 26, 2020 through October 25, 2020, occurred 
over 92 days, not exactly 14 weeks.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 1; Def. post-hearing brief, p. 11) 
Defendants arrives at an average weekly wage of $953.32.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 1)    
While I do not agree with the weeks defendants used to calculate claimant’s 
average weekly wage, I do agree that his average weekly wages should not simply be 
divided by 14 because this results in an artificially inflated rate.  I conclude that 
claimant’s calculation of the average weekly wage is correct.  However, I further 
conclude that the average weekly wage should be based on the exact number of weeks 
utilized.  In this case, claimant’s total average weekly wages of $15,602.98 are based 
on pay periods from June 26, 2020 through August 10, 2020 and August 26, 2020 
through October 25, 2020 which consists of 15.286 weeks.  Thus, I conclude claimant’s 
average weekly wage is $1,020.74.  Claimant is married and entitled to 4 exemptions 
which results in a weekly workers’ compensation rate of $682.21.   
It should be noted that all of claimant’s weekly benefits shall be based on the 
weekly workers’ compensation rate of $682.21.  Prior to hearing the defendants paid 
claimant weekly benefits at lesser rates.  Defendants shall make up any underpayment 
of weekly benefits, plus interest.  Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Next, we turn to medical expenses.  The employer shall furnish reasonable 
surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, 
nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable 
under the workers' compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 16 
the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant has failed to 
demonstrate entitlement to payment of any past medical expenses via this proceeding.   
Claimant is seeking reimbursement for his IME.  Section 85.39 permits an 
employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.  
The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the 
subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that the prerequisites of section 
85.39 were met.  In their post-hearing brief defendants contend the claimant is not 
entitled to reimbursement of the full amount of the IME because the fees charged are 
not reasonable.  However, in the hearing report the defendants stipulated that medical 
providers would testify to the reasonableness of their fees and that defendants were not 
offering any contrary evidence.  (Hearing Report, numbered paragraph 8(d)).  Thus, I 
conclude the fee is reasonable and claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the IME in 
the amount of $2,500.74. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of six hundred eighty-two and 21/100 
dollars ($682.21).   
Defendants shall pay three hundred (300) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on September 3, 2021. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay any underpayment of all previously paid weekly benefits.   
 
 

NEWBURRY V. THE LUTHERAN HOME FOR THE AGED ASSOCIATION 
Page 17 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 
2018).  
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the IME in the amount of two thousand 
five hundred and 74/100 dollars ($2,500.74). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs in the amount of one hundred three 
and no/100 dollars ($103.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __9th __ day of January, 2023. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
 
Connor Mulholland (via WCES) 
Laura Ostrander (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
