Case Number: 5052161
Case Title:  MARRS, ROBERTA V. REGIONALCARE HOSPITAL PA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Marrs Roberta-5052161d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROBERTA MARRS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                            File No. 5052161 
REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL 
  : 
PARTNERS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                       REVIEW-REOPENING  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                             DECISION 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AMERICAN ZURICH INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  :       Head Note No.:  1402.40, 1803, 1804, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
2501, 2602, 2907, 4100 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Roberta Marrs, claimant, filed a petition seeking review-reopening of a prior 
decision of this agency.  Specifically, claimant seeks to review and reopen a June 14, 
2017 arbitration decision, which was affirmed in part and modified in part by the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner on December 21, 2018 and ultimately affirmed 
by the Iowa Court of Appeals in a February 17, 2021, decision on judicial review.   
In the underlying arbitration decision, the presiding deputy commissioner found 
that as the result of her July 28, 2014 work injury, claimant sustained injuries to her 
thoracic and cervical portions of her spine.  The deputy commissioner also found she 
was entitled to a running award of healing period benefits commencing on October 22, 
2014.  At the time of the review-reopening hearing, the underlying case was on appeal 
to the Iowa Court of Appeals.  On February 17, 2021, claimant’s counsel filed a Notice 
of Court of Appeals Decision stating that on February 17, 2021, the Iowa Court of 
Appeals issued a decision affirming the underlying decision.     
Claimant filed a review-reopening petition on October 22, 2018, seeking a 
determination of the proper commencement date for permanency benefits and a 
determination of the extent of permanent disability she sustained as the result of the 
work injury.  This review-reopening proceeding came on for hearing before the 
undersigned on November 18, 2020.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person 
hearing occurring in Des Moines.  However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video 
means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via 
CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jun-11  14:01:08     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 2 
Claimant was the only witness that testified live at the time of the review-
reopening hearing.  The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE3, 
claimant’s exhibits 1-7, and defendant’s exhibits A-G.  All exhibits were received without 
objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties also submitted a hearing report, which contains stipulations.  During 
the course of the hearing, claimant’s counsel moved to amend the hearing report to 
include the odd-lot doctrine.  Defense counsel stated that if the odd-lot doctrine was not 
raised on the petition for review-reopening, then defendants would object to the 
amendment.  If odd-lot was included on the petition, then defendants did not have any 
objection to the amendment.  A review of the petition filed on October 22, 2018 reveals 
that claimant did allege the odd-lot doctrine on her petition.  Therefore, the hearing 
report was amended, without objection, to include an allegation of the odd-lot doctrine.  
The parties’ stipulations were accepted by the presiding deputy commissioner and are 
now relied upon in entering this decision.  No findings or conclusions will be entered 
with respect to the parties’ stipulations and the parties are bound by those agreements. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. The extent of permanent disability benefits claimant is entitled to receive as 
the result of the July 28, 2014 work injury 
2. The appropriate commencement date for permanency benefits. 
3. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
In a June 14, 2017, arbitration decision, another deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner concluded that claimant sustained injuries to her thoracic and cervical 
spine that were causally related to her work injury at Regional Care Hospital Partners, 
Inc., on July 28, 2014.  Claimant was awarded running healing period benefits in the 
arbitration decision.  The parties now agree that claimant has sustained a change of 
condition because she is no longer in a running healing period and benefits should be 
converted to permanency benefits.  There is a dispute surrounding the proper 
commencement date.  There is also a dispute between the parties regarding the extent 
of permanency claimant sustained as the result of the work injury.   
Ms. Marrs has received additional treatment since the April 4, 2017 arbitration 
hearing.  She has continued to receive conservative treatment including medications, 
physical therapy, and injections.  She has opted not to undergo surgery because the 
surgeons have told her that surgery will not alleviate the pain in her neck or her 
headaches.  (Testimony)     

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 3 
In July of 2017, Ms. Marrs saw Todd Harbach, M.D., with bilateral lateral neck 
pain, bilateral posterior neck, and bilateral shoulder.  She also had radiating pain to the 
bilateral upper arm, elbow, forearm interscapular, wrist, and hand pain.  Dr. Harbach 
noted that he had seen her for an evaluation in February of 2017, and recommended 
surgery.  At this July appointment, Dr. Harbach stated that the plan was to proceed with 
C6-C7 anterior cervical diskectomy with fusion.  He hoped this would treat her left upper 
extremity radicular pain and weakness and her interscapular pain/cervical pain.  Dr. 
Harbach advised Ms. Marrs that she might not get complete relief of her cervical pain.  
She stated that she wanted to proceed with the surgery.  (JE2, pp. 102–105) 
In late August of 2017, Ms. Marrs saw John W. Rayburn, M.D., at Iowa Ortho.  
She reported neck pain.  She was scheduled for C6-C7 fusion, but she was having 
other health issues so the surgery was on hold until approved for other health issues.  
Dr. Rayburn recommended C3-C6 medial branch blocks.  If she received more than 80 
percent relief then she would be a candidate for radiofrequency ablations (RFA).  The 
first round of medial branch block injections was performed on September 8, 2017, the 
second round was performed on September 22, 2017, and the third was performed on 
October 24, 2017.  (JE1, pp. 1-9)    
By early December 2017, Ms. Marrs reported good relief from the RFA on the left 
side.  She was still having pretty severe pain in the right neck musculature.  She also 
reported more left arm and hand numbness.  She had significant improvement with her 
headaches.  Dr. Rayburn felt that a lot of her symptoms appeared to be soft tissue 
related trigger points.  He recommended bilateral trigger point injection (TPI), physical 
therapy, and hydrocodone.  Ms. Marrs received additional bilateral TPIs in early January 
2018.  (JE1, pp. 10-15) 
Ms. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn on January 22, 2018.  She reported 30 
percent relief from TPIs.  She noticed improvement with physical therapy and wanted to 
continue with conservative treatment and wait to undergo surgery for as long as 
possible.  Dr. Rayburn recommended additional TPI and continuing physical therapy.  
(JE1, pp. 16-19)   
By the end of February 2018, Dr. Rayburn felt Ms. Marrs was making significant 
progress.  He believed one last TPI with some additional physical therapy would be 
beneficial.  He also prescribed Lyrica and hydrocodone.  Ms. Marrs was to follow-up as 
needed.  Another TPI was performed on March 22, 2018.  (JE1, pp. 19-26)   
At the end of April 2018, Ms. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn.  She reported that 
she did not receive much relief from the last injection.  She does get some relief from 
physical therapy on the day of therapy, but the relief is not long lasting.  (JE1, pp. 27-29) 
Mr. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn on May 30, 2018.  She reported that she has 
been doing better with physical therapy and her traction unit.  She was very pleased 
with her progress.  Dr. Rayburn recommended continued physical therapy and 
continued home traction.  He refilled her Lyrica, Robaxin, and hydrocodone.  (JE1, pp. 
30-32) 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 4 
Dr. Rayburn saw Ms. Marrs again on August 22, 2018.  She reported that her 
pain had increased since stopping physical therapy.  Ms. Marrs wanted to repeat the 
RFAs and restart physical therapy.  She had been unable to sleep due to pain.  Based 
on his examination, Dr. Rayburn felt that the RFA had worn off on the left side.  He 
planned to repeat left C3-C4, C4-C5, RFA.  He also recommended physical therapy and 
continuation of the home traction unit.  The repeat RFA was performed on September 
11, 2018.  (JE1, pp. 33-40)  
Ms. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn on October 10, 2018.  She received good 
relief from the previous injection.  Dr. Rayburn recommended continued physical 
therapy and moving into a maintenance phase.  (JE1, pp. 37-39) 
By mid-November 2018, Ms. Marrs reported that her right side pain continues to 
worsen and she would like repeat RFA on that side.  Her current physical therapy is 
providing some benefit.  On December 18, 2018, Dr. Rayburn performed the RFA on 
the right side.  (JE1, pp. 40-45) 
Ms. Marrs returned to see Dr. Rayburn on January 16, 2019.  She reported relief 
from the RFA, but she still continues to have pain.  Mr. Marrs reported that her 
medications are making her functional.  He recommended refills of medications, right 
upper thoracic TPI, and continued physical therapy.  Dr. Rayburn performed the right 
thoracic TPI on February 14, 2019. (JE1, pp. 46-50)   
On February 25, 2019, Ms. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn.  She reported 50-60 
percent relief from the right thoracic TPIs.  She noticed more pain in her left upper back.  
She believes she should have received bilateral TPIs.  She received the bilateral 
injections on March 14, 2019.  (JE1, pp. 51-56) 
Dr. Rayburn saw Ms. Marrs again on March 27, 2019.  Ms. Marrs received some 
relief from the injections, but she was still having some left-sided pain.  She also 
reported frequent headaches.  Ms. Marrs was scheduled for C6-C7 fusion, but she has 
been having other health issues so the surgery is on hold.  Dr. Rayburn recommended 
left upper thoracic TPI; which was performed on April 10, 2019.  (JE1, pp. 57-61)   
On May 22, 2019, Ms. Marrs reported good relief from the previous procedure 
and is getting good relief from physical therapy.  The severity of her pain comes and 
goes on her bad days.  Dr. Rayburn recommended continuing physical therapy and 
advised her to follow-up in three months.  She was instructed to call if she wanted 
repeat injections.  (JE1, pp. 62-65)   
Ms. Marrs received bilateral TPIs on August 19, 2019.  By the end of August 
2019, Ms. Marrs reported that she did receive some relief from these injections.  Dr. 
Rayburn adjusted her medications, recommended continued physical therapy, and told 
her to follow-up in 3 to 4 months.  (JE1, pp. 66-71)  
On December 9, 2019, Ms. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn.  She reported that 
she was starting to get more pain in the right side of her neck; the left side was still 
doing well.  Ms. Marrs was wondering if she might need to repeat RFA.  Dr. Rayburn 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 5 
performed repeat RFA on the right.  Ms. Marrs returned on February 10, 2020 and 
reported that she did not receive much relief from that repeat RFA.  Dr. Rayburn 
recommended right upper thoracic TPI.  (JE1, pp. 72-81)   
On January 29, 2020, at the request of her attorney, Ms. Marrs saw Jacqueline 
M. Stoken, D.O., for an IME.  Dr. Stoken’s impression was: status post work injury on 
July 28, 2014, with herniated disk of the cervical spine and thoracic strain, chronic 
cervical and thoracic pain, and chronic muscle spasms.  Dr. Stoken used the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, to place Ms. Marrs in 
the DRE cervical category II and assigned 8 percent impairment of the whole person for 
her cervical injury.  Utilizing the Fifth Edition of The Guides, Dr. Stoken placed her in the 
DRE thoracic category II and assigned 5 percent impairment of the whole person for her 
thoracic injury.  Using the combined values chart this amounts to 13 percent impairment 
of the whole person.  Dr. Stoken opined that reasonable work restrictions would be per 
the January 29, 2020 FCE.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-2) 
Also on January 29, 2020, at the request of her attorney, Ms. Marrs underwent a 
functional capacity evaluation (FCE) at Advantage Physical Therapy and Rehab.  The 
therapist noted that Ms. Marrs was willing to work to her safe maximal abilities 
throughout all the testing.  Based on the results of the FCE, Ms. Marrs functional ability 
places her within the U.S. Department of Labor’s light work category.  Specifically, Ms. 
Marrs is to avoid waist-to-overhead lifting work activities on a frequent and constant 
basis and right upper extremity single carry work activities on a constant basis.  She 
should consistently avoid performing elevated work activities or repetitive reaching of 
the right upper extremity at or above shoulder height, and limit repetitive work activities 
to 6-33 percent of the workday.  No limit was placed on the number of hours that 
claimant could work each day, but specific recommendations were made for distribution 
of certain activities throughout the day, including limiting certain tasks to half hour at a 
time (rarely) or three hours (occasionally).  Static work was recommended to be rare, 1 
to 5 percent of an 8-hour workday, but claimant demonstrated the ability to perform 
forward bending/sitting frequently and forward bending/standing constantly.  No 
restrictions were placed on ration sitting or rotation standing.  She may only sit rarely, 
which is 1-5 percent of the day.  She may stand only rarely.  She may walk 
occasionally, which is 6-33 percent of the day.    (Cl. Ex. 2)   
Dr. Rayburn performed a trigger point injection on February 17, 2020.  By 
February 24, Ms. Marrs reported some relief, but still had continued pain.  (JE1, pp. 82-
85) 
On February 20, 2020, Dr. Harbach authored a missive to defendants.  Dr. 
Harbach noted that he had scheduled Ms. Marrs for surgery in the summer of 2017 due 
to her continuing neck and radicular arm pain.  However, she had medical issues that 
prevented her from having the surgery.  He stated he would place her at maximum 
medical improvement (MMI) on February 28, 2018 because that is the point where she 
had finished all the injections and reached a steady state.  She had a maintenance 
trigger point and other injections after that point, but it was his opinion that they all just 
kept her at a steady state.  Dr. Harbach utilized The Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides.  

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 6 
He placed her in the DRE cervical category II, found in Table 15-5 and assigned 8 
percent permanent impairment of the whole person.  He noted she had a clinically 
significant radiculopathy and an imaging study that demonstrated a herniated disk at the 
level and on the side that would be expected.  Dr. Harbach reviewed the January 29, 
2020 FCE.  He recommended the FCE recommendations which placed her in the light 
duty category be followed.  He also recommended that she perform her home exercise 
program daily.   (JE2, pp. 106-107) 
At the request of the defendants, Charles D. Mooney, M.D., conducted an 
independent medical evaluation (IME).  He issued a report on February 25, 2020.  Ms. 
Marrs reported daily headaches in the occipital frontal area.  Her headaches are 
improved with traction, TPI, massage, and therapy.  Ms. Marrs has constant pain in her 
neck, predominantly on the right side from the base of her skull.  Her pain radiates into 
her right shoulder blade area and occasionally towards her right and left shoulder.  She 
did not report any lumbar symptoms at the time of the exam.  The EMG studies were 
not available for Dr. Mooney to review.  Dr. Mooney diagnosed Ms. Marrs with chronic 
cervical pain consistent with aggravation of underlying cervical disc disease associated 
with radicular symptoms and chronic pain syndrome.  She also demonstrates evidence 
of chronic cervical arthropathy and has responded minimally to rhizotomy and other 
international pain techniques.  Dr. Mooney opined that these conditions are related to 
the July 28, 2014 work injury.  He placed Ms. Marrs at MMI for the work injury as of 
February 13, 2017; at the time that she declined surgical intervention by Dr. Harbach.  
For her cervical spine, he placed Ms. Marrs in the DRE cervical category II and 
assigned 8 percent permanent impairment of the whole person related to the work 
injury.  Dr. Mooney opined that Ms. Marrs should reconsider cervical fusion as 
discussed by multiple evaluators.  He felt it would be reasonable to improve her 
condition and her ability to function and have her overall pain decrease.  However, he 
stated that it is unlikely that a fusion would resolve all of her symptoms which appear to 
be multifactorial including chronic headaches and chronic pain syndrome.  He felt she 
should be evaluated for potential Botox treatments which may be more effective in 
controlling her headaches which may allow for the weaning of opiate medications.  Dr. 
Mooney confirmed that the FCE appeared to be valid and consistent with her medical 
condition.  He believed that she could function at a higher level if she would undergo the 
recommended surgery.  He stated that her permanent restrictions place her in the light-
duty capacity.  Specifically, maximum rare lift of 20 pounds, a maximum occasional lift 
of 10 pounds.  He stated that Ms. Marrs would be unable to perform elevated work 
activities, requiring repeated reaching above her shoulder on the right.  Dr. Mooney 
does believe that Ms. Marrs is employable.  (Def. Ex. D) 
At the request of the defendants, Lana Sellner issued an employability report on 
March 2, 2020.  The defendants did not request that Ms. Sellner speak with or interview 
Ms. Marrs.  Unfortunately, the vocational opinion is based primarily on records provided 
to Ms. Sellner.  Ms. Sellner concluded that the FCE restrictions place Ms. Marrs in the 
light work category.  Ms. Sellner set forth her understanding of Ms. Marrs’ work history.  
She noted that Ms. Marrs had not explored or applied for any job opportunities since her 
injury.  Ms. Sellner feels that Ms. Marrs has many transferable skills.  She conducted 
labor market research to identify jobs within the Ottumwa, Iowa area for Ms. Marrs.  Ms. 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 7 
Sellner identified 16 available positions for Ms. Marrs, including customer service or 
sales representative, monitor technician, registration clerk, client service representative, 
nurse case manager, scheduling coordinator, coordinator care plan nurse, weekend 
receptionist, care coach, telephonic specialty medication review nurse, cardiovascular 
data entry abstractor, clinical reviewer, and customer service care coordinator.  Based 
upon her research, Ms. Sellner believes Ms. Marrs would be able to utilize her RN 
degree in a nondirect patient care manner.  Ms. Sellner feels that Ms. Marrs has non 
office and computer skills that are assets in many different industries.  The labor market 
survey identified part-time and full-time jobs for Ms. Marrs.  She listed some job 
accommodations to assist with Ms. Marrs’ physical limitations for her to be successful.  
She also identified jobs that could be performed from home.  Ms. Sellner felt Ms. Marrs 
would be considered a valuable candidate in the snapshots of jobs she listed.  Ms. 
Sellner stated that the jobs she listed are available within the recommended FCE 
guidelines, with or without accommodations.  (Def. Ex. E, pp. 11-17) 
On May 11, 2020, Dr. Rayburn performed thoracic TPIs.  He also recommended 
continued physical therapy and medications.  (JE1, pp. 86-92) 
Ms. Marrs returned to Dr. Rayburn on August 10, 2020.  She reported that her 
pain had gotten significantly worse over the past few weeks.  She was there for right 
upper thoracic/cervical TPI.  He advised her to return in three months.  (JE1, pp. 94-
101) 
Ms. Marrs testified that she has not undergone the fusion surgery because every 
surgeon has told her that the surgery would not alleviate the pain in her neck, nor would 
it terminate her headaches.  The surgeons have advised her that the operation could 
help with her arm pain, but not her neck, shoulder, and head pain.  Because the crux of 
her pain is in her neck and head, Ms. Marrs feels that the risks of the surgery do not 
outweigh the potential benefits.  (Testimony)     
At the time of hearing, Ms. Marrs continued what was described as maintenance 
treatment with Dr. Rayburn.  This includes ablation and trigger injections.  She also 
used medications such as Lyrica, methocarbamol, hydrocodone, ibuprofen, and 
Lidocaine patches.  Ms. Marrs testified that she has bad days and really bad days, she 
does not have great days.  When she increases her dosage of methocarbamol she is 
very slow, very sleepy, lethargic, and has difficulty communicating; it can also basically 
knock her out.  Activities that trigger really bad days include sitting, or standing for long 
periods of time, doing any type of manipulation with her hands or having to hold things.  
She also utilizes a traction machine two to three times per day for 20 to 30 minutes at a 
time.  On bad pain days she could be in traction six times per day.  She also gets some 
relief using heating pads.  She keeps a heating pad in her car, in her bedroom, and at 
her desk chair.  Ms. Marrs was concerned that sitting for such a long period of time 
during the hearing would flare her symptoms, so she scheduled a physical therapy 
appointment for later in the day to try to work through her increased symptoms.     
 
 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 8 
Ms. Marrs last saw Dr. Rayburn approximately one week prior to the hearing.  
She received multiple TPIs in her neck and upper thoracic area.  They helped her quite 
a bit with her pain and relief in her movement.  She has been receiving these injections 
approximately every three months and will continue to receive injections and ablations 
into the future as needed.  She will also continue her medications and physical therapy.  
(Testimony) 
Ms. Marrs participated in the hearing from her home.  At the start of the hearing, 
Ms. Marrs was sitting in a reclined desk chair.  Midway through the hearing, she 
experienced technical difficulties and had to move to a different location in her home.  At 
that point, she was able to sit in her recliner, lying back.  Although Ms. Marrs does have 
a computer at her house, she rarely uses it.  She is only able to use it for a very short 
time and then has to take a break.  Simply using the keyboard, causes her arms to give 
out and she develops tightness in her neck.  Her mobility decreases after just a few 
minutes of use.  Ms. Marrs is only able to sit in a desk chair that is not reclined for 
approximately ten to fifteen minutes due to the pressure that it puts on her neck.  When 
talking on the phone Ms. Marrs uses a headset because her hands go numb and her 
hands feel weak which increases the pain in her neck and head.  Ms. Marrs is not able 
to clean her own home.  Her aunt comes over once a week and cleans her home for 
her.  Her three teenage boys help with daily and weekly chores.  Her husband takes 
care of the laundry and any other household duties.  Ms. Marrs does not do any out of 
town driving, her husband takes her to out-of-town doctors’ appointments.  (Testimony)        
Ms. Marrs discussed the FCE that she underwent.  Her husband drove her to 
and from the appointment.  The FCE took approximately two hours.  She felt completely 
wiped out after the testing and her pain was increased for several days following the 
testing.  The FCE indicates that she may only sit rarely, which is 1 to 5 percent of the 
day.  The FCE indicates that she may only stand rarely.  Standing causes her problems 
due to the compression of her spine which creates numbness in her right arm, right 
shoulder as well as increased pain which leads to increased headaches.  This happens 
after only standing for approximately five minutes.  The FCE estimated that Ms. Marrs 
could walk occasionally, which is 6 to 33 percent of the day.  Ms. Marrs testified that she 
is able to walk no more than ten to fifteen minutes at a time.  If she walks longer than 
that, then her pain and weakness increase and she will need to lie down in her traction.  
If she is in her chair or in a standing position for five minutes, then she needs to take a 
break for an hour or two, she usually goes right into traction.  She spends most of her 
day lying down in her recliner or in her bed.  The FCE also indicates that Ms. Marrs 
cannot use her right arm for reaching or for elevated work.  Ms. Marrs feels that this is 
accurate.  For example, she cannot even hold her right arm over her head to do her 
hair.  The FCE also indicated that she may use her left arm only on an occasional basis.  
When Ms. Marrs uses her left arm, then her neck muscle tense up, the tightness and 
pain increases and there is weakness in her left arm.  (Testimony)   
There is a dispute regarding the appropriate commencement date in this case.  
Dr. Harbach placed Ms. Marrs at MMI on February 28, 2018.  This is the date claimant’s 
treatment plateaued; I find the treatment after this date was maintenance.  I find the 
proper commencement date in this case is February 28, 2018.       

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 9 
I find the impairment ratings set forth by Dr. Harbach and Dr. Mooney carry 
greater weight than the rating from Dr. Stoken.   
I find the restrictions set forth by the FCE and adopted by Dr. Kanis, Dr. Harbach, 
Dr. Stoken, and Dr. Mooney are persuasive.  Therefore, I find that as a result of the July 
28, 2014 work injury Ms. Marrs now has permanent restrictions as set forth in the FCE.     
Ms. Marrs was unable to return to her job at Regional Care Hospital Partners, 
Inc.  She believes she is not able to work at any of her previous work.  She applied for 
and was approved for Social Security Disability (SSD).  The list of impairments in the 
SSD decision include: obesity, degenerative disc disease of the cervical and lumbar 
spine, carpal tunnel syndrome, osteoarthritis, anxiety disorder NOS, panic disorder 
without agoraphobia, and chronic PTSD.  Her primary impairments are her neck, 
headaches, arm weakness and thoracic.  Ms. Marrs testified that at the SSD, they 
focused on her neck condition.  (Testimony; Cl. Ex. 6, p. 107) 
Ms. Marrs was never asked to speak with the vocational counselor in this case.  
Ms. Marrs did look at the jobs Ms. Sellner listed.  Some of the jobs listed are jobs that 
Ms. Marrs previously performed; Ms. Marrs knows that she is no longer physically 
capable of performing those jobs.  Ms. Marrs does not believe she is capable of 
performing any of the jobs identified by the counselor.  However, since her work injury, 
Ms. Marrs has not made any attempts to secure employment because she does not feel 
that there are any jobs that she is capable of performing.  She believes that there are 
not any jobs that she is physically able to perform with any level of accuracy.  She is not 
aware of any jobs that would allow her to lie down for 90 percent of her day.  Ms. Marrs 
feels she is not capable of performing work-from-home jobs either.  For example, she 
needs to be in her traction machine three to four times a day for thirty minutes each.  
She is not capable of sitting or standing for any long periods of time.  (Testimony) 
At the time of the review-reopening hearing Ms. Marrs was 48 years old.  She 
graduated from high school in 1990.  She attended classes at the University of 
Nebraska in Lincoln and the University of Phoenix for business management, but she 
did not obtain a degree.  In 2013, Ms. Marrs obtained her R.N. with an associate’s 
degree in nursing.  (Testimony) Ms. Marrs’ testimony demonstrates that she is an 
intelligent, pleasant, forthright, and well-spoken woman.  During the hearing she 
appeared to be physically uncomfortable.     
Ms. Marrs has worked in a variety of jobs.  While Ms. Marrs attended college she 
worked as a waitress.  Her first full-time job was for Newell Rubbermaid where she 
worked as a 401(k) administrator.  She traveled across the country providing 401(k) 
information to employees, converting them to 401(k) plans and performed data entry.  
She performed this work for around three years.  For the next five years she worked for 
Edward Jones as a branch office administrator, where she performed data entry and 
dealt with customers and clients via telephone.  (Testimony) 
 
 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 10 
For approximately four years Ms. Marrs was the co-owner of a landscaping 
business.  She owned this business for approximately four years with her then husband 
until the time they separated.  Her duties included installations, ordering inventory, 
managing locations, and a small retail operation.  Her time was predominately spent 
doing installations and landscape purchasing for wholesalers and picking up product.  
This work ended when she separated from her husband.  (Testimony) 
Ms. Marrs worked as a pharmacy technician for approximately five years.  In this 
position she stood all day long.  Her work included distributing medications, putting 
away inventory that came in several times per week.  She was also responsible for 
getting the nursing home medication travel boxes ready and distributing medication that 
would go to the nursing home.  She would also get any grocery items ready for delivery.  
She left this job to attend nursing school.  (Testimony)   
After graduating from nursing school, Ms. Marrs’ first job was at Mahaska Health 
Partnership in Oskaloosa, Iowa.  She also worked as an ICU telemetry nurse at 
Regional Care.  She was responsible for patient care which ranged from bathing, 
ambulating to the restroom, changing, wound care, medication administration, NG 
tubes, telemetry monitoring, post-op cardiac catheterization care, charting and reading 
telemetry strips.  Her duties included a lot of heavy lifting and a lot of standing.   
(Testimony)     
Ms. Marrs does not believe she is physically capable of performing the 401(k) job 
that she previously held.  She believes she cannot perform data entry because she is 
not able to sit at her computer and type for more than five minutes without taking an 
hour or two break.  She also testified that she is not able to sit in a traditional desk chair.  
At the review-reopening hearing, Ms. Marrs sat in a reclined-back desk chair with a 
heating pad and her legs elevated.  Additionally, she is not able to travel like she was 
previously required to do for her 401(k) job.  (Testimony)  
Ms. Marrs feels she is not able to perform an administrative assistant job at 
Edward Jones.  She is not able to sit at a computer for any length of time.  She spends 
90 percent of her day lying down.  She also testified that because of the work injury she 
is not physically capable of performing the work of a pharmacy technician.  Likewise, 
she is not physically capable of performing her landscaping job.  (Testimony)          
Ms. Marrs reviewed Ms. Sellner’s report.  Ms. Marrs does not believe that she is 
capable of performing any of those jobs.  Additionally, she does not believe that she is 
capable of returning to an in-person or online classroom to complete her degrees from 
University of Nebraska or University of Phoenix.  (Testimony).   
Unfortunately, the years of treatment, including RFAs and TPIs have not resolved 
Ms. Marrs’ symptoms.  Prior to the July 28, 2014, injury Ms. Marrs did not have any 
permanent restrictions placed on her activities.  As the result of the work injury, Ms. 
Marrs has substantial permanent restrictions placed on her activities.  The evidence 
clearly demonstrates that Ms. Marrs is no longer physically capable of performing work 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 11 
at the levels necessary to perform her prior work at Regional Care Hospital or many of 
her prior jobs.     
This is a difficult case because I find Mr. Marrs’ testimony regarding her ongoing 
symptoms and physical capabilities to be credible.  She has difficulty with standing, 
sitting, and walking.  She spends 90 percent of her time lying down and anywhere from 
one and a half to three hours per day in traction.  However, the defendants have offered 
a vocational report which lists a snapshot of jobs that are in Ms. Marrs’ geographical 
area and fit within the FCE’s light work category.  This vocational report is unrebutted.  It 
is not known for certain whether Ms. Marrs is capable of performing the jobs provided 
by Ms. Sellner because Ms. Marrs has not made any attempts to reenter the workforce.         
Considering Ms. Marrs’ age, educational background, employment history, ability 
to retrain, length of healing period, permanent impairment, and permanent restrictions, 
and the other industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that 
she has sustained 80 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of her work 
injury with the defendant employer.  This entitles claimant to a finding that she is entitled 
to 400 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.     
I find that claimant failed to establish a prima facie case that there are not any 
jobs or well-known branches of the labor market for which claimant would be capable of 
obtaining and retaining employment.  Even if claimant had established a prima facie 
case, I find that with the unrebutted report of the vocational counsel, defendant 
produced sufficient and convincing evidence to rebut the claimant’s evidence.  
Therefore, I find that claimant ultimately failed to prove by a preponderance of the 
evident that she is not currently capable of performing any substantially gainful 
employment within a well-known branch of the labor market.      
We now turn to the issue of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of 
the deputy hearing the case.  I find that claimant was generally successful in her claim 
and therefore an assessment of costs is appropriate.  Claimant is seeking costs in the 
amount of $100.00 for the filing fee in this case.  I find that this is an appropriate cost 
and assess defendants’ costs in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars 
($100.00). 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND REASONING 
Claimant brings this review-reopening proceeding.  A review-reopening 
proceeding is appropriate whenever there has been a substantial change in condition 
since a prior arbitration award or settlement.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387 (Iowa 2009).  Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), this agency is authorized to 
reopen a prior award or settlement to inquire about whether the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation.  Id. 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made.  The 
change may be either economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 12 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review-
reopening.  Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated since the 
time of the initial award or settlement.  Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 
N.W.2d 109 (1957).  A failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated 
originally may also constitute a change of condition.  Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar 
Falls, Iowa, 272 N.W.2d 24 (Iowa App. 1978).  In the present case, the parties 
stipulated that agree that the issue of permanency is now ripe for determination.  Thus, I 
conclude there has been a change of condition since the original award.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 13 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Ms. Marrs has not demonstrated 
by a preponderance of the evidence that she is permanently and totally disabled.  
Unfortunately, Ms. Sellner has not applied for any jobs since the work injury.  Although 
Ms. Sellner has substantial restrictions placed on her activities, no medical provider has 
opined that she is completely precluded from returning to work.  Rather, all the doctors 
have stated that she may work with the restrictions set forth in the FCE.  I conclude that 
claimant has failed to demonstrate that she is wholly disabled from performing work that 
the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  I find she has sustained 80 percent 
loss of future earning capacity as a result of her work injury with the defendant 
employer.  This entitles claimant to a finding that she is entitled to 400 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits.   
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34.  Based on the above findings of fact, I 
conclude these benefits shall commence on February 28, 2018.      
We now turn to the odd-lot doctrine.  In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 
101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that 
doctrine a worker becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker 
incapable of obtaining employment in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An 
odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled if the only services the worker can perform are “so 
limited in quality, dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable market for them 
does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  Even under the 
odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I find that claimant failed to establish a prima 
facie case that there are not any jobs or well-known branches of the labor market for 
which claimant would be capable of obtaining and retaining employment.  Even if 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 14 
claimant had established a prima facie case, I find that with the unrebutted report of the 
vocational counsel, defendant produced sufficient and convincing evidence to rebut the 
claimant’s evidence.  Therefore, I find that claimant ultimately failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she is not currently capable of performing any 
substantially gainful employment within a well-known branch of the labor market. 
Finally, each party submits a statement of costs and seeks reimbursement of 
those costs.  Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of the agency.  Iowa Code 
section 86.40.  We now turn to the issue of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy hearing the case.  I find that claimant was generally successful 
in her claim and therefore an assessment of costs is appropriate.  Claimant is seeking 
costs in the amount of $100.00 for the filing fee in this case.  I find that this is an 
appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Thus, defendants are assessed costs in the 
amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred fifty-nine 
and 49/100 dollars ($559.49). 
Defendant shall pay 400 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of February 28, 2018. 
Defendant shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
Defendants are assessed costs in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars 
($100.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2), and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _11th _ day of June, 2021. 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

MARRS V. REGIONAL CARE HOSPITAL PARTNERS, INC. 
Page 15 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
 
John Dougherty (via WCES) 
Charles Blades (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the 
next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
