Case Number: 22700508.01
Case Title:  VALENTINO, STEFANO V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Valentino Stefano-22700508.01M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
STEFANO ENRICO VALENTINO, 
File No. 22700508.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE  
DECISION 
 
Employer, 
SEDGWICK, 
Headnote:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
On May 26, 2022, Stefano Enrico Valentino filed an application for alternate care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 and agency rule 876 IAC 4.48. The defendants, 
employer Wells Enterprises, Inc., and insurance carrier Sedgwick, answered. The 
defendants accept liability for Valentino’s left arm injury and dispute his application for 
alternate care. 
The undersigned presided over an alternate care hearing held by telephone and 
recorded on June 10, 2022. That recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding under agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(12).1 Valentino represented himself and 
participated personally. The defendants participated through attorney Steven T. Durick. 
The record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 1;2 and 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A and B. 
                                                 
1 The phone call dropped during the hearing, disconnecting the presiding deputy from the call, so the 
audio recording in this case consists of two parts. 
2 Exhibit 1 is an audio recording Valentino made as a voice memorandum to himself after an appointment 
with Dr. Douglas Martin, an authorized care provider for his work injury. Valentino did not submit the 
recording as a proposed exhibit before the hearing as directed in the agency order setting this case for 
hearing and agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(9). However, the defendants did not object to him playing the 
audio recording at hearing after laying foundation for its genesis. The undersigned ordered him to submit 
a copy of the audio recording as Exhibit 1 to the agency and defense counsel after the hearing. 
Instructions for doing so are included under the “Order” heading below. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jun-10  11:29:41     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

VALENTINO V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSU E  
The issue under consideration is whether Valentino is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of care with orthopedist Dr. Matthew Silisio, M.D. 
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
Valentino sustained an injury while working for Wells Enterprises to his left arm, 
The defendants arranged care under Iowa Code section 85.27 with Dr. Douglas Martin. 
The care included physical therapy to be followed by a word-hardening program during 
which he would gradually ease into the full workload he had before the injury. 
(Testimony; Ex. B) 
Valentino continued to experience pain in his elbow. Dr. Martin told him that his 
expectation to recover to a point where he had no pain in his elbow was unrealistic. 
Valentino requested a referral to an orthopedic specialist. Dr. Martin responded by 
stating that if he referred Valentino to an orthopedic specialist in the Siouxland area, the 
provider would laugh at him because of his unreasonable expectations for a pain-free 
outcome. Dr. Martin refused to provide a referral to an orthopedist. (Testimony) 
Dr. Martin’s statements are presented for the truth of the matter asserted—that 
any orthopedic specialist in the greater Siouxland area would laugh at Valentino’s desire 
to be pain free and find his expectation of such ridiculous—and are therefore hearsay. 
Hearsay evidence is admissible in administrative proceedings such as this one with its 
status as hearsay going to the weight the fact-finder gives it. Here, Dr. Martin’s 
statements about how all orthopedic specialists in the Siouxland area would react to 
Valentino’s expectation to be pain free is given little weight and is not persuasive. There 
is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude all orthopedic specialists 
in the greater Siouxland area would laugh at Valentino’s expectation to be pain free 
after care because they find the expectation ridiculous. 
Valentino contacted Sedgwick, seeking a referral to an orthopedic specialist after 
Dr. Martin refused to provide one. Then he applied to the agency for alternate care. At 
hearing, he explained that he wants alternate care with an orthopedic specialist outside 
the Siouxland area because of Dr. Martin’s statement regarding the response providers 
in the area would give him. He specifically wants care with Dr. Silisio, an orthopedic 
specialist who practices in Omaha, Nebraska. 
The defendants do not object to Valentino’s request for care with an orthopedic 
specialist. They scheduled an appointment with Dr. Ryan Meis, an orthopedic surgeon 
based out of Dakota Dunes, South Dakota, with The Center for Neurosciences, 
Orthopaedics & Spine (CNOS), to take place at Bollin Chiropractic & Acupuncture Clinic 
in LeMars, Iowa. That appointment is set for June 22, 2022. 

VALENTINO V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), our 
legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the 
competing interests of their employers.” Id. at 770–71. “Reduced to its essentials, 
section 85.27 requires an insurer to furnish reasonable medical services and supplies 
and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.” Stone 
Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003). Such employer-provided 
care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without 
undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties 
cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, the agency “may, upon application and 
reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436. Because “the employer’s 
obligation under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not 
desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, 
standing alone, is not enough to find such care unreasonable. Id. 
The evidence shows the conservative care provided and overseen by Dr. Martin 
reached a plateau. Valentino has ongoing pain. After he informed the defendants he 
wanted to see an orthopedic specialist because of his ongoing symptoms, they 
arranged care for him with an orthopedic specialist, Dr. Meis. There is an insufficient 
basis in the evidence from which to conclude Dr. Meis will find Valentino’s hope to be 
pain free ridiculous or laugh at him for it. The care with Dr. Meis, as arranged by the 
defendants, is therefore reasonable.  
For these reasons, Valentino has failed to meet his burden of proof on 
entitlement to alternate care. The weight of the evidence shows the care the defendants 
have arranged with Dr. Meis is reasonable under the circumstances. Valentino’s 
application for alternate care is therefore denied. 
OR D ER  
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Valentino’s application for alternate care is DENIED. 

VALENTINO V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
2) Valentino shall mail a copy of the audio recording admitted into evidence as 
Exhibit 1 to both of the following: 
 
a) Steven Durick 
Peddicord Wharton, LLP 
6800 Lake Drive, Suite 125 
West Des Moines, IA 50266 
 
b) Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation 
ATTN:  Deputy Humphrey 
150 Des Moines Street 
Des Moines, IA 50309 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in a district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 10th day of June, 2022. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Stefano Valentino (via WCES) 
Steven Durick (via WCES) 
 
 
