Case Number: 20006595.02
Case Title:  SMITH, KENNETH V. H.D. SUPPLY MANAGEMENT, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Smith, Kenneth-20006595.02.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 23-1656 
Filed September 18, 2024 
 
 
H.D. SUPPLY MANAGEMENT, INC. and NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
 
Petitioners-Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
KENNETH E. SMITH, 
 
Respondent-Appellant. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Scott J. Beattie, Judge. 
 
 
An injured employee appeals an interlocutory district court order staying 
enforcement of a workers’ compensation award pending judicial review under Iowa 
Code section 17A.19(5) (2023) and refusing to enter judgment on the award under 
section 86.42.  APPEAL DISMISSED. 
 
 
Nate Willems of Rush & Nicholson, P.L.C., Cedar Rapids, for appellant. 
 
Kathryn L. Hartnett of Prentiss Grant, LLC, Omaha, Nebraska, for 
appellees. 
 
 
Considered by Schumacher, P.J., and Ahlers and Langholz, JJ.

 
2
LANGHOLZ, Judge. 
 
In this interlocutory appeal, the parties ask us to decide whether the district 
court correctly granted a stay of a workers’ compensation award pending 
completion of a judicial-review proceeding that is now complete.  And they want to 
know if the court properly refused to enter judgment on that award, which has now 
been reversed and remanded to the workers’ compensation commissioner.  But 
because the judicial-review proceeding has ended and the workers’ compensation 
award has been reversed and remanded, this interlocutory appeal is moot.  Any 
ruling would not affect either party.  And this appeal does not satisfy the public-
importance exception to mootness because deciding it would provide little 
additional guidance on the law governing stays and enforcement of workers’ 
compensation awards during judicial-review proceedings.  So we abide by our duty 
to refrain from answering moot questions and dismiss this appeal. 
I. 
 
In March 2023, the workers’ compensation commissioner awarded Kenneth 
Smith benefits for an injury while working at H.D. Supply Management, Inc.  The 
commissioner found that Smith suffered an unscheduled work-related injury to his 
shoulder and arm under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2023) and that he was 
permanently and totally disabled.  And so, the commissioner awarded Smith 
benefits of $487.87 to be paid weekly, beginning from the date of the injury.  It also 
awarded penalty benefits of $19,000 because H.D. Supply and its insurer, New 
Hampshire Insurance Company, unreasonably denied Smith’s claim for benefits.1  
 
1 The insurer, New Hampshire Insurance, is also a party to this proceeding.  But 
for readability we will refer to both collectively as H.D. Supply. 

 
3
And it ordered H.D. Supply to reimburse Smith for his medical expenses and 
mileage, the cost of the independent medical evaluation, and the costs of the 
arbitration proceeding and hearing transcript. 
 
H.D. Supply petitioned for judicial review of the commissioner’s award.  Its 
two-page petition contained little explanation of its grounds for review aside from 
conclusory claims that the award was not supported by substantial evidence; was 
based on an irrational, illogical or wholly unjustifiable interpretation and application 
of law; and was otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of 
discretion.  See Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f), (l), (m), (n). 
 
Thirty-three days later, Smith applied for entry of judgment on the award 
under Iowa Code section 86.42.2  He argued that he was entitled to judgment 
because H.D. Supply did not post a bond within thirty days of filing its petition for 
judicial review to stay the award under Iowa Code section 86.26(2).  See Iowa 
Code § 86.42 (authorizing judgment on presentment of “file-stamped copy of an 
order or decision of the commissioner . . . which has not had execution or 
enforcement stayed as provided in section 17A.19, subsection 5, or section 86.26, 
subsection 2”); id. § 86.26(2) (staying “execution or enforcement of a decision or 
order of the workers’ compensation commissioner if the party seeking judicial 
review posts a bond securing any compensation awarded pursuant to the decision 
or order with the district court within thirty days of filing the petition”).  Smith 
 
2 Effective July 1, 2023—after Smith filed his motion—section 86.42 was 
transferred to section 10A.330 without making any changes to its text as part of a 
government reorganization statute.  See 2023 Iowa Acts, ch. 19, § 1477(1)(ab).  
The rest of chapter 86 was also transferred chapter 10A.  See id. § 1477(1).  To 
be consistent with the citations used by the district court and the parties on appeal, 
we continue to use the citations in effect at the time Smith filed his motion. 

 
4
calculated the amount of weekly total disability benefits and interest that H.D. 
Supply still owed under the award as of the date of his application for entry of 
judgment.  He also added in the penalty benefits and medical and litigation 
expenses he was awarded.  He thus requested entry of judgment against H.D. 
Supply “in the total amount of $77,942.08 with interest continuing to accrue on 
unpaid permanent total disability benefits at 2.15%.” 
 
About three hours later, H.D. Supply moved to stay enforcement of the 
award under Iowa Code sections 86.26(2) or 17A.19(5).  H.D. Supply conceded 
that it was three days late in posting bond under section 86.26(2), but asked for 
permission to do so “[i]n the interest of: judicial economy, having this case be heard 
by this Court on the merits, justice, and equity.”  Alternatively, H.D. Supply argued 
that a stay was appropriate under section 17A.19(5) because it was likely to prevail 
on the merits, it would suffer irreparable injury if Smith could not repay the award 
if the award is reversed after being paid, Smith would not be substantially harmed 
by delayed payment, and there is significant public interest in deciding the proper 
statutory interpretation. 
 
The district court eventually heard argument on the dueling requests.  But 
it did not receive any testimony or other evidence.  Nor did it have the 
administrative record before the workers’ compensation commissioner—that 
record was not filed by the commissioner until several months after the court ruled.  
See generally id. § 17A.19(6) (requiring the agency to “transmit to the reviewing 
court the original or a certified copy of the entire record of any contested case 
which may be the subject of the petition” for judicial review). 

 
5
 
In September 2023, the court granted H.D Supply’s motion to stay the 
award during the judicial-review proceeding under section 17A.19(5) and denied 
Smith’s application to enter judgment on the award.  The court reasoned: 
In this case, there is a likelihood that the Petitioner will prevail on the 
appeal.  Furthermore, the Petitioner would suffer irreparable harm if 
the judgment were to be entered at this juncture because they would 
likely be unable to recuperate the award payment if they prevailed 
on appeal.  The Respondent will also not be prejudiced in a stay 
because he would not have received judgment if the bond was 
posted and the Petitioners appear solvent and capable of paying an 
award at the appeal’s conclusion.  As such, the Court concludes that 
a stay under Iowa Code section 17A.19(5) is supported. 
 
 
Smith then sought interlocutory review of the district court order.  The 
supreme court granted his application and transferred the case to our court.  In his 
appeal, Smith makes two main arguments that the district court abused its 
discretion in granting the stay.  First, he argues that the court made its findings—
especially on irreparable harm—without having any evidence on which to base 
them and thus improperly “listened to a mere allegation from an employer and 
adopted it.”  Second, he argues the court did not follow the governing precedent 
on considering stays pending judicial review of workers’ compensation awards: 
Grinnell College v. Osborn, 751 N.W.2d 396 (Iowa 2008). 
 
In most interlocutory appeals, proceedings in the district court would have 
stopped while this appellate process plays out.  See Iowa R. App. P. 6.104(2) (“An 
order granting an appeal under this rule will stay further proceedings in the court 
below . . . .”).  But here, the supreme court ordered that the district court could 
continue its “proceedings related to the petition for judicial review” so long as it did 
“not rule on any issues directly related to its” order granting the stay and denying 

 
6
entry of judgment.  And so, the district court proceedings on the merits of H.D. 
Supply’s judicial-review petition continued on.   
 
In April 2024, the district court ruled on the merits of H.D. Supply’s petition.  
The court first held that Smith’s arm injury and shoulder injury were both work-
related—rejecting H.D. Supply’s argument that the arm was “not injured due to the 
work injury, but as an incidental result of [Smith’s] shoulder surgery.”  But the court 
still reversed and remanded the award back to the workers’ compensation 
commissioner because the commissioner had awarded compensation for an 
unscheduled injury rather than as separate scheduled injuries.  The court reasoned 
that Smith’s injuries “are parallel to those in” a supreme court case decided a few 
weeks before its ruling, which held that arm and shoulder injuries should be 
compensated separately as scheduled injuries rather than as an unscheduled 
injury.  See Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676, 683 (Iowa 
2024).  So the court concluded that “[t]he commissioner should consider Smith’s 
injuries consistent with the Iowa Supreme Court’s Bridgestone decision.”   
 
Neither party appealed that district court order.  And according to Smith’s 
statement to us, which H.D. Supply does not dispute, as of August 2024, his case 
was still pending before the commissioner after the parties submitted additional 
briefing about “Smith’s entitlement to permanent benefits consistent with 
Bridgestone.” 
 
We asked the parties for supplemental briefing to address the effect on this 
interlocutory appeal of the district court’s ruling reversing and remanding the 
award.  Both parties urged that it has no effect and this appeal is not moot.  Smith 
also contends that even if it is moot, we should decide it under the public-

 
7
importance exception to mootness because whether injured workers should be 
paid “benefits which are not contested or disputed” during judicial-review 
proceedings “is a matter of public importance” and “likely to recur unless this Court 
requires a workers’ compensation carrier to pay the injured workers the benefits 
which they have not contested on appeal.” 
II. 
 
“Courts exist to decide cases, not academic questions of law.”  Riley Drive 
Ent. I, Inc. v. Reynolds, 970 N.W.2d 289, 296 (Iowa 2022) (cleaned up).  So as a 
matter of “judicial restraint,” we generally “do not decide cases when the underlying 
controversy is moot.”  Grinnell, 751 N.W.2d at 398 (cleaned up).  A dispute is moot 
when our decision would have no “force or effect in the underlying controversy.”  
Id. (cleaned up).  And a case can become moot while pending on appeal if 
“because of changed circumstances,” our “decision will no longer matter.”  Homan 
v. Branstad, 864 N.W.2d 321, 328 (Iowa 2015).  So we “may consider matters 
technically outside the district court record in determining a question of mootness.”  
Riley Drive, 970 N.W.2d at 296.   
 
Even when neither party contests mootness, “[i]t is our duty on our own 
motion to refrain from determining moot questions” unless the case fits within an 
exception to mootness.  Homan, 864 N.W.2d at 328 (cleaned up).   One such 
exception is the public-importance exception.  See Riley Drive, 970 N.W.2d at 298.  
In deciding whether to apply the public-importance exception, we consider: “(1) the 
private or public nature of the issue; (2) the desirability of an authoritative 
adjudication to guide public officials in their future conduct; (3) the likelihood of the 

 
8
reccurrence of the issue; and (4) the likelihood the issue will recur yet evade 
appellate review.”  Id. (cleaned up); see also Grinnell, 751 N.W.2d at 399. 
 
This interlocutory appeal is moot.  Nothing we might decide could affect 
anything because the judicial-review proceeding appealed from is already over and 
the award sought to be enforced has been reversed.  Cf. Grinnell, 751 N.W.2d at 
399 (holding that appeal of entry of judgment on workers’ compensation award 
and denial of stay pending judicial review was moot after the judicial review 
proceeding concluded with affirmance of the award).  Suppose we agreed with 
Smith that the district court should not have stayed the workers’ compensation 
award while the judicial-review proceeding was pending and reversed that ruling.  
What relief would that give Smith?  None.  Even without any decision by our court, 
the stay already has no continuing effect because it only operated while the 
judicial-review proceeding was pending, and that proceeding has ended.  And the 
stay prevented enforcement of an award that no longer exists now that the district 
court has reversed and remanded that award. 
 
For the same reason, even if we were to hold that the district court should 
have entered judgment on that award back in September 2023, the court could not 
do so now.  The award has been reversed and remanded.  Smith’s claims are now 
pending before the workers’ compensation commissioner.  And the district court 
lacks authority under section 86.42 to enforce a commissioner’s award that no 
longer exists.  Accord Iowa Code § 10A.330 (2024). 
Smith contends that “[t]his case still presents a justiciable controversy,” 
explaining “[t]he gist is the fact that aspects of the original agency decision which 
were not appealed by [H.D. Supply] result in monetary payments to [Smith], and 

 
9
[H.D. Supply has] paid [Smith] nothing.”  And so, he argues for various alternative 
amounts that he believes he is still owed regardless of how the commissioner 
resolves the remaining disputes between the parties in a new award.  But Smith 
misunderstands the issues that are before us in this appeal: dueling requests to 
stay or enforce a specific award that no longer exists.  The district court’s ruling on 
the judicial-review petition reversed and remanded the entire award back to the 
commissioner—the decretal language in its judgment (“IT IS THEREFORE 
ORDERED that [the] worker[s’] compensation commissioner’s decision is 
REVERSED AND REMANDED”) does not carve out any part of the award that 
was not reversed and remanded. 
And whatever the merits of Smith’s argument that he should be able to 
request entry of judgment for some portion of the award that was not disputed by 
H.D. Supply in its petition for judicial review, that is not the judgment that he 
requested in the district court.  He sought entry of judgment for the total amount 
he calculated as being owed under the commissioner’s award on the date of his 
application.  And even if the award had not been reversed, he could not seek a 
different judgment for the first time on appeal from our court.3 
 
Smith also argues that we should still decide this appeal under the public-
importance exception to mootness.  But the issue he suggests would warrant 
application of that exception—whether injured workers should be paid at least 
some “benefits which are not contested or disputed” during a judicial-review 
proceeding contesting other benefits—is not before us in this appeal.  And while 
 
3 We have also considered H.D. Supply’s single paragraph of argument that the 
appeal is not moot.  It does not offer any other points that merit further discussion. 

 
10 
the issues he does properly raise in his original briefing may reoccur and evade 
appellate review, deciding them would provide little new guidance on any important 
issue.  The supreme court has already exercised its discretion to give guidance on 
stays of workers’ compensation awards under the public-importance exception to 
mootness in a similar case.  See Grinnell, 751 N.W.2d at 399–404.  Smith’s 
argument on appeal is mainly that the district court failed to properly follow that 
case, especially the supreme court’s admonitions that “the applicant for a stay 
during judicial review has the burden to establish the prerequisites for a stay and 
must submit evidence to the district court concerning all relevant statutory factors 
at a hearing” and that the court must “decide the request based on the evidence 
submitted by the parties.”  Id. at 403.  We could thus decide this appeal without 
plowing new ground.  And doing so would not give any significant guidance on 
these issues that would warrant an exception to mootness.4 
 
Because this appeal is moot and the public-importance exception does not 
apply, we refrain from deciding its purely academic questions and dismiss it.  Our 
dismissal does not disturb the district court’s ruling on the petition for judicial review 
nor the case pending before the workers’ compensation commissioner. 
 
APPEAL DISMISSED. 
 
4 Before we could get to the merits, we would also have to address whether Smith 
preserved error in the district court even though he never cited Grinnell nor argued 
that there was an insufficient evidentiary record—in his written resistance, at the 
hearing, or in a reconsideration motion under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.904 
after the ruling granting the stay.  See Meier v. Senecaut, 641 N.W.2d 532, 537 
(Iowa 2002) (“It is a fundamental doctrine of appellate review that issues must 
ordinarily be both raised and decided by the district court before we will decide 
them on appeal.”). 
