Case Number: 5066270
Case Title:  CHAVEZ, ROSA V. MS TECHNOLOGY LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Chavez Rosa-5066270d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROSA CHAVEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5066270 
MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WESTFIELD INSURANCE COMPANY,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1803, 1803.1 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a petition in arbitration.  The contested case was initiated when claimant, 
Rosa Chavez, filed her original notice and petition with the Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation.  The petition was filed on September 28, 2018.  Claimant alleged she 
sustained a work-related injury on February 5, 2018.  Claimant alleged the work injury 
affected her right shoulder, neck and right upper extremity.  (Original notice and petition, 
amended original notice and petition) 
For purposes of workers’ compensation, MS Technology, LLC, is insured by 
Westfield Insurance Company.  Defendants filed their answer on October 15, 2018.  
They also filed several subsequent amended answers.  (As a point of reference, the 
company was previously known as Stine Seed Company.) 
The hearing administrator scheduled the case for hearing on October 1, 2019.  
The hearing took place at Iowa Workforce Development in Des Moines, Iowa.  The 
undersigned appointed Ms. Janice Doud as the certified shorthand reporter.  She is the 
official custodian of the records and notes.  Ms. Melyna Mosher was sworn to translate 
the proceedings from English to Spanish. 
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Ms. Angie Umthun also testified.  She is 
the quality control director for the lab.  The parties offered joint exhibits1 through 5.  
Claimant offered exhibits 1 through 7.  Defendants offered exhibits A through E.  The 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-05  12:18:01     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
proffered exhibits were admitted as evidence in the case.  The original transcript was 
filed with the Division of Workers’ Compensation on October 18, 2019. 
Post-hearing briefs were filed on November 15, 2019.  The case was deemed 
fully submitted on that date. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties completed the designated hearing report.  The various stipulations 
are: 
1. There was the existence of an employer-employee relationship at the time of 
the injury; 
2. Claimant sustained an injury on February 5, 2018 which arose out of and in 
the course of her employment; 
3. The parties agree the injury resulted in both temporary and permanent 
disability to the left lower extremity; 
4. Temporary or healing period benefits are no longer in dispute; 
5. The parties agree the weekly benefit rate is $459.33 per week; 
6. The parties agree the commencement date for the payment of permanent 
disability benefits is April 16, 2019; 
7. Defendants have waived any affirmative defenses; 
8. Medical benefits are no longer in dispute; 
9. Defendants will pay the independent medical examination pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39; 
10. Prior to the hearing date, defendants have paid twenty-four (24) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits in the amount of $459.33 per week for a 
total of $11,023.92 paid in permanency benefits; and 
11. Claimant has paid certain costs and defendants do not dispute those costs 
have been paid. 
ISSUES 
The issues presented are: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury to her shoulder only; 
2. Whether claimant sustained any injuries beyond the shoulder; 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
3. Whether claimant sustained a scheduled member injury or an injury to the 
body as a whole; 
4. The extent of permanency to which claimant is entitled. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
This deputy, after listening to the testimonies of claimant and Ms. Umthun at 
hearing, after judging the credibility of the two people who testified, and after reading 
the transcript, the evidence, and the post-hearing briefs, makes the following findings of 
fact and conclusions of law: 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving the issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
Claimant is a 61-year-old married mother of five adult children.  She is right-hand 
dominant.  Claimant was born and educated in Mexico.  Her highest level of education 
was the third grade.  Claimant does not speak, read or write English.  She has never 
attended any schooling in the United States.  In the early 1990’s, claimant worked at a 
pork processing plant performing assembly line work with a knife.  She worked as a 
homemaker.   
In 2010, claimant commenced employment with the present employer.  She was 
hired as a “grinding lab technician”.  (Claimant’s exhibit 3) The duties are varied and 
detailed in claimant’s exhibit three.  Each day, claimant is involved with cleaning 
activities in the lab. 
On February 4, 2018, claimant was mopping the lab.  The bucket had its own 
wringer system but the wringer was broken.  Claimant had to exert extreme force when 
squeezing the water out of the mop.  As she was squeezing, she heard a pop in her 
right shoulder.  She felt immediate pain. 
Claimant reported the work injury to Ms. Angie Umthun, the director of quality 
control for the lab.  Ms. Umthun directed claimant to see a medical provider of her own 
choosing.  On March 8, 2018, claimant presented to Mercy Family Care in Perry, Iowa.  
Claimant described the mopping incident to the medical provider.  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 
16) Jason Noble, PA-C, examined claimant’s right shoulder.  The physician assistant 
referred claimant to Todd Peterson, D.O., an orthopedic surgeon at Capital 
Orthopedics.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) 
Dr. Peterson examined claimant on April 12, 2018 because of her right shoulder 
complaints.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) Claimant reported pain on both the anterior and posterior 
aspects of her right shoulder with the pain radiating down her right arm.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
37) Dr. Peterson noted: 
…Active range of motion.  140° of flexion.  90° of abduction.  30° of 
external rotation.  Internal rotation to the sacrum.  Pain over the biceps 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 4 
 
 
tendon.  Mild pain over the AC joint.  Pain over the lateral epicondyle of 
the humerus.  Pain with speed’s test.  Good strength, but pain with empty 
can test.  Pain with Hawkin’s test.  Significant pain with cross body test. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 38) 
Dr. Peterson diagnosed claimant with: 
 
Impression: 
 
RIGHT Pain in right shoulder 
 
RIGHT Impingement syndrome of right shoulder 
 
RIGHT Secondary osteoarthritis, right shoulder 
RIGHT Unspecified rotator cuff tear or rupture of right shoulder, not specified as 
traumatic 
RIGHT Pain in right elbow 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 38) 
Dr. Peterson recommended magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
39) He reviewed the results of the MRI.  The results demonstrated why surgery was the 
best modality to approach: 
The MRI indicates a full thickness rotator cuff tear that has retracted to the 
level of the glenoid, severe AC arthrosis, tendonitis and tearing of the 
biceps tendon.  There was mild atrophy of the supraspinatus.  We could 
try to manage symptoms with corticosteroid injections and physical 
therapy.  However, conservative treatment would not heal the tear, and 
the severity of the tear could potentially advance.  The only definitive 
treatment would be a shoulder arthroscopy with rotator cuff repair, biceps 
tenotomy, subacromial decompression, and distal claviculectomy… 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 42) 
Initially, defendants denied the surgery.  However, they later approved it.  Dr. 
Peterson performed the surgery on July 11, 2018 at West Lakes Surgery Center.  (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 69) The procedures performed were: 
 
PROCEDURES PERFORMED: 
Right shoulder arthroscopy with arthroscopic repair of the rotator cuff tendon of 
the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis tendons; extension 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 5 
 
 
debridement of the labrum, biceps tendon, and subacromial space with biceps 
tenotomy, subacromial decompression. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 69)   
Dr. Peterson noted during the surgery: 
…A subacromial bursectomy was then done which showed some 
subacromial scar tissue present.  A subacromial bursectomy and 
subacromial decompression was done with a shaver on the underside to 
remove the areas of scar tissue and fraying that was seen between the 
anterior aspect of the supraspinatus and the undersurface of the anterior 
acromion.  This was decompressed, and attention was then paid to the 
massive rotator cuff tear.  This was a large U- shaped tear.  There was a 
posterior flap, and some of the infraspinatus tendon and teres minor were 
still attached posteriorly, but this was a large tear including the entire 
supraspinatus and around 80% of the infraspinatus… 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 70)   
Claimant returned for post-surgical care on July 26, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 48) 
Claimant reported wearing her sling at all times.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 49) The physician 
assistant examined claimant.  She was neurovascularly intact distally to the right upper 
extremity.  The incisions were healing well.  There were no signs of infections and 
claimant was doing well.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 49) 
Pursuant to a request from defendants, claimant presented to Stephen A. Ash, 
M.D., for an independent medical examination.  The examination occurred on August 
23, 2018 at Iowa Ortho on Laurel Street in Des Moines, Iowa.  Previous to the 
examination. Dr. Ash had reviewed a number of claimant’s medical records.  
(Defendants’ Exhibit A, page 1) Defendants posed a number of questions to Dr. Ash 
with respect to claimant’s request for workers’ compensation benefits.  In his report of 
August 23, 2018, Dr. Ash explained his expert opinions.  He wrote in relevant portion: 
 
… 
Please provide your opinion on whether any work-related injury to the 
bilateral shoulders and elbows on February 5, 2018, remains a substantial 
causal, contributing, accelerating, or aggravating factor to any current 
condition and/or physical complaints.  Please explain the basis of your 
opinion. 
Answer:  Rotator cuff tears become more prevalent as people age.  Over 
the age of 60, 25% of people with no shoulder pain have a cuff tear.  It is 
possible that Ms. Chavez, prior to any complaints, had a cuff tear.  It is 
also possible that she could have developed a tear based on her 
complaints of pain in December 2017.  It is also possible that if she 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 6 
 
 
slipped and fell on the ice, as was described in the clinic note above, she 
could have sustained a rotator cuff tear then.  It is also possible that the 
incident at work with the mop bucket could have produced a rotator cuff 
tear.  It is impossible for me to definitively apportion which event was more 
significant in causing her cuff tear.  Given the patient’s stated history, the 
mop bucket incident could have been a significant contributor to her 
objective shoulder problems. 
(Ex. A, pp. 2, 3) 
Dr. Ash opined Dr. Peterson provided reasonable and necessary medical care to 
claimant.  (Ex. A, p. 3) Dr. Ash also opined work restrictions should be left to Dr. 
Peterson.  (Ex. A., p. 3) In a subsequent report, Dr. Ash opined: 
In response to your February 20, 2019, letter regarding Rosa Chavez it is 
impossible to know whether her rotator cuff tear was causally-related to 
the February 5, 2018, mop incident.  This was explained in detail during 
my IME letter in response to Question #4.  Please contact me if I can be of 
further assistance. 
(Ex. A, p. 7) 
Dr. Peterson’s staff returned claimant to work on modified duty effective August 
27, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 50) Claimant was restricted from lifting anything greater than five 
pounds.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 50) The restrictions were modified on October 11, 2018.  Claimant 
was allowed to lift ten pounds with the right arm.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 51) Four months post-
surgery, claimant remained neurovascularly intact distally to the right upper extremity.  
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 53) The right shoulder range of motion was 175° of flexion, 150° of 
abduction, and internal rotation to L4.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 53) 
Dr. Peterson opined claimant reached maximum medical improvement on 
November 8, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 57) Additionally, Dr. Peterson opined claimant had a 
permanent partial impairment in the amount of six percent to the right upper extremity.  
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 57) An impairment of six percent to the upper extremity equals four percent 
to the body as a whole pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, 5th Ed., page 439.   
Dr. Peterson indicated he calculated the rating as follows: 
Based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, I believe she sustained a partial permanent 
impairment.  Based on Figures 16-40, 16-43, 16-46 and Table 16-35 of 
Upper extremity strength and Range of Motion, Ms. Chavez would have a 
6% right upper extremity impairment. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 57) 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 7 
 
 
Claimant exercised her right to an independent medical examination pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39.  On May 13, 2019, Sunil Bansal, M.D., M.P.H., examined 
claimant, after reviewing relevant medical records.  (Claimant’s exhibit 1) Dr. Bansal 
opined claimant had a 40 percent loss of abduction in the right shoulder and a 20 
percent flexion strength loss as compared to the left.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) Dr. Bansal opined 
claimant had a 10 percent permanent impairment to the right upper extremity.  The 
rating equaled a 6 percent rating to the body as a whole.  The independent medical 
examiner based his opinion on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, 5th Ed. Figures 16-40 through 16-46, when he compared the right shoulder 
to the left one.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) Dr. Bansal opined claimant should not lift greater than 
10 pounds with her right arm.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10)   
Counsel for claimant posed the following question to Dr. Bansal: 
7.  In your opinion, is Ms. Chavez’s injury proximal to her glenohumeral 
joint? 
Dr. Bansal offered a succinct reply.  He included an illustration too. 
Yes.  Ms. Chavez tore multiple rotator cuff tendons.  The rotator cuff 
tendons attach to the scapula as noted in the following illustration and are 
all proximal to the glenohumeral joint. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10)   
Dr. Bansal also provided an illustration to explain his opinion.  The illustration is 
duplicated below: 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 8 
 
 
Claimant returned to work for MS Technology, LLC.  She testified she was 
released to return to work without restrictions.  During her arbitration hearing, claimant 
testified her employer allowed claimant to select the jobs she felt she was able to 
perform.  Claimant also testified her co-workers were very helpful.  They assisted 
claimant with physically demanding chores.  At the time of her arbitration hearing, 
claimant was still employed by MS Technology, LLC. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND RATIONALE 
PERMANENT PARTIAL DISABILITY BENEFITS 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Pursuant to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated for a loss or a loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2) (a)-(u) (2017) or for a loss of earning capacity under section 
85.34(2)(v) (2017).  The extent of scheduled member benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is 
“limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993).  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a)-(t) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 9 
 
 
The Iowa Legislature modified Iowa Code section 85.34 in 2017.  Subsection 
85.34(2) (On) was added.  The subsection is now renumbered to 85.34(2)(n) (2018).   It 
reads: 
For the loss of a shoulder, weekly compensation is paid based on four 
hundred weeks. 
The Iowa Legislature also added Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  It provides the 
manner for determining functional disability or loss of percentage of permanent 
impairment.  The subsection provides:   
w.  In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “f”, or paragraph “u’ when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American Medical 
Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining 
functional impairment and not loss of earning capacity. 
With respect to case law regarding the new shoulder statute, there has been 
minimal interpretations at the administrative level.  In Agee v. EFCO, Corp. Inc., File 
Nos. 5065304, 5064099, (Arb. Dec. October 22, 2019), a deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner determined a shoulder injury should be calculated according to the 
schedule.  The rationale behind the deputy’s decision was: 
Claimant urges a finding that the February 21, 2018, injury extends 
beyond the right shoulder.  No medical provider has rendered an opinion 
that the February 21, 2018 injury extends beyond the shoulder.  Surgery 
was performed on claimant’s right shoulder.  Both Dr. Galles and Dr. 
Bansal have analyzed the permanent impairment pursuant to the AMA 
Guides using impairment ratings for the shoulder.  It is found that claimant 
has proven a permanent injury to the right shoulder but has not 
demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that the February 21, 
2018 injury extends beyond the right shoulder. 
Agee at page 7. 
Later in the same arbitration decision, the deputy expounded: 
The Iowa legislature enacted significant amendments to the Iowa workers’ 
compensation laws, which took effect in July 2017.  As part of those 
amendments, the legislature specified that injuries to the shoulder should 
be compensated as scheduled member injury on a 400-week schedule.  

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 10 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2018).  It has long been understood that 
an injury must be compensated as a scheduled injury if the legislature saw 
fit to list the injured body part in Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (a-(u).  
Williams v. Larson Construction Co., 255 Iowa 1149, 125 N.W. 248 
(1963).  Having found that claimant did not prove his February 21, 2018, 
injury extended beyond the right shoulder.  [sic] I conclude that the injury 
should be compensated as a scheduled member injury pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2018). 
Agee, at page 10.  (It is noted for the record, this case was not appealed.  It became 
final agency action.) 
In another arbitration decision, decided just days following Agee, a different 
deputy held there were no expert opinions to support a finding that a November 1, 2017 
work injury extended beyond the shoulder.  In Hospodarsky v. Quaker Oats Company, 
File No. 5061912, (Arbitration Dec. October 30, 2019), the deputy concluded: 
The next question is the extent of disability.  Under the statutory change, 
shoulder injuries are considered to be functional rather than industrial 
disabilities.  A shoulder injury is based on a four-hundred-week schedule.  
The evidence supports a finding of a shoulder injury rather than a whole 
body injury.  There are no expert opinions that support a finding that the 
November 1, 2017, injury extended beyond the shoulder.  Therefore, the 
determination of extent must be measured by examining the claimant’s 
functional loss. 
Hospodarsky at page 7. 
The same deputy continued on page 9 of her decision in Hospodarsky: 
While the Supreme Court has not examined the current statute, based on 
past precedent, the legislature’s designation of the shoulder injury as a 
functional loss is within their power.  Therefore, claimant’s shoulder loss 
will be examined as a functional loss.  Dr. Hart assigned a 4 percent 
impairment of the right upper extremity while Dr. Mathew assessed a 20 
percent upper extremity impairment.  Claimant testified that she works the 
same job and has no formal accommodations or restrictions; however, she 
has made personal modifications due to weakness in her shoulder.  Dr. 
Mathew is a physical and rehabilitation expert.  His restrictions were 
based on his opinions regarding claimant’s ability to function on a day-to-
day basis.  Because of his expertise, his opinion regarding claimant’s 
functional use of her shoulder is given more weight.  Based on the 
foregoing expert opinions and claimant’s own testimony, it is determined 
she has sustained a 20 percent functional impairment of her left shoulder 
arising out of the work injury. 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 11 
 
 
Hospodarsky at page 9.  (It is noted for the record, this case was not appealed, and 
became final agency action.) 
In claimant’s post-hearing brief, her attorney made some compelling arguments 
to show why claimant’s work injury was an injury to the body as a whole and not a 
scheduled member injury.  Claimant’s counsel discussed case law prior to the 2017 
legislative changes for calculating a permanent disability to the shoulder.  The attorney 
wrote in relevant part: 
There are several prior agency decisions defining what a “shoulder” is and 
which parts of anatomy are considered body as a whole (aka 
unscheduled) injuries. 
The wrist is the joint between the arm and the hand just as a shoulder is 
the joint between the arm and the trunk or the hip is the joint between 
the leg and the trunk.  It is now well established that a loss of function in 
a joint is compensated as a part of the proximal [body site] side of 
the joint, not as a loss of the member on the distal [arm side] side of that 
joint.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W. 2d 258 (Iowa 
1995); Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. 
Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Nazarenus v. 
Oscar Mayer &Co., II Iowa Industrial Comm’r Report 281 (App. February 
24, 1982); Godwin v. Hicklin G.M. Power, II Iowa Industrial Comm’r Rep 
170 (App. August 7, 1981). 
Miranda v. IBP/Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 5008521, 2005 WL 1842567 (App. Dec. 
8/2/2005) (emphasis added).  See also, 
Haffner v. Electrical Systems, File No. 955542 (App. Dec. 2/25/94) 
(Applying Alm and Dailey, discussing Gray’s Anatomy, and holding:  “The 
gleno-humeral joint is the dividing line between the arm and the body at 
the shoulder joint.  Parts of the body distal to that joint are the arm.  Parts 
of the body proximal to that joint belong to the body as a whole.  The 
gleno-humeral joint is where the head of the humerus forms a socket (or 
joint) with the gleno-cavity of the scapula.  The parts of the arm in that 
vicinity are the greater tuberosity, lesser tuberosity and bicipital groove.  
Parts of the body as a whole in that vicinity are the acromion (sp.0 
process the clavicle and the coracoid process.  …The parts of the 
body excised or removed were members of the body as a whole, more 
specifically, the distal end of the clavicle, the anterior and inferior 
aspect of the acromion and the coracoacromial ligament, which are 
parts of the body as a whole.  None of these body parts are parts of the 
arm.”) 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 12 
 
 
Pack v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 865057, p. 10-11 (Arb. Dec. 
9/29/1994) (“The dividing line between the arm and the body as a whole 
for workers compensation purposed is the gleno-humeral joint.  This is a 
ball and socket joint.  The ball is the head of the humerus of the arm.  The 
socket is the gleno-cavity of the scapula, which is on the body side of the 
shoulder joint.  Everything distal to the gleno-humeral joint is the arm.  
Everything proximal to the gleno-humeral joint belongs to the body 
as a whole.  This clarification of this issue was reaffirmed, defined and 
promulgated again by the industrial commissioner in the case of Haffner v. 
Electrical Systems, File no. 955542 (Appeal Dec. February 25, 1994).  In 
this case, the humerus and greater tuberosity are distal to the gleno-
humeral joint and are parts of the arm.  At the same time the 
acromioclavicular joint, the lateral clavicle, the anterior and lateral 
acromion, the coracoacromial ligament, the coracoid, the clavicle, the 
subscapularis muscle and the teres major muscle mentioned in the 
surgical report are all parts of the body as a whole because they are 
located proximal to the gleno-humeral joint.”) 
(emphasis added). 
Claimant’s counsel continued to argue in her brief: 
A “shoulder has been defined to be the ball and socket joint between the 
arm (humerus) and the trunk (scapula) which is medically called the 
glenohumeral joint as shown in the following medical diagram: 
 
 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 13 
 
 
If the word “shoulder” is not ambiguous under the 2017 amendments, then 
85.34(2)(n) only applies to anatomical structures of the “shoulder” which is 
the glenohumeral joint (injuries to the humeral head [ball] or gleno-cavity 
[socket], or arthritis in the glenohumeral joint).  The legislature chose to 
use the word “shoulder” as opposed to a wide variety of specific parts of 
human anatomy.  The above cited case law supports that work injuries 
sustained to or affecting the area proximal (nearer to the center of the 
body) to the glenohumeral joint area are to be compensated as body 
as a whole injuries under the catch-all provision in Iowa Code § 
85.34(2)(v).  Therefore, it is presumed that the legislature knew how the 
word “shoulder” had been defined and their intent is to only change 
compensation for injuries that affect the glenohumeral joint only as defined 
by prior case law. 
(Claimant’s post-hearing brief pages 4-8) 
The present case is distinguishable from both the Agee case, and the 
Hospodarsky case.  Here, there is one expert, who explained claimant’s work injury on 
February 5, 2018 was not a scheduled member injury to the shoulder.  The rationale 
given was the injury went beyond the shoulder and into the body as a whole.  Dr. 
Bansal opined claimant’s injury was proximal to her glenohumeral joint.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
10) Dr. Bansal indicated claimant tore multiple rotator cuff tendons.  The evaluating 
physician reported the rotator cuff tendons were attached to the scapula.  The tendons 
were proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  The tendons were attached to the body as a 
whole.  The work injury contributed to damage that affected the body as a whole.  The 
included illustration, showed where the attachments occurred.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
Then there was the July 11, 2018 operative report.  Dr. Peterson noted in his 
report, there was a massive rotator cuff tear.  It was “a large U-shaped tear.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, 
p. 70)  Specifically, Dr. Peterson wrote: 
There was a posterior flap, and some of the infraspinatus tendon and 
teres minor were still attached posteriorly, but this was a large tear 
including the entire supraspinatus and around 80% of the infraspinatus. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 70) The procedure itself involved changes to the body as a whole.  Surgery 
impacted the whole body even though Dr. Peterson rated claimant’s injury to the right 
upper extremity only. 
According to the opinion and illustration provided by Dr. Bansal, plus the 
operative report supplied by Dr. Peterson, claimant’s work injury was proximal to the 
glenohumeral joint.  It is the determination of this deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner; claimant has sustained an injury to her body as a whole.   
The salient issue to address is whether claimant is entitled to have her 
permanency benefits calculated by the industrial method or whether claimant is only 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 14 
 
 
entitled to have her permanency calculated by the functional impairment/loss method 
per the 2017 legislative changes to Iowa Code section 85.34 (2) (u).  The relevant 
portion of the subsection provides: 
u.  In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “t” hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred.  A determination of the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury.  If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee’s earning capacity.   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u). 
There is crucial language under the 2017 legislative changes to 85.34(2)(u) that 
involves industrial disability when an employee returns to work following an injury.  The 
language is whether the injured worker receives the same or greater salary, wages or 
earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury.  It is noted section 
85.34(2)(u) does not require the finder of fact to calculate a post-injury 13-week average 
weekly wage to determine whether an injured worker earns the same or greater wages.  
Any discussion of an average weekly wage exists in Iowa Code section 85.36 and 
requires consideration of pre-injury earnings not post-injury earnings.  A post-injury 
average weekly wage analysis for determining whether an injured worker returns to 
work at the same or greater wages is not necessary.  To determine whether an injured 
worker earns the same or greater earnings depends on the totality of the evidence 
presented at the hearing. 
Claimant testified she returned to work at MS Technology, LLC.  Her job title 
remained the same.  She kept the position of laboratory technician.  Dr. Peterson 
returned claimant to work without any restrictions.  Claimant received a small raise after 
she returned to work.  She earned more per hour post-injury than she earned prior to 
the work injury.  The employer never refused claimant a scheduled raise.  Claimant 
worked all overtime offered to her upon her return to work.  Often, she worked 50 to 52 
hours per week.  The employer never refused overtime hours to claimant.  However, 
claimant’s gross earnings were not necessarily greater than what she had earned prior 
to her right shoulder injury.  The gross earnings received after the work injury were not 
the result of claimant’s work injury.  She worked the same hours as other employees in 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 15 
 
 
the lab.  Claimant’s gross earnings were a reflection of market trends affecting the 
company.  Claimant’s job injury had no bearing on her ability to earn wages. 
According to Ms. Umthun, the Director of Quality Control in the lab, claimant had 
not requested any accommodations since she returned to work.  Ms. Umthun testified 
the employees always decided among themselves what task each employee was going 
to perform on a given day.   
It is the determination of the undersigned; claimant is earning the same or 
greater wages as contemplated by the 2017 statute.  As a consequence, claimant is to 
be compensated for her functional impairment. 
Since claimant is to be compensated for her functional impairment, Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(w) is applicable.  The subsection provides: 
w.  In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “t’, or paragraph “u” when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American Medical 
Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “t’, or paragraph “u” when determining 
functional impairment and not loss of earning capacity. 
(Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w). 
There are two impairment ratings provided in this case.  The treating orthopedic 
surgeon, Dr. Peterson, rated claimant as having a six percent permanent impairment to 
the right upper extremity or a four percent impairment to the body as a whole.  The 
ratings are based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th 
Ed., Tables, 16-35, 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 57) A four percent 
impairment to the body as a whole equates to 20 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
Dr. Bansal, the independent medical examiner, provided the second permanent 
impairment rating.  Dr. Bansal rated claimant as having a ten percent permanent 
impairment to the right upper extremity or a six percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole.  Dr. Bansal based his ratings on the same tables in the AMA Guides, 
as did Dr. Peterson.  When the ten percent impairment is converted to a body as a 
whole impairment, the rating is six percent impairment to the body as a whole.  A six 
percent impairment to the body as a whole equates to 30 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits. 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 16 
 
 
It is the determination of this deputy; Dr. Bansal had the most accurate 
impairment rating for claimant.  Dr. Bansal provided in detail how he arrived at his 
impairment rating.  He provided the loss of abduction and flexion strength loss for the 
right shoulder as compared to the left one.  He also provided the precise percentage 
point for every loss in range of motion.  On the other hand, Dr. Peterson only provided 
his end result.  He did not explain how he calculated the sum of 6 percent to the right 
upper extremity/four percent to the body as a whole.  The undersigned is persuaded; 
Dr. Bansal’s rating best reflects claimant’s functional impairment. 
Claimant has a permanent partial disability to his body as a whole in the amount 
of six percent to the body as a whole.  Defendants shall pay unto claimant thirty (30) 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  The parties stipulated claimant’s 
permanent partial disability benefits commenced on April 6, 2019.  She was previously 
paid 24 weeks of permanency benefits at the stipulated weekly benefit rate of four 
hundred fifty-nine and 33/100 dollars ($459.33) per week.  Defendants shall take credit 
for all benefits paid prior to the date of the hearing. 
Accrued benefits shall be paid in a lump sum, together with interest, as allowed 
by law.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 
1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 
5054686 (App. April 24, 2018). 
Claimant supplied the costs in her exhibit 7.  At the arbitration hearing, 
defendants agreed they would pay the cost of the independent medical examination 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 17 
 
 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010).  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
     The costs detailed were: 
 
Deposition of claimant 
 
 
 
$74.80 
 
Filing fee                                                           $100.00 
 
Certified Mail  
 
 
 
 
  $6.74 
     Defendants are liable for the aforementioned costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant thirty (30) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing from April 16, 2019 and payable at the rate of four 
hundred fifty-nine and 27/100 dollars ($459.27). 
Accrued benefits, shall be paid in a lump sum together with interest as detailed in 
the body of the decision. 
Defendants shall take credit for all benefits paid prior to the date of the hearing. 
Defendants shall pay the costs of the independent medical examination as 
agreed prior to the commencement of the arbitration decision. 

CHAVEZ V. MS TECHNOLOGY, LLC 
Page 18 
 
 
Defendants shall pay the costs to litigate as detailed in the body of the decision. 
The attorneys of record, if they have not already done so, shall register within 
seven (7) days of this order in the Workers’ Compensation e-Filing System (WCES) and 
as a participant in this case to receive future filings from this agency. 
Defendants shall file all reports as required by law. 
Signed and filed this 5th day of February, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Lori Scardina Utsinger (via WCES) 
Erin Tucker (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
MICHELLE A. MCGOVERN 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
