Case Number: 21009598.01
Case Title:  CRUZ, JOSE V. CONTRACTOR SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORPORATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Cruz Jose-21009598.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
JOSE CRUZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 21009598.01 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
CONTRACTOR SERVICES OF IOWA 
  : 
A/K/A TOPBUILD CORPORATION, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE, 
  :  
 
 
  :       Head Note Nos.: 1402.30, 1402.40,                      
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
      1803, 1803.1, 2501, 2502, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Jose Cruz Bernal1, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, Contractor Services of Iowa a/k/a TopBuild 
Corporation, as the employer, and Old Republic Insurance, as the insurance carrier.  
The case proceeded to an arbitration hearing on June 17, 2024 via Zoom conference 
call.   
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the arbitration hearing. On the hearing 
report, the parties entered into various stipulations. All of those stipulations were 
accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual or 
legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 9, and Employer’s Exhibits A and B. All exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record without objection. Claimant requested that any documents referenced 
in Dr. Broghammer’s report contained at Defendants’ Exhibit B be administratively 
noticed. Claimant objected to that request and the undersigned declined to 
administratively notice documents referenced by Dr. Broghammer but not previously 
produced or included in the evidentiary record. 
                                                 
1 Claimant’s name could cause confusion in this decision.  He filed this case using the name Jose 
Cruz.  At hearing, he testified his full name is Jose Cruz Bernal.  Although I have captioned this case as 
claimant pled it, in the body of this decision, I will use Mr. Cruz Bernal’s full name as he testified to it. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-13  09:20:41     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 2 
 
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing. 
However, the parties requested the opportunity to file post-hearing briefs. Their request 
was granted, and the parties filed their briefs on July 22, 2024. The case was 
considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether claimant’s right carpal tunnel syndrome and/or neck injuries arose 
out of and in the course of claimant’s employment on June 2, 2021. 
 
2. Whether claimant’s injury should be compensated as a scheduled member 
injury or with industrial disability benefits. 
 
3. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to past medical expenses contained at 
Claimant’s Exhibit 7. 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
6. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Jose Cruz Bernal, claimant, is a 58-year-old gentleman, who lives in Des Moines.  
Mr. Cruz Bernal is a native of Mexico, where he obtained 8 years of education before 
moving to the United States in 1984. He has not obtained any additional education 
since arriving in the United States. Claimant speaks very little English and is not able to 
read or write in English. 
 
Claimant first obtained employment in the United States picking mushrooms, 
where he was required to lift 50-to-60-pound boxes. He next worked at Iowa Packing in 
a meatpacking position. Claimant testified that he was deboning meat at Iowa Packing.  
In this job, claimant was required to lift 50-to-52-pound boxes of meat. 
 
Claimant next went to work for Kinzler Construction, where he worked for 14 
years.  At Kinzler, claimant performed concrete work.  He was required to lift up to 50-
pound bags of concrete.   
 
In 2016, he went to work for TopBuild, the employer in this case. Mr. Cruz Bernal 
testified that he had no prior injuries to his right shoulder, right arm, or neck prior to 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 3 
 
commencing his employment with TopBuild. In his position with TopBuild, claimant 
installed insulation in attics and walls. This required him to lift insulation bags weighing 
up to 35 pounds as well as manipulate a large hose to perform the installation. 
 
On June 2, 2021, claimant sustained an admitted injury to his right shoulder. On 
that date, claimant was performing insulation installation, as noted above. The hose he 
was using got stuck between wall studs and he had to forcefully pull on the hose to 
maneuver the hose. When he did, claimant testified he experienced a pulling sensation 
in his right shoulder and in the base of his neck. 
 
Claimant testified that he immediately reported an injury to his arm, shoulder, and 
neck to his supervisor at TopBuild. The employer sent claimant to Concentra for 
medical evaluation the day after the injury. 
 
Mr. Cruz Bernal testified that he notified the physician at Concentra’s Urgent 
Care that he had pain in his right shoulder, right arm, and neck. The Concentra record 
from June 3, 2021 documents a chief complaint was a right biceps injury after an injury 
occurring the prior day at work while doing insulation. (Joint Ex. 1, p. 4) However, it is 
not apparent in this record whether an interpreter was provided and present for any of 
the treatment at Concentra. Claimant was diagnosed with a right biceps tendon rupture.  
(Joint Ex. 1, p. 5) There was no other diagnoses rendered for claimant’s right shoulder, 
right arm, or neck on June 3, 2021. In fact, none of Concentra’s records document 
symptoms in claimant’s neck.   
 
Physical therapy was ordered for claimant, and he was given light duty work 
restrictions. The employer accommodated claimant and moved him to a cleaning job 
that was lighter work and allowed him to continue working. Claimant also reported to his 
initial physical therapy appointment on June 3, 2021. That initial therapy record 
documents that claimant presented with “decreased ROM and strength in the elbow as 
well as the shoulder. The patient also has deficits in his wrist ROM and strength as 
well.”  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 10) There is no mention of claimant’s neck or any symptoms in the 
neck at this initial therapy appointment, though I am unable to ascertain whether an 
interpreter was present for this appointment. 
 
Unfortunately, claimant’s conservative care did not resolve his symptoms and 
Concentra referred claimant to an orthopaedic surgeon, Todd Peterson, D.O.  Dr. 
Peterson initially evaluated claimant on June 16, 2021. Dr. Peterson noted that claimant 
reported for evaluation of his right shoulder, noting a large pop in his right upper arm. 
 
Dr. Peterson noted that claimant had “symptomology of a proximal biceps tendon 
tear.” (Joint Ex. 2, p. 28) He recommended an MRI of claimant’s right shoulder. There is 
no mention of symptoms in claimant’s lower arm or neck in Dr. Peterson’s initial record, 
though it is documented that an interpreter was present at this evaluation. (Joint Ex. 2, 
p. 27) 
 
Following the right shoulder MRI, Dr. Peterson re-evaluated claimant on June 23, 
2021. Once again, an interpreter was present for this evaluation. Dr. Peterson noted the 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 4 
 
MRI demonstrated a biceps tendon rupture, but also noted that there was tearing of 
more than one rotator cuff tendon, and noted the findings were consistent with 
claimant’s symptoms. Dr. Peterson recommended surgical intervention for claimant’s 
right shoulder. (Joint Ex. 2, p., 35) There is no mention of any symptoms or complaints 
in claimant’s neck at the June 23, 2021 evaluation. 
 
Mr. Cruz Bernal testified that he submitted to right shoulder surgery with Dr. 
Peterson on July 12, 2021. (Tr., p. 43) This corresponds with the surgical record, which 
documents Dr. Peterson performed a right shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, 
debridement of the biceps tendon stump, anterior labrum, and superior labrum, as well 
as an open biceps tenodesis and subacromial decompression. (Joint Ex. 4) 
 
Dr. Peterson provided appropriate post-operative care, including physical 
therapy. Mr. Cruz Bernal returned to Dr. Peterson for a four-month post-operative 
evaluation on November 23, 2021. Dr. Peterson again documented that an interpreter 
was present for this evaluation. At this evaluation, Dr. Peterson documented that 
claimant reported he was “happy with his progress.” (Joint Ex. 2, p. 78) Dr. Peterson 
released claimant to return to work without restrictions as of November 29, 2021. (Joint 
Ex. 2, pp. 72, 79)   
 
Of particular interest, I also note that Dr. Peterson’s documentation of reported 
symptoms includes “Back pain” on November 23, 2021. (Joint Ex. 2, pp. 74-78) 
Claimant also reported back pain to Dr. Peterson at prior post-operative evaluations. 
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 63, 70) Claimant testified that he reported pain at the base of his neck to 
Dr. Peterson, as well as Concentra and his physical therapist.   
 
In his post-hearing brief, claimant urges that he was attempting to report neck 
pain to Dr. Peterson on November 23, 2021 and is unsure why it was recorded as back 
pain. (Tr., pp. 41-42) He also points to the physical therapy note dated November 22, 
2021 (the day before Dr. Peterson’s evaluation). Review of that physical therapy record 
demonstrates a report of muscle guarding and tenderness along the upper trapezius, 
pectoralis and anterior shoulder. (Joint Ex. 5, p. 148) There is no mention of symptoms 
at the base of the neck where the claimant testified he experienced symptoms. 
 
Claimant’s physical therapist again reports muscle guarding and tenderness 
along the upper trapezius on December 14, 2021. However, again that therapy record 
does not mention symptoms at the base of the neck. (Joint Ex. 5, p. 151) The therapist’s 
assessment at the December 14, 2021 treatment was “signs and symptoms consistent 
with R shoulder pain secondary to R RCR.” (Joint Ex. 5, p. 152) The therapist noted 
some myofascial tension but documented no assessment of neck pain or issues with 
claimant’s neck. (Joint Ex. 5, pp. 151-153) 
 
Then, on December 21, 2021, Mr. Cruz Bernal returns to Dr. Peterson.  At that 
evaluation, Dr. Peterson again notes that an interpreter was present.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 84)  
Interestingly, Dr. Peterson’s review of symptoms also changes.  Following the physical 
therapy noted above, claimant reports “no back pain” and “no neck pain” at the 
December 21, 2021 evaluation by Dr. Peterson.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 89)  Often, I am 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 5 
 
skeptical of medical records that repeat the same report of symptoms or repeat the 
same information evaluation record after evaluation record.  However, it is apparent 
from the December 21, 2021 record that Dr. Peterson is actually performing an 
assessment and recording claimant’s reported symptoms at each evaluation.   
 
It is certainly possible that claimant was attempting to report neck pain on 
November 23, 2021 and at prior evaluations.  It is also possible that there were 
problems in translation or interpretation, as argued by claimant in his post-hearing brief.  
However, it certainly appears that Dr. Peterson was attempting to take and record an 
accurate review of symptoms at each evaluation, given that he records this significant 
change in reported symptoms on December 21, 2021. 
 
Dr. Peterson noted claimant’s symptoms could improve for up to a year post-
surgery. However, he declared maximum medical improvement for claimant’s right 
shoulder on December 21, 2021. He permitted a return to work without restrictions and 
released claimant from care to follow-up only as needed. (Joint Ex. 2, p. 84) 
 
Mr. Cruz Bernal returned to work after the release by Dr. Peterson.  However, he 
continued to experience symptoms and reported those ongoing difficulties to the 
employer.  The employer ultimately returned claimant to be evaluated by Dr. Peterson 
on August 23, 2022. 
 
The August 23, 2022 record from Dr. Peterson’s evaluation documents claimant 
reported “no back pain” and “no neck pain.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 90)  However, Dr. Peterson 
did record a report of new numbness in claimant’s right fingers.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 91)  
Once again, it is apparent that claimant was provided the services of an interpreter at 
this evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 91)  Dr. Peterson assessed claimant with early adhesive 
capsulitis.  Dr. Peterson recommended physical therapy for the new assessment and 
related it back to the work injury and resulting surgery.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 91)  However, 
Dr. Peterson permitted claimant to return to work without restrictions.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 
92) 
 
Claimant returned to physical therapy on September 27, 2022.  At that 
evaluation, the therapist noted claimant demonstrated limited range of motion in the 
right shoulder and slight restriction of range of motion in claimant’s neck.  Claimant also 
demonstrated a reduction in forearm strength at the time of this therapy evaluation.  
(Joint Ex. 5, p. 156)  Claimant continued to report symptoms in his right shoulder and 
neck in therapy treatment after September 27, 2022.  (Joint Ex. 5) 
 
Mr. Cruz Bernal returned to Dr. Peterson on November 22, 2022.  At that 
appointment, Dr. Peterson noted a positive Tinel’s sign, noted reported right-hand 
numbness, and recommended an EMG for claimant.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 98)  Dr. Peterson 
also documented a finding of a “Popeye biceps.”  Once again, Dr. Peterson reports a 
change in symptoms but still notes no reports of neck pain in this record.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 
98)  Dr. Peterson also noted, “His hand numbness is concerning of median nerve 
damage which may also be related to his bicep placing pressure on his median nerve.”  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 103) 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 6 
 
 
Claimant submitted to the recommended EMG, which Dr. Peterson indicated 
demonstrated carpal tunnel syndrome in the right wrist.  Dr. Peterson recommended 
against surgical intervention for the carpal tunnel syndrome but recommended an 
injection.  Claimant consented, and Dr. Peterson performed the recommended injection 
on December 27, 2022.  Dr. Peterson again declared maximum medical improvement at 
that time and released claimant to return to work at full duty.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 108)  
Ultimately, Dr. Peterson utilized the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, and opined that Mr. Cruz Bernal sustained a five percent 
permanent functional impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of his work 
injury.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 117) 
 
Following the declaration of maximum medical improvement, claimant sought an 
independent medical evaluation, which was performed by Sunil Bansal, M.D. on March 
7, 2023.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with a surgically repaired 
full-thickness rotator cuff tear of the supraspinatus tendon, a full-thickness tear of the 
right biceps tendon, right shoulder subacromial impingement, right wrist carpal tunnel 
syndrome, and discogenic cervical pain.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 14)   
 
Dr. Bansal opined that the forceful pulling on June 2, 2021 at work directly 
caused claimant’s right rotator cuff, labral, and biceps tendon tears.  He opined that 
claimant’s right carpal tunnel syndrome developed as a result of the surgical procedure 
following the work injury as a result of “retraction pressure” presumably from the biceps 
tendon rupture.  Finally, Dr. Bansal opined that the neck pain claimant reported was 
also directly related to the forceful arm pull and jerking motion claimant experienced on 
June 2, 2021 at work.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 14)  Dr. Bansal recommended an MRI of 
claimant’s neck. 
 
Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Peterson and opined that claimant achieved 
maximum medical improvement for the right shoulder injury on December 27, 2022.  He 
opined that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement for the carpal tunnel 
syndrome and the neck injury if no further treatment is obtained.  He assigned claimant 
a five percent whole person (eight percent upper extremity) impairment for reduced right 
shoulder range of motion, a one percent whole person (two percent upper extremity) 
permanent impairment as a result of his right biceps injury, a two percent whole person 
(four percent upper extremity) permanent impairment for the right carpal tunnel 
syndrome, and five percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of 
the neck injury.  All permanent impairment was attributed or awarded by Dr. Bansal 
pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal recommended significant permanent work 
restrictions that would preclude lifting more than 15 pounds with the right arm, no 
overhead lifting with the right arm, and avoidance of vibratory tools or forceful turning or 
twisting with the right arm.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p 16)  He also noted that claimant may 
require future medical care, including an MRI for the neck, steroid injections for the right 
shoulder (and possibly revision surgery), and potential surgical release of the right 
carpal tunnel ligament.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p 16) 
 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Bansal charged $3,948.00 for his March 7, 2023 evaluation.  (Claimant’s Ex. 
1, p. 17)  Dr. Bansal’s invoice provides no information pertaining to the total amount of 
time he spent performing these services, the length of his evaluation, or the hourly rate 
he charges for his services.  Nevertheless, Dr. Bansal’s report notes that he reviewed 
fairly extensive medical records in preparation for his evaluation.  Claimant testified the 
evaluation lasted approximately an hour and a half.  (Tr., p. 55)  Dr. Bansal authored a 
16-page report that contains pertinent, relevant and no unnecessarily repetitive 
information and opinions.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)  I find that Dr. Bansal’s IME charges are 
reasonable and consistent based upon a typical fee in the local area (Urbandale) where 
Dr. Bansal performed his evaluation. 
 
During a routine medical examination for hypertension and diabetes with his 
personal physician’s office on July 17, 2023, Mr. Cruz Bernal reported neck pain.  The 
treating nurse practitioner noted chronic neck pain and ordered an MRI of claimant’s 
neck.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 136)  That MRI occurred on July 26, 2023 and demonstrated a 
disc bulge at C3-4.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 181) 
 
Defendants responded with an independent medical evaluation performed by 
Robert L. Broghammer, M.D., on February 5, 2024.  Dr. Broghammer diagnosed 
claimant with a right shoulder rotator cuff tear and right biceps tendon tear, both related 
to the sudden jerking motion and pulling on a hose at work on the alleged date of injury.  
He opined that claimant does not require further medical treatment for the right shoulder 
and has achieved maximum medical improvement and concurred with Dr. Peterson in 
this respect.  Dr. Broghammer also concurred with Dr. Peterson’s assessment of a five 
percent permanent functional impairment as a result of the right shoulder injury.  
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 40) 
 
Dr. Broghammer also diagnosed claimant with right carpal tunnel syndrome, 
related to his long-standing diabetes.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 38)  Specifically, Dr. 
Broghammer opined, “there is no evidence that the June 2, 2021 injury materially 
aggravated” the carpal tunnel syndrome.  Instead, Dr. Broghammer opined that he 
carpal tunnel diagnosis is “related entirely to personal pre-existing factors, in particular, 
the worker’s diabetes, as well as his age.  Both age and diabetes are known 
independent risk factors for carpal tunnel syndrome.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 39)  Dr. 
Broghammer opined that claimant does not qualify for any permanent impairment 
related to the right carpal tunnel syndrome and opined that he is at maximum medical 
improvement, concurring with Dr. Peterson.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, pp. 39-40) 
 
Finally, Dr. Broghammer diagnosed claimant with mild spondyloarthropathy.  He 
opined, “the June 2, 2021 injury did not cause or materially aggravate any condition in 
Mr. Cruz’ neck.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 39)  Dr. Broghammer described claimant’s MRI 
as “remarkably clean for someone of his age.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 39)  Dr. 
Broghammer similarly opined that claimant does not require future treatment of his neck 
and assigned no permanent impairment for claimant’s neck condition, reiterating he 
does not believe it is related to the alleged work injury.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 40). 
 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 8 
 
Claimant obtained a rebuttal report from Dr. Bansal after his review of the report 
from Dr. Broghammer.  In his addendum report, Dr. Bansal appears to misread or 
misinterpret at least a part of Dr. Broghammer’s opinions.  Dr. Bansal attempts to 
“explain away” Dr. Broghammer’s opinion that the right shoulder injury is not related to 
the alleged work injury.  However, as noted above, Dr. Broghammer actually opines that 
the right shoulder condition is directly related to the work injury.  Dr. Bansal’s 
misinterpretation is somewhat damaging to the credibility of his overall analysis.  My 
interpretation from the various medical professionals is that there is actually consensus 
that claimant’s right shoulder injury and right biceps injury are related to the June 2, 
2021 work incident and defendants conceded, or stipulated, to that injury. 
 
With respect to the carpal tunnel condition, Dr. Bansal offers no rebuttal or 
response to Dr. Broghammer’s opinions pertaining to the cause of claimant’s right 
carpal tunnel condition.  That issue is clearly disputed.  Ultimately, I find the opinions of 
Dr. Peterson most persuasive on this issue and, to the extent that he concurs, the 
opinion of Dr. Bansal to also be persuasive on the carpal tunnel condition.  Specifically, 
I find that claimant’s carpal tunnel syndrome is a sequela of the initial injury and is 
“related to his bicep placing pressure on his median nerve.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 103) 
 
With respect to the cervical condition, Dr. Bansal’s rebuttal report asserts that Dr. 
Broghammer’s opinion “seems to ignore the clear MRI evidence of a disc bulge that 
correlates precisely with Mr. Cruz’s clinical presentation.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 20)  Dr. 
Bansal reasons, “the acute symptomatic presentation in close temporal proximity to the 
work incident strongly implies a traumatic etiology in this case.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p 20)  
Again, the neck injury is clearly disputed and requires factual findings. 
 
Ultimately, I understand claimant’s argument about a language barrier and 
generally find claimant to be a credible witness.  However, the medical records do not 
contain reports of neck symptoms “in close temporal proximity to the work incident” as 
asserted by Dr. Bansal.  Rather, there appears to be long gap between the work 
incident and documentation of neck symptoms.   
 
The question is why there is a gap in the report or documentation of symptoms.  
Again, I understand claimant’s argument about the language barrier and that certainly 
could explain why neck symptoms were not documented earlier.  However, Dr. 
Peterson clearly documented at his visits that an interpreter was present.  Dr. 
Peterson’s documentation of symptoms changed over time, and he clearly documented 
new, or changed, symptoms when they occurred.   
 
My review of the medical records demonstrates that Dr. Peterson was attempting 
to conduct and document thorough histories.  Dr. Peterson clearly documents no 
complaints of pain in claimant’s neck after the alleged work injury.  None of the other 
medical providers indicate symptoms at the base of claimant’s neck until long after the 
traumatic incident at work.  I find it strange and unlikely that claimant would report neck 
symptoms to multiple medical providers, who would all fail to record those symptoms 
accurately over the course of several months of treatment. 
 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 9 
 
Ultimately, I find that claimant cannot prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that he was experiencing and reporting neck symptoms to the medical providers “in 
close temporal proximity” to the work injury, as asserted by Dr. Bansal.  Rather, on the 
issue of claimant’s neck condition, I accept the medical histories and documentation of 
Dr. Peterson as most persuasive in this record.  Because Dr. Bansal’s history and 
explanation of the temporal relationship is unconvincing when compared to Dr. 
Peterson’s records, I ultimately accept the opinion of Dr. Broghammer with respect to 
the neck and find that claimant failed to prove the neck condition arises out of and in the 
course of his employment. 
 
I find Dr. Peterson’s December 27, 2022 date for maximum medical improvement 
to be credible and convincing.  No significant care or treatment occurred after that date 
for the right shoulder, right biceps, or right carpal tunnel syndrome.  Therefore, I find 
claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on December 27, 2022. 
 
With respect to permanent impairment, Dr. Peterson and Dr. Bansal both 
purportedly use Figures 16-40 through 16-46 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, to 
calculate claimant’s permanent impairment.  Those figures all provide permanent 
impairment related to range of motion of the shoulder. 
 
Dr. Peterson is the treating orthopaedic surgeon.  He had the opportunity to 
evaluate claimant on multiple occasions.  He offered a five percent permanent 
impairment rating of the right upper extremity related to claimant’s right shoulder and 
right biceps injuries.  Dr. Broghammer did not specifically refer to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, but noted his agreement with Dr. 
Peterson’s impairment rating.   
 
While I have no specific, or independent basis, to find Dr. Peterson’s impairment 
rating to be erroneous, I note that he does not provide specific range of motion 
measurements in his impairment rating report.  Therefore, it is impossible to verify or 
check his use of the Guides.  By contrast, Dr. Bansal delineates and documents his 
specific range of motion measurements for claimant’s right shoulder in his report.  
(Claimants’ Ex. 1, p. 15)  I find Dr. Bansal’s eight percent upper extremity impairment 
rating to be more convincing with respect to the right shoulder range of motion deficits. 
 
Dr. Bansal also specifically provides a permanent impairment rating related to 
claimant’s right biceps injury, documenting a loss of strength in elbow flexion.  Neither 
Dr. Peterson nor Dr. Broghammer addresses this issue or refute it.  Therefore, I accept 
Dr. Bansal’s two percent permanent impairment rating of the right upper extremity due 
to a loss of strength of the right elbow or arm. 
 
With respect to the claimant’s carpal tunnel condition, I find Dr. Bansal’s 
explanation of his permanent impairment rating to be more thorough and convincing 
than the zero percent impairment rating offered by Dr. Broghammer.  Therefore, I find 
claimant proved he sustained a four percent right upper extremity impairment as a result 
of his carpal tunnel syndrome.  In total, I find claimant proved an eight percent 
permanent functional loss of the right arm as a result of the right shoulder injury.  I find 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 10 
 
that claimant proved a six percent permanent functional loss of the right arm as a result 
of the biceps injury and right carpal tunnel syndrome. 
 
Finally, Claimant seeks award of a past medical expense for anesthesia services.  
The parties stipulate that the medical providers would testify that the services rendered 
were reasonable and necessary.  The parties stipulate that the charges are also 
reasonable and that defendants offer no contrary evidence.  The parties further stipulate 
that the charges are causally connected to a medical condition upon which this claim is 
based. 
 
Reviewing this record, the only anesthesia services that would be used and only 
anesthesia charges that would be submitted would be for surgery on claimant’s 
shoulder.  As such, I find that the medical expenses submitted at Claimant’s Exhibit 8 
are reasonable and causally related to the work injury.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The initial dispute in this case is whether claimant has proven his neck and/or 
right carpal tunnel syndrome conditions are causally related to the June 2, 2021 
accident. 
   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974). 
 
All parties stipulate claimant sustained a right shoulder injury, including a 
ruptured right biceps.  With respect to the disputed neck injury, I found that claimant 
failed to prove the alleged neck injury is causally related to or arose out of and in the 
course of his employment on June 2, 2021.  However, I found that claimant did prove 
his right carpal tunnel syndrome arose out of and is a sequela of the right shoulder 
injury.  Accordingly, I conclude claimant proved a compensable right shoulder and right 
arm injury. 
 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 11 
 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).   
 
In this instance, I found that claimant proved two scheduled members.  The first 
is an injury to the right shoulder, including a right shoulder injury as well as a biceps 
injury.  The biceps injury results in permanent impairment of the right arm and elbow. 
Claimant also proved a permanent injury and permanent impairment of the right arm as 
a result of his carpal tunnel syndrome. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) states:  
 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through 
“u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning 
capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by 
the American medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall 
not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity.  
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  
 
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
 
I found claimant proved an eight percent permanent functional loss of the right 
arm as a result of the right shoulder injury.  I also found that claimant proved a six 
percent permanent functional loss of the right arm as a result of the biceps injury and 
right carpal tunnel syndrome.  Injuries to two separate scheduled members (and 
specifically injuries to the shoulder and arm) that are not covered under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(t) are compensated separately using their respective statutory 
schedules.  Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676 (Iowa 2024). 
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m), the arm is a scheduled member 
injury and compensation for the arm is based upon a 250-week schedule.  A shoulder 
injury is also scheduled and is compensated based upon a 400-week schedule.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(n)  When disability is less than total in a scheduled member, 
benefits are awarded proportional based on the percentage of permanent functional 
impairment to the maximum number of allowable weeks for the scheduled member.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).   
 
Using the maximum 250-week schedule for claimant’s right arm injury, a six 
percent permanent functional impairment of the arm results in an entitlement of 15 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m), (w). The 
shoulder injury is compensated based upon a 400-week schedule.  Claimant’s eight 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 12 
 
percent permanent functional impairment of the shoulder results in an award of 32 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n), (w).  
Combining both injuries, I conclude claimant is entitled to an award of 47 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m), (n), (w). 
 
Permanent partial disability benefits commence once maximum medical 
improvement is achieved.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  In this case, I found that 
claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on December 27, 2022.  Therefore, I 
conclude permanent partial disability benefits commence on December 28, 2022.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2). 
 
Claimant also seeks an award of past medical expenses for charges from an 
anesthesiologist.  Those charges are contained at Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  The employer 
shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all 
conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The employer shall also 
allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those 
services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 
The parties stipulated that the medical treatment rendered and reflected in the 
medical bill contained at Claimant’s Exhibit 8 was reasonable and that the treatment 
was also reasonable and necessary.  The parties further stipulated that the treatment 
was for a medical condition that is the subject of this claim.  I noted that the only 
anesthesia treatment rendered was part of the shoulder surgery.  Accordingly, I found 
that the medical expenses at Claimant’s Exhibit 8 arose as a result of the work injury.  I 
conclude claimant is entitled to an award of the medical expenses at Claimant’s Exhibit 
8. 
 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement of his independent medical evaluation 
expense.  Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice if claimant ultimately 
proves the injury for which the examination occurs is compensable.  Section 85.39 also 
establishes prerequisites that require an employer-retained physician has previously 
evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is 
too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2).   
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 13 
 
 
In this instance, defendants authorized treatment through Dr. Peterson.  Dr. 
Peterson rendered a permanent impairment rating for claimant’s right shoulder injury 
prior to claimant obtaining his evaluation with Dr. Bansal.  Ultimately, the right shoulder, 
biceps injury, and right carpal tunnel syndrome were all determined to be compensable 
injuries.  Accordingly, I conclude claimant established entitlement to reimbursement of 
his IME in some amount. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) provides claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the 
IME examination if the charges are reasonable and “based on the typical fee charged 
by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the 
examination is conducted.”  I found that Dr. Bansal’s charges were reasonable and 
typical for the area where claimant’s IME was conducted.  Therefore, I conclude that 
claimant established entitlement to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME charges totaling 
$3,948.00.  Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of his costs related to this case.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of this agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  Having 
awarded claimant permanent partial disability benefits for the shoulder, biceps, and 
carpal tunnel syndrome conditions, I conclude it is appropriate to assess claimant’s 
costs in some amount.   
 
Claimant seeks assessment of Dr. Bansal’s IME costs.  Given that those 
expenses were awarded pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(2), I decline to award 
those expenses as costs.  However, claimant also seeks assessment of his filing fee 
totaling $128.75.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 9, p. 89)  This is a reasonable and permissible 
cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Claimant also seeks assessment for the cost of 
serving the petition upon the defendants totaling $16.68.  Again, this is a reasonable 
request and a permissible cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(3).  I conclude defendants 
should be ordered to reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of $145.43. 
 
ORDER 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant forty-seven (47) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on December 28, 2022. 
 
Weekly benefits shall be paid to claimant at the stipulated rate of nine hundred 
two and 71/100 dollars ($902.71) per week. 
 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for benefits stipulated to have been paid. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits, if any, in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).  
  

CRUZ V. CONTRACTORS SERVICES OF IOWA A/K/A TOPBUILD CORP. 
Page 14 
 
Defendants shall pay the outstanding medical expenses contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 8. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation fees in 
the amount of three thousand nine hundred forty-eight and 00/100 dollars ($3,948.00). 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred forty-
five and 43/100 dollars ($145.43). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 11.7.   
 
Signed and filed this    13th    day of December, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James Byrne (via WCES) 
L. Tyler Laflin (via WCES) 
