Case Number: 1661309.01
Case Title:  KEMPER, DELBERT V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Kemper Delbert-1661309.01d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DELBERT KEMPER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
        File No.  1661309.01  
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
  :  
vs. 
 
  :  
 
 
  :  
INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT   
  : 
      ARBITRATION  DECISION 
SOLUTIONS, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :  
 
 
  :  
ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE CO.,   :  
        Head Note Nos.:   1803 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Delbert Kemper, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against International 
Equipment Solutions, as the employer and Zurich American Insurance Company as the 
insurance carrier.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
September 21, 2020.  This case was heard via videoconferencing using the CourtCall 
platform as a result of the ongoing pandemic in the State of Iowa and pursuant to an 
order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 15, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 10, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through J.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf and defendants called Timothy Guyer to 
testify.  No other witnesses testified at trial.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on September 21, 2020.   
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on October 
16, 2020.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Dec-03  13:40:33     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained permanent disability and, if so, the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability, if any. 
2. 
Whether claimants’ costs should be taxed and, if so, in what amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the written evidence and testimony in 
the record, finds: 
Delbert Kemper sustained a work related injury to his low back on July 30, 2018.  
(Hearing Report)  Specifically, Mr. Kemper and a co-employee were attempting to move 
a large cart holding metal parts that weighed approximately 4,000 pounds on July 30, 
2018.  The concrete floor on which he was rolling the cart was pitted, or delaminated, 
and caused difficulties in rolling the cart smoothly.  As a result, Mr. Kemper felt a pop in 
his back and his right leg gave out causing him to fall to the ground.  (Claimant’s 
testimony) 
Mr. Kemper reported the injury to the employer and the employer accepted the 
claim and directed claimant’s medical care.  However, defendants deny claimant 
sustained permanent disability as a result of the July 30, 2018 work injury.  Instead, 
defendants point to prior injuries sustained by claimant and contend that claimant 
cannot prove he sustained permanent impairment or permanent disability as a result of 
the July 30, 2018 work injury. 
Indeed, in 2012, Mr. Kemper sustained a neck injury.  However, he was able to 
return to full duty after that injury.  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 3)  There is no evidence of 
ongoing or permanent disability resulting from the 2012 neck injury.   
In February 2018, claimant also experienced an injury to his low back and was 
placed on restrictions for a period of time.  Claimant worked light duty for a period of 
time after the February 2018 injury but returned to full duty work months before the July 
30, 2018 injury occurred.  (Claimant’s testimony; Joint Ex. 3, p. 54)  Again, there is no 
evidence that the February 2018 injury to claimant’s low back resulted in permanent 
impairment, permanent restrictions, or permanent disability. 
Following the July 2018 injury, claimant experienced right leg symptoms in 
addition to low back symptoms.  Mr. Kemper had not previously experienced these right 
leg symptoms.  Claimant also described a “shock” feeling running down his right leg into 
his right calf after the July 2018 work injury and testified that the symptoms were much 
more severe after the July 2018 injury than they were after the February 2018 event.  
Mr. Kemper also identified right big toe numbness as a new symptom after the July 
2018 injury. (Claimant’s testimony) 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 3 
 
 
Following the July 2018 injury, claimant received appropriate and reasonable 
medical care.  Ultimately, three back surgeons evaluated claimant and ruled out a 
surgical procedure for treatment of claimant’s low back condition.  (Joint Ex. 9, p. 74; 
Joint Ex. 12, p. 93; Joint Ex. 14, p. 109)  Epidural injections were attempted but proved 
unsuccessful in treating Mr. Kemper’s low back and right leg pain and no further 
interventional treatments were recommended.  (Joint Ex. 7, pp. 67, 70) 
There are some troubling comments in the medical records in which claimant 
disagrees with the medical recommendations and findings.  For instance, Erin J. 
Kennedy, M.D., indicates that she has nothing further to offer in March 2019.  She notes 
that claimant believes he needs to recover from the injury at home, while she believes 
claimant was capable of returning to work.  Dr. Kennedy notes that claimant’s wishes 
are not compatible with medical philosophy and that his desires are contrary to medical 
best practices.  (Joint Ex. 11, p. 92) 
Surveillance was also introduced into the evidentiary record.  The surveillance 
video demonstrates claimant’s ability to walk stairs without difficulties.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3 
at 11:36).  The surveillance video also demonstrates claimant bending and returning to 
a standing position without any obvious difficulties.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3 at 12:54)  In 
general, the surveillance demonstrates claimant remains capable of some physical 
activities and he certainly appears to remain capable of employment in some capacity. 
On the other hand, there are several moments during the surveillance video 
where claimant’s gait appears altered and difficult.  Most notably, claimant appears to 
have an awkward right leg “swing” as he walks during the surveillance video.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 3)  Similar difficulties were noted by a physical therapist during a 
functional capacity evaluation performed on January 30, 2020.  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, pp. 6, 
8)  Interestingly, however, claimant’s independent medical evaluator, Patrick Hartley, 
MB, noted that claimant had a normal gait at the time of his evaluation on February 7, 
2020. 
Ultimately, this case comes down to the medical opinions of competing 
physicians.  The treating occupational medicine physician, Dr. Kennedy, opined that she 
has nothing further to offer claimant because he has experienced adverse results from 
prior interventional treatments.  She opined that claimant could return to work.  (Joint 
Ex. 11, p. 92)  Similarly, a pain specialist, Timothy Miller, M.D., recommended against 
further medication management or interventional care due to claimant’s reported 
complications after such efforts were attempted.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 70) 
Claimant sought a neurosurgical evaluation of Matthew Howard, M.D., at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  Dr. Howard concurred with prior assessments, 
noting there is no recommended surgical intervention.  However, Dr. Howard opined 
that claimant’s symptoms are consistent with the lumbar imaging performed.  (Joint Ex. 
6, p. 63; Claimant’s Ex. 6) 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 4 
 
 
Defendants also sought an independent medical evaluation performed by 
Charles Broghammer, M.D., on May 6, 2019.  Dr. Broghammer indicated that he was 
uncertain what was causing claimant’s ongoing symptoms.  Instead, he opined that 
there was a functional overlay caused by an emotional response from claimant.  Dr. 
Broghammer suggested that symptom magnification was at play and noted concerns 
that claimant’s responses may be driven by secondary gain, presumably an effort to 
maximize a recovery in this worker’s compensation claim.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 17)  
Dr. Broghammer opined that Mr. Kemper requires no additional medications and 
requires no permanent work restrictions as a result of the July 2018 work injury to his 
low back.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 18) 
Defendants introduce a functional capacity evaluation (FCE), which was 
performed on March 13, 2019.  That FCE documents abilities consistent with the 
medium work category.  However, the physical therapist administering the FCE 
declared the test invalid due to inconsistent performance and invalid effort by claimant.  
(Defendants’ Ex. G, p. 45)  That FCE documented some positive Waddell’s signs and 
recommended lifting in at least the 30-pound range and 13 pounds above shoulder with 
clinical correlation by a physician needed given the inconsistency of claimant’s effort.  
Interestingly, the therapist performing the testing documented antalgic gait, particularly 
in the right leg.  (Defendants’ Ex. G, p. 48) 
Claimant sought an FCE with a provider of his choosing, which was performed 
on January 30, 2020. (Claimant’s Ex. 4)  The physical therapist conducting the second 
FCE declared the testing valid and concluded that claimant remains capable of 
performing medium category work.  Claimant’s abilities in the second FCE were 
significantly greater than those documented in the March 2019 FCE.  Specifically, the 
therapist found during the January 2020 FCE that claimant remains capable of lifting up 
to a maximum of 61 pounds and lifting up to 31 pounds over head.  The therapist 
offered additional restrictions, but then followed up with claimant the day after the FCE 
and documented significant increases in claimant’s symptoms.  The therapist opined 
that, although claimant demonstrated these physical capabilities at the time of testing, 
he was probably not able to perform these functions at the FCE levels for an eight-hour 
day and work five days per week.  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 45) 
Mr. Kemper also sought an independent medical evaluation performed by Dr. 
Hartley on February 7, 2020.  Dr. Hartley opined that Mr. Kemper’s ongoing low back 
and right leg symptoms are causally related to the July 2018 work injury.  Dr. Hartley 
opined that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) after his 
evaluation with Dr. Howard on July 16, 2019.  Dr. Broghammer concurred with the MMI 
date of July 16, 2019.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 21)  I accept this as a reasonable estimate 
of the date of maximum medical improvement and find that claimant achieved MMI on 
July 16, 2019.   
Similar to other physicians, Dr. Hartley recommended against future opioid 
treatment.  However, Dr. Hartley opines that claimant sustained a ten percent 
permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the July 2018 work injury.  

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 5 
 
 
(Claimant’s Ex. 5)  I accept Dr. Hartley’s permanent impairment rating as reasonable 
and convincing.  I find that Mr. Kemper proved he sustained a ten percent permanent 
impairment of the whole person as a result of the July 2018 work injury. 
Dr. Hartley considered his physical examination findings, the prior FCE, and 
disagreed with the FCE findings in some respects.  Dr. Hartley opined that claimant 
remains capable of lifting 35-40 pounds occasionally (four times per hour or less) with 
frequent lifting limited to 15 pounds and overhead lifting limited to 20 pounds.  Dr. 
Hartley also recommended only occasional squatting and crouching.  He also 
recommended that claimant be permitted to change positions and stretch every hour 
during work.  (Claimant’s Ex. 5) 
Mr. Kemper appeared relatively credible during trial.  Reviewing medical notes in 
evidence calls the accuracy of Mr. Kemper’s testimony about his symptoms into 
question, however.  It is noted that more than one physician noted claimant reports 
subjective symptoms that are not consistent with the objective findings noted on medical 
evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 1, pp. 7-8; Joint Ex. 11, p. 92; Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 17; 
Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 33))  I also note an entry made by a counselor at the Iowa 
Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, which indicates that Mr. Kemper “will be more 
interested in moving forward with part time employment after the [workers’ 
compensation] hearing.” (Claimant’s Ex. 9, p. 60) This notation causes some concern 
about the legitimacy of all of claimant’s stated symptoms and his motivation to seek 
work since the injury.  If Mr. Kemper is making a legitimate and full attempt to return to 
work, it should make no difference whether the opportunity to return to work occurs 
before or after the workers’ compensation hearing.  The vocational entry note lends 
some credence to the concerns stated by Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Broghammer about 
claimant’s subjective complaints. 
Nevertheless, I find that claimant did sustain an injury to the low back in the July 
2018 work accident.  I find that the low back injury continues to cause Mr. Kemper some 
symptoms, though perhaps not as significant or severe as he states.  In this sense, I 
find the opinions of Dr. Broghammer somewhat convincing on the issue of emotional 
response to the injury.  Yet, I do not find his opinion that claimant can return to work 
without restrictions convincing or credible.  Mr. Kemper demonstrates some difficulties 
walking during the surveillance video.  He is clearly not fully recovered from his injury 
and it is not reasonable to anticipate that he is capable of returning to work full-duty. 
In fact, the employer did not readily accept Dr. Broghammer’s opinions.  The 
employer’s human resources manager, Tim Guyer, testified in a straightforward 
manner. He conceded that Mr. Kemper was not a complainer before the July 2018 work 
injury and that he had no specific reason to disbelieve Mr. Kemper.  Mr. Guyer testified 
that the employer did not require Mr. Kemper to return to work after receiving the full-
duty work release from Dr. Broghammer.  Instead, Mr. Guyer noted significant ongoing 
complaints from claimant and testified that his own observations of claimant caused him 
significant concerns about whether Mr. Kemper could actually return to work without 
restrictions.  (Tim Guyer testimony) 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 6 
 
 
Therefore, after Dr. Broghammer issued his report and released Mr. Kemper to 
return to work full-duty, the employer scheduled a second independent medical 
evaluation with James W. Milani, D.O.  (Defendants’ Ex. C)  Dr. Milani evaluated 
claimant on November 22, 2019.  Dr. Milani noted prior reports that claimant’s 
subjective complaints exceeded objective findings.  Dr. Milani further noted that the 
excessive subjective complaints existed and continued during his evaluation.  
(Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 33)  Dr. Milani also noted, “Mr. Kemper has been self limiting 
himself from the very beginning of this injury which has only led to his continued 
subjective symptoms.”  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 33) 
Dr. Milani noted, “Mr. Kemper is not going to injure/damage his back by doing 
normal work/activities, any more than the average 49-year-old male.”  (Defendants’ Ex. 
C, p. 33)  He further noted that there is no objective clinical findings or objective 
diagnostic findings that require imposition of permanent work restrictions.  (Defendants’ 
Ex. C, p. 33)  Nevertheless, Dr. Milani noted that claimant’s self-limiting behavior 
resulted in de-conditioning and noted that due to his subjective perception, Mr. Kemper 
has a very low work tolerance.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 34)   
Dr. Milani opines that there is no need for permanent work restrictions from a 
structural standpoint.  However. Dr. Milani also recognized that it is claimant’s personal 
or individualized makeup that causes him to self-limit after his work injury.  Given that 
personal makeup, Dr. Milani recommended maximum lifting of 30 pounds with lifting of 
only 14 pounds above shoulder height.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 35) 
The employer ultimately accepted the work restrictions imposed by Dr. Milani as 
applicable.  In fact, on January 14, 2020, the employer noted Dr. Milani’s evaluation 
results.  The employer indicated, “[W]e cannot accommodate the noted restrictions at 
this time.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 2)  The employer placed claimant on a medical leave of 
absence.  Claimant has not returned to work for the employer since that date and has 
effectively been terminated from his employment. 
As noted previously, Mr. Kemper did seek evaluation and assistance from the 
Iowa Division of Vocational Rehabilitation Services.  That agency appears to have been 
made aware of and relied upon the work restrictions from Dr. Kennedy and specifically a 
20-pound lifting restriction.  (Claimant’s Ex. 9, p. 57)  I do not accept that as claimant’s 
applicable work restriction, however. 
When considering all of the competing medical opinions in this record, I find the 
medical opinion of Dr. Hartley to be the most convincing and credible.  Dr. Hartley 
considered the FCE findings, reviewed recommendations of other physicians, and 
ultimately tailored restrictions that appear reasonable and appropriate for Mr. Kemper.  
Specifically, I find that claimant remains capable of lifting 35-40 pounds occasionally 
(four times per hour or less) with frequent lifting limited to 15 pounds and overhead 
lifting limited to 20 pounds.  I find that claimant is capable of occasional squatting and 
crouching and that he should be permitted to change positions and stretch every hour 
during work.  (Claimant’s Ex. 5) 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 7 
 
 
Mr. Kemper sought a vocational opinion from Barbara Laughlin in support of his 
claim for a permanent total disability after this injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7)  Ms. Laughlin 
appears to attempt to be more of an advocate than an independent evaluator of Mr. 
Kemper’s abilities and residual work capabilities.  Ms. Laughlin purports to explain 
Waddell’s signs and explain any suggestion of malingering by claimant.  (Claimant’s Ex. 
7, p. 28)  These issues appear to be more medical issues for the physicians to offer 
explanations or opinions, rather than issues for the vocational expert to evaluate.  In 
these ways, Ms. Laughlin steps beyond her role of attempting to evaluate claimant’s 
vocational abilities and opportunities and begins advocating Mr. Kemper’s claim.  In 
doing so, she loses credibility. 
Ms. Laughlin’s opinions also seem strained and unreasonable in this case when 
considering solely the vocational issues.  Ms. Laughlin considers the restrictions offered 
by Dr. Hartley, suggests they may fit within the light category of work and opines that 
claimant sustained between a 57 and 78.4 percent loss of access to light category work 
jobs.  However, she suggests that it may be more appropriate to consider sedentary 
duty jobs given the requirement that Dr. Hartley imposes for a break and stretching 
every hour.  Considering this, Ms. Laughlin opines that Mr. Kemper sustained a 98.5 
loss of access to semi-skilled and skilled occupations in good occupational matches 
since the injury and that claimant lost 96.9 of access to unskilled sedentary occupations 
as a result of the July 2018 injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 37) 
In my judgment, these are unrealistic assertions. According to Dr. Hartley, Mr. 
Kemper remains capable of 35-40 pounds on an occasional basis.  Opining that he has 
lost almost all of his access to good match occupations and also to all unskilled 
occupational matches given these residual abilities and in light of claimant’s continued 
activity without apparent significant difficulties on the surveillance video seem an 
unreasonably high estimate of claimant’s loss of access. 
Ms. Laughlin indicates that she reviewed Dr. Milani’s restrictions and opines that 
she “found his IME confusing.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 38)  Ms. Laughlin did not request 
clarification of Dr. Milani’s restrictions.  Nevertheless, without clarifying her confusion, 
Ms. Laughlin purports to go ahead and apply some type of unspecified restrictions she 
perceives from Dr. Milani’s report.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 38)  Ms. Laughlin concludes, 
using the unspecified restrictions she gleaned from Dr. Milani, that Mr. Kemper 
sustained a 57.9 percent loss of access to semi-skilled and skilled occupations with 
good matches to claimant’s experience since the July 2018 injury.  Ms. Laughlin opines 
that claimant has lost 44.9 percent access to unskilled occupations using the 
unspecified restrictions from Dr. Milani.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 38)  Given Ms. Laughlin’s 
confusion about Dr. Milani’s report, her loss of access opinions do not instill a great deal 
of confidence or come across as terribly credible. 
Ms. Laughlin concedes that she was not tasked with assisting Mr. Kemper to 
identify and secure employment.  Instead, she was asked to perform a labor market 
survey.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 38)  Ms. Laughlin identifies several potential positions 
open to Mr. Kemper, many of which would exceed his restrictions from Dr. Hartley.  Ms. 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 8 
 
 
Laughlin also identifies jobs such as an election clerk and escort vehicle driver, but finds 
such positions only at a distance she deems an “unreasonable commute.”  (Claimant’s 
Ex. 7, p. 44)  In the alternative, Ms. Laughlin lists positions that have requirements (high 
school diploma or GED) that Mr. Kemper does not possess.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 46) 
Ms. Laughlin even identifies a fast food worker position, but identifies open 
positions 141 miles or 153 miles from claimant’s home.  Ms. Laughlin identifies only one 
fast food position remotely close to claimant’s residence.  (Claimant’s Ex. 7, p. 47)  This 
seems highly unlikely, but the fact that claimant can work such a job is relevant and 
demonstrates that he is not permanently and totally disabled as he asserted. 
Ultimately, I find Ms. Laughlin’s opinions insightful in that they establish there has 
been a permanent loss of earning capacity and to the extent that her opinions 
demonstrate there remain positions available to Mr. Kemper within the labor market for 
which he remains capable and qualified to perform.  However, I find Ms. Laughlin’s 
estimates of his loss of access to be inflated and not convincing.  Moreover, I find that 
claimant’s loss of future earning capacity is not as severely impacted as Ms. Laughlin’s 
loss of access estimates suggest. 
Ms. Laughlin points out and claimant testified that he has a stutter.  Observing 
claimant at the time of hearing, he definitely has a slight stutter.  However, it is not 
distracting, nor does it affect claimant’s ability to communicate his thoughts.  Mr. 
Kemper’s stutter may impact his ability to obtain employment in a few positions that 
would require expedited communications for safety reasons, but based on my 
observations, is not likely to be a significant impediment to him securing alternate 
employment. 
Mr. Kemper has applied for several jobs since the injury.  He is relaying work 
restrictions and is not seeking accommodations necessary from employers.  His 
approach to the job search may be hampering his ability to find alternate work.  On the 
other hand, his employer has effectively terminated him as a result of his work injury 
and resulting physical limitations.  The employer’s representative testified that Mr. 
Kemper was a good employee prior to the July 2018 injury.  If the employer is not willing 
to accommodate claimant’s restrictions on a permanent basis, it is even less likely that 
other employers will be willing to do so.  The employer’s actions suggest a fairly 
significant industrial disability has been sustained. 
I accept Dr. Hartley’s opinion and find that Mr. Kemper sustained a ten percent 
permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of the July 2018 low 
back injury.  I acknowledge Mr. Kemper’s testimony that he would like to complete a 
GED and then attend college with the intention of serving as an alcohol addiction 
counselor.  While a noble goal that Mr. Kemper may well pursue and achieve, his 
academic record at this time does not suggest that is a realistic pursuit. Nevertheless, it 
does demonstrate that Mr. Kemper believes he can return to gainful employment in 
some capacity, and I completely accept and agree with that belief.   

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 9 
 
 
Realistically, claimant is likely to find employment moving forward.  However, he 
is likely to find employment that pays significantly less than a skilled welder would enjoy.  
Therefore, I find that Mr. Kemper has proven he sustained a permanent loss of future 
earning capacity and that the loss is moderate to fairly significant. 
Considering that Mr. Kemper was 50 years of age at the time of hearing, 
possesses a 10th grade education, lacks significant computer skills, his primary past 
work experience is as a welder, his restrictions as identified by Dr. Hartley, his 
permanent impairment, as well as the situs and severity of the injury, claimant’s 
motivation, age, and abilities to retrain, and all other factors of industrial disability 
identified by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that Mr. Kemper has proven a 55 percent 
loss of future earning capacity as a result of the July 30, 2018 work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Having found that Mr. Kemper sustained a new injury on July 30, 2018 and that it 
caused him ongoing symptoms, permanent restrictions, and permanent functional 
impairment, I conclude that claimant proved he sustained permanent disability as a 
result of the July 30, 2018 injury.  Therefore, I must address the parties’ dispute about 
the extent of the permanent disability sustained. 
Claimant asserts he is permanently and totally disabled as a result of the July 30, 
2018 injury.  Defendants contend that claimant sustained no permanent disability and 
certainly not more than the five percent permanent disability already paid by 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 10 
 
 
defendants.  Claimant’s injury involves the low back.  He has been terminated from 
employment.  Therefore, the parties appropriately stipulated that the injury should be 
compensated with industrial disability if claimant sustained permanent disability.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Having considered claimants’ age, educational and employment backgrounds, 
abilities to return to gainful employment, motivation, permanent impairment, permanent 
restriction, the severity of the injuries, the length of healing period, the likelihood of 
retraining, and all of the other relevant factors outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court to 
assess industrial disability, I found that Mr. Kemper proved a 55 percent loss of future 
earning capacity as a result of the July 30, 2018 work injury.  This is equivalent to a 55 
percent industrial disability and entitles claimant to an award of 275 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2018). 
Mr. Kemper also asserts a request for taxation and reimbursement of his costs 
associated with this contested case proceeding.  Costs are taxed at the discretion of the 
agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  Claimant has recovered an award of permanent 
disability benefits.  Therefore, I conclude that it is appropriate to tax claimants’ costs in 
some amount. 
In this case, Mr. Kemper seeks assessment of the cost ($750.00) of his 
functional capacity evaluation with Daniel Fog, DPT.  Claimant also seeks assessment 
of the cost ($1,228.00) of Ms. Laughlin’s vocational assessment and report.  In this 
case, I found the FCE performed by Mr. Fog to be somewhat helpful.  I conclude it could 
be appropriate to tax the cost of drafting Mr. Fog’s report, if offered in lieu of Mr. Fog’s 
testimony at trial.  However, there is no breakdown of Mr. Fog’s charges, and it is 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 11 
 
 
impossible to know the cost of Mr. Fog’s report in lieu of testimony.  I decline to tax any 
portion of Mr. Fog’s FCE expenses. 
With respect to Ms. Laughlin’s vocational report, I did not find it to be credible or 
helpful given the facts of this case, other than to disprove claimant’s asserted 
permanent total disability claim.  I found Ms. Laughlin’s estimates to overstate the 
permanent disability experienced by Mr. Kemper.  Having declined to accept Ms. 
Laughlin’s opinions and having found them unhelpful in my determination of industrial 
disability, I also conclude it inappropriate to tax the cost of Ms. Laughlin’s evaluation or 
report. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant two hundred seventy-five (275) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing on October 14, 2019. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated weekly rate of five hundred 
sixty and 24/100 dollars ($560.24) per week. 
Defendants shall be entitled to the stipulated credit noted in the hearing report 
against this award of permanent disability benefits. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump 
sum together with interest payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File 
No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __3rd ___ day of December, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 

KEMPER V. INTERNATIONAL EQUIPMENT SOLUTIONS 
Page 12 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Darin Luneckas (via WCES) 
Jean Dickson (via WCES) 
 
