Case Number: 20004873.01
Case Title:  MCFARLAND, BENJAMEN V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING HEATING & COOLING INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      McFarland Benjamen-20004873.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
BENJAMEN MCFARLAND, 
File No. 20004873.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, & 
COOLING, 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
FEDERATED RESERVE INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
Headnotes:  1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Benjamen McFarland seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer Terpstra Plumbing, Heating, and Cooling (Terpstra) and 
insurance carrier Federated Reserve Insurance Company (Federated). The 
undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing on November 8, 2022. McFarland 
participated personally and through attorney Nathaniel Boulton. Terpstra participated as 
the legal representative of Terpstra. The defendants participated by and through 
attorney Rene Charles LaPierre. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding deputy 
commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via an 
order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability caused by the 
stipulated work injury? 
2) Is McFarland entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jul-17  07:39:44     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 2 
 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between McFarland and Terpstra 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) McFarland sustained an injury on July 5, 2019, which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with Terpstra. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, but McFarland’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits 
is no longer in dispute. 
4) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5) The commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits, if 
any are awarded, is February 26, 2020. 
6) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) McFarland’s gross earnings were $1,000.63 per week. 
b) McFarland was single. 
c) McFarland was entitled to one exemption. 
7) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to McFarland 25 weeks of compensation 
at the rate of $654.75 per week. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE-1 through JE-14; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 2;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through G; and 
 Hearing testimony by McFarland.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 3 
 
McFarland was forty-six years of age at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 9) He 
was born in Des Moines, Iowa, and lived in Stuart and Grinnell until he moved to 
Colorado. (Hrg. Tr. p. 9) McFarland moved from Iowa to Colorado in August of 2021. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 9)  
McFarland graduated from Grinnell High School. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10) McFarland took 
emergency medical technician (EMT) classes and obtained a credential in that field. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 10) He also took classes at a community college. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10) 
McFarland has a master plumber certification. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10) This is the level 
above journeyman. (Hrg. Tr. p. 78) He worked as a plumber for another company for a 
year before Terpstra hired him. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10–11) McFarland worked there until his 
wife at the time and he bought a restaurant in Grinnell. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) The restaurant 
did not work out, so McFarland returned to work for Terpstra in or around the spring of 
2015. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11)  
McFarland worked with Mike and Brenda. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11–13) He worked on 
service calls, installation, and did some sales work. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 12–13) The physical 
requirements varied by the job and required him to do what needed to be done to 
complete a job, whether it be replacing a furnace, carrying an old water heater out of a 
basement, working over his head on a ladder, crawling in a crawl space, working in a 
hole, laying on the floor in what is essentially a reverse plank while working on a kitchen 
sink repair, or digging a drain in a residential basement. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 13–14) 
McFarland’s work for Terpstra included lifting weights that ranged between 150 
and 200 pounds. (Ex. 1, p. 1) The heaviest item McFarland lifted by himself was a water 
heater that weight approximately 200 pounds. (Ex. 1, p. 1) When working on an 
installation, McFarland did not often sit. (Ex. 1, p. 1) However, when driving between 
jobs, McFarland would sit. (Ex. 1, p. 1) 
McFarland earned about $25.00 per hour while working full time for Terpstra. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 14–15) That worked out to one thousand dollars each week before taxes. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 14) McFarland testified he would have moved on to another job if Terpstra 
had not given him requested pay raises between the date of injury and the date of 
hearing. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17)  
Terpstra offered health insurance as part of a group plan. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) 
McFarland did not know if there was a retirement plan. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 15–16) Terpstra 
also provided a Chevrolet pickup truck to McFarland and paid for gas. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) 
McFarland could use the truck to commute to jobs and for personal errands. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 15–16) 
Before the stipulated work injury, McFarland suffered issues with his back and 
left leg. (Hrg. Tr. p. 70; Ex. JE-14, p. 177) The parties have stipulated that McFarland 
sustained an injury to his back while performing job duties for Terpstra on July 5, 2019. 
The doctors who have authored expert opinions in this case agree that the stipulated 
work injury caused McFarland permanent disability. No doctor has opined that the 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 4 
 
stipulated work injury was at least a significant factor in causing McFarland permanent 
functional impairment. Therefore, the weight of the evidence establishes that the 
stipulated work injury McFarland sustained on July 5, 2019, more likely than not caused 
permanent functional impairment. 
On July 5, 2019, McFarland went to install a furnace and air-conditioning system 
in a bar and grill in Montezuma, Iowa. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) The job required removing a 
furnace that weighed about 350 pounds. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) McFarland and Mike were 
removing the furnace and an air-conditioning coil from a platform. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) 
While removing an air-conditioning coil, the furnace began to fall off the platform. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 19) McFarland grabbed the furnace so that it would not fall on Mike and 
caught with his body bent in a twisted position. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) They were able to keep 
the furnace from falling. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 19–20) McFarland felt warmth in his back, went 
outside to collect himself, and then returned to finish the job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20) After 
completion of the job, McFarland went home for the day. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20) 
Brenda called McFarland the next morning for a job, and he answered while still 
in bed. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 20–21) He noticed he was sorer and had more stiffness than was 
typical. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) By the time McFarland walked to his truck to drive to the job, he 
was having problems moving his legs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) McFarland went back inside, took 
a hot shower, and took over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medication as well as some 
“nerve medicine.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) McFarland was able to complete the job that day 
despite his symptoms. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) 
That night after work, McFarland experienced muscle cramps and spasms in his 
back and stiffness and tingling in his legs. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 21–22) His symptoms led him to 
see his personal physician the following Monday. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) Ultimately, McFarland 
reported the injury to Terpstra and the defendants provided care under Iowa Code 
section 85.27.  
The defendants authorized care with Ryan Albright, M.D., for McFarland’s injury. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 25) McFarland saw Dr. Albright on July 8, 2019. (JE-1, p. 1) Dr. Albright 
noted McFarland shared “he had an acute worsening of his pain last week after being 
asked to hold up a furnace and keep it from falling down some stairs.” (JE-1, p. 1) 
On July 12, 2019, McFarland followed up with Dr. Albright, who noted back pain 
that was “moderate in severity, constant in nature and has a pressure-like and sharp 
quality.” (JE-1, p. 3) Dr. Albright also recorded the pain shot intermittently into the back 
of McFarland’s legs. (JE-1, p. 3) Dr. Albright released McFarland to return to work on 
July 15, 2019, with restrictions that including no lifting more than 20 pounds, no pushing 
or pulling more than 40 pounds, and no using ladders. (JE-1, p. 4) 
Terpstra did not have much in the way of light-duty work because it was a small 
operation that specialized in plumbing, heating, and cooling. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) Terpstra 
was motivated for McFarland to return to service calls, so they often asked him to try 
performing work to see if he could do it. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32)  

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 5 
 
McFarland would perform service calls outside his restrictions in order to ensure 
he would get hours. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) To lessen the physical demands of the job, he did 
things like remove tools out of his bag to lighten it for carrying. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) But this 
also meant more trips to the van for tools when performing a job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33)  
McFarland also requested that Terpstra hire his stepson as a helper. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 
33–34) Terpstra did so for jobs that required heavier job duties. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 33–34) But 
his son was unable to perform much work without McFarland providing direction. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 34) 
McFarland requested other accommodations for the physical limitations caused 
by the work injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) He asked for a mechanical lift to help load and unload 
items from his truck, but Terpstra refused. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) He also inquired about an 
electric stair cart to transport heavy items up and down stairs; Terpstra would not agree 
to purchase such a cart. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) 
McFarland returned to see Dr. Albright on July 22, 2019. (JE-1, p. 5) He 
described his pain as somewhat improved but persistent with sharp bilateral back pain 
that was moderate in severity and worse when standing or walking. (JE-1, p. 5) Rest 
helped relieve the pain. (JE-1, p. 5) McFarland also complained of weakness in his legs 
when walking over about 100 feet in distance. (JE-1, p. 5) Dr. Albright continued 
McFarland’s work restrictions from July 12 and added additional restrictions of no 
repetitive upper extremity twisting and no continuous walking for more than 100 feet. 
(JE-1, p. 6) 
On July 29, 2019, McFarland underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of 
his lumbar spine at Pella Regional Health Center. (JE-2, pp. 12–13) Lee Henry, D.O., 
interpreted the MRI to show: 
 Posterior bulging disc and degenerative disc disease at L4-5; 
 Left foraminal narrowing at L4-5 secondary to posterior bulging disc and 
facet hypertrophy; 
 No critical nerve root impingement or edema;  
 No evidence of disc herniation; and 
 No canal stenosis. (JE-2, p. 13) 
McFarland next saw Dr. Albright on August 7, 2019, when he shared he was 
doing mainly administrative work at Terpstra. (JE-1, p. 7) Dr. Albright noted McFarland’s 
pain continued and he had no new complaints or symptoms. (JE-1, p. 7) They 
discussed different types of treatment for his pain, including massage, acupuncture, 
biofeedback, and physical therapy, but McFarland did not want to take the time to 
undergo such care. (JE-1, p. 8) Dr. Albright instructed McFarland to follow-up on an as-

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 6 
 
needed basis. (JE-1, p. 8) Dr. Albright continued McFarland’s work restrictions on 
September 4, 2019. (JE-1, p. 9) 
On August 16, 2019, McFarland began physical therapy at Total Rehab in 
Grinnell. (JE-3, p. 14) McFarland experienced mixed results with his symptoms during 
his time participating in physical therapy. (JE-3, pp. 14–47) Initially, McFarland would 
feel good after a physical therapy appointment only to have his symptoms return, often 
from performing physical activities at work. (JE-3, pp. 14–47)  
On September 25, 2019, McFarland saw Daniel Miller, D.O., an occupational 
medicine specialist, for the first time. (JE-4, p. 48) Dr. Miller noted McFarland had 
complaints of back pain, “stingers” down the back of both legs into both feet, muscle 
spasms in his back and both legs, leg stiffness, and difficulty operating his legs with 
prolonged walking. (JE-4, p. 48) Dr. Miller assigned work restrictions of no lifting over 20 
pounds, no pushing or pulling over 40 pounds, no repetitive bending or twisting, no 
climbing ladders, and sitting, standing, and walking as tolerated. (JE-4, p. 50) He also 
directed McFarland to ice and heat the affected area three times daily for 20 minutes. 
(JE-4, p. 50)  
As McFarland continued with physical therapy, he felt soreness and fatigue after 
appointments. (JE-3, pp. 14–47; Hrg. Tr. p. 25)  McFarland thought that was part of the 
process, but his providers told him that if exercises were causing him increased pain, 
they needed to stop doing them. (Hrg. Tr. p. 25) Nonetheless, he continued his physical 
therapy. (JE-3, pp. 14–47) 
McFarland continued to see Dr. Miller and they decided to maintain conservative 
care in the form of medication and physical therapy. (JE-4, pp. 51–56) McFarland 
reported worsening symptoms on December 11, 2019, so Dr. Miller prescribed 
Prednisone, which had been beneficial previously. (JE-4, pp. 57–58) After a December 
30, 2019 appointment, Dr. Miller opined McFarland was at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) because “all reasonable modalities have been tried without results 
that were hoped for” and requested a functional capacity examination (FCE), which 
McFarland underwent on January 29, 2019. (JE-4, p. 60; JE-5, pp. 95–102) Shortly 
thereafter, McFarland discontinued physical therapy. (JE-3; JE-4, p. 61) 
On February 26, 2020, McFarland saw Dr. Miller again. (JE-4, pp. 63–64) Dr. 
Miller noted tenderness in the paralumbar muscles bilaterally, flexion of ninety degrees 
with discomfort, extension of ten degrees with mild pain, and side bend rotation of 
twenty degrees bilaterally with discomfort. (JE-4, p. 63) He also recorded the straight 
leg test was negative bilaterally and symmetrical reflexes and sensation and strength in 
McFarland’s lower extremities. (JE-4, p. 63) 
Dr. Miller found McFarland’s FCE was valid and placed him in the heavy physical 
demand level of work. (JE-4, p. 64) Based on the FCE, he assigned McFarland the 
following permanent work restrictions: 
 Occasionally lifting up to 57.5 pounds from waist to floor; 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 7 
 
 Occasionally lifting 47.5 pounds from waist to shoulders; 
 Occasionally lifting 42.5 pounds from waist to overhead; 
 Occasionally carrying up to 42.5 pounds bilaterally; 
 Occasionally pushing up to 72.5 pounds horizontally; 
 Occasionally pulling up to 50 pounds horizontally; 
 Frequently climbing ladders; and 
 Occasionally squatting. (JE-4, p. 64) 
McFarland continued to follow-up with Dr. Miller with complaints of ongoing 
symptoms. (JE-4, pp. 65–68) On April 22, 2020, Dr. Miller opined that he did not believe 
McFarland was a candidate for surgery despite his ongoing symptoms. (JE-4, p. 68) He 
felt they needed to find a regiment that offered the greatest amount of pain relief with 
little or no medications. (JE-4, p. 68)  
The defendants inquired about what, if any, permanent impairment McFarland 
had sustained. (JE-4, p. 68) Dr. Miller opined “within a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty, that [McFarland] has a permanent aggravation of his pre-existing spondylosis 
of the lumbar spine.” (JE-4, p. 68) He also used Table 15-3 on page 384 of the Fifth 
Edition of the American Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (Guides) to place McFarland in the diagnosis-related estimate (DRE) lumbar 
category II and opined he had a five percent impairment to the whole person. (JE-4, p. 
68)  
McFarland’s symptoms worsened while he was working at Terpstra. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
35) Because of concerns about opioids, McFarland and his doctors tried other types of 
drugs to address the pain. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 23, 35–36) Some of them had undesirable side 
effects such as kidney issues, cognitive issues, and troubles staying awake while 
driving at night. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 22–23) McFarland tried other avenues, such as yoga, to 
alleviate his ongoing symptoms, but had little success. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 36–37) 
McFarland was able to take action to mitigate his symptoms. Sitting on a bucket 
relieved some of the stress on his back. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 34–35) McFarland also found that 
sitting in the company truck on the heated seats helped keep his pain level lower. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 33–34) McFarland was under the impression sitting on a bucket or using the 
heated seats to reduce his symptoms was okay with Terpstra. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35)  
McFarland continued to see Dr. Miller for his ongoing symptoms. (JE-4, p. 69) Dr. 
Miller believed McFarland was on too many medications and attempted to reduce the 
number of prescriptions he had. (JE-4, pp. 76, 78) Dr. Miller and McFarland continued 
to work to find a prescription medication regimen that consisted of as few prescriptions 
as possible with the maximum amount of symptoms reduction. (JE-4, pp. 78, 80, 82, 84, 
86, 88, 90)  

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 8 
 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for McFarland to undergo an independent medical 
examination (IME) with John Kuhnlein, D.O., an occupational medicine specialist, on 
November 4, 2020. (Ex. 1) As part of the evaluation process, Dr. Kuhnlein learned of 
McFarland’s medical history during an in-person examination and review of medical 
records. (Ex. 1, pp. 1–8) Dr. Kuhnlein issued an IME report dated November 24, 2019. 
(Ex. 1) 
Dr. Kuhnlein diagnosed McFarland with chronic musculoskeletal low back pain 
with features consistent with radiculitis. (Ex. 1, p. 8) He opined that the stipulated work 
injury materially aggravated McFarland’s pre-existing low back condition. (Ex. 1, p. 8) 
Dr. Kuhnlein concluded McFarland reached MMI on February 26, 2020, and that his 
subsequent care was of a maintenance nature. (Ex. 1, p. 8) 
On the question of permanent impairment caused by the stipulated work injury, 
Dr. Kuhnlein utilized the Guides to opine: 
In this particular case, with the pre-existing condition’s aggravation in 
essentially the same distribution as before with more severe symptoms, I 
believe that the DRE method is indicated. Turning to Table 15-3, page 
384, I would place Mr. McFarland into DRE Lumbar Category II and 
assign 7% whole person impairment. This would be an overall impairment, 
including the pre-existing condition. Apportionment may be indicated. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 8–9) 
Dr. Kuhnlein did not assert that the entirety of the 7 percent impairment rating he 
assigned McFarland was due to the stipulated work injury. He states that this rating 
includes McFarland’s pre-existing condition, and that apportionment may be 
appropriate. In contrast, Dr. Miller linked the entirety of the 5 percent whole person 
impairment rating he gave McFarland was due to the aggravation of his pre-existing 
condition by the stipulated work injury. Therefore, Dr. Miller’s opinion on permanent 
impairment is most persuasive. 
Dr. Kuhnlein also prescribed the following permanent work restrictions: 
 Occasionally lifting up to 30 pounds from floor to waist; 
 Occasionally lifting up to 40 pounds from waist to shoulder; 
 Occasionally lifting up to 20 pounds over the shoulder relating to the “moment 
arm” phenomenon; 
 Occasionally lifting up to 30 pounds when reaching away from the axial plane; 
 Sitting, standing, and walking on an as needed basis with the ability to 
change positions for comfort; 
 Occasionally bend at the waist, crawl, kneel, stoop, or squat; 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 9 
 
 Occasionally climb stairs; 
 Occasionally work at or above shoulder height;  
 No working on a ladder or at height for any significant length of time; and 
 Stretch breaks while traveling. (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Ultimately, McFarland’s employment with Terpstra came to an end. He was 
working with a young man Terpstra had hired as an apprentice. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) They 
were assigned an installation job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) While McFarland’s coworker was 
performing some work, McFarland went to the truck to sit on a heated seat to alleviate 
his back symptoms and check emails. (Hrg. Tr. p. 38) 
Tim arrived at the job site, alleged McFarland sat in the truck for fifteen minutes, 
and made a comment to McFarland about sitting in the truck. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 38–39) 
McFarland took issue with Tim’s tone and comments, the two exchanged words 
heatedly, and McFarland collected his tools and left the job site. (Hrg. Tr. p. 39) 
McFarland returned to the office and spoke with Brenda about the tension between him 
and Tim. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) He told Brenda he would return the next day to discuss 
accommodations until he could find another job within his physical limitations. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 40–41) 
During the next day’s meeting, Tim informed McFarland that as far he was 
concerned, McFarland had quit his job the day before. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) McFarland 
apologized for losing his temper and Tim said something along the lines of, “Let’s get to 
work.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) McFarland asked Tim if Terpstra would accommodate his work 
restrictions until he could find another job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) Tim replied, “I’m not paying 
somebody to sit around on a fucking bucket.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 41)  
While McFarland had decided to find a less physically demanding job before his 
conversation with Tim, it motivated him to end the employment relationship. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
43) Tim’s response caused McFarland to recognize he was beating himself up 
physically and emotionally working for Terpstra and he could not do it anymore. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 41) He left the office, went home, cleaned out the company truck, got help to fill 
the truck bed with items he had borrowed from Terpstra, and then returned the truck to 
Terpstra with the items in it. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 41–42)  
Because of their issues finding a viable pain medication regimen for McFarland, 
on February 3, 2021, Dr. Miller recommended he see a pain specialist because he was 
beyond his level of medical expertise. (JE-4, pp. 92, 94) McFarland went to Central 
States Pain Clinic, but the pain management was ineffective. (JE-7, pp. 120–23, 128–
29; Hrg. Tr. p. 25) McFarland also tried other types of conservative care, including 
massage, muscle manipulation, and traction, but they did not reduce his pain. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 25–26) Chiropractic care likewise resulted in minimal benefit. (JE-6, pp. 103–108) 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 10 
 
Ultimately, providers performed imaging that showed his spine was unstable. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 26–27) They referred him to a surgeon. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) However, because 
McFarland was moving from Iowa to Colorado, they decided to wait until after he was 
established in Colorado to find him a surgeon there. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27)  
In Colorado, McFarland saw Konrad Nau, M.D. (JE-9) Dr. Nau has kept 
McFarland under work restrictions that include no lifting, carrying, pushing, or pulling 
more than 35 pounds. (JE-9) This is in line with McFarland’s lived experience and the 
self-limitation he uses in his daily life according to his credible hearing testimony. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 54) 
In Colorado, McFarland received injections to address his symptoms. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
29) The results have not lasted long. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 29–30) McFarland’s relief subsides 
after days or weeks, depending on his activity level. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 29–30) Even walking 
behind a self-propelled lawnmower will cause his pain to increase shortly after an 
injection. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30)  
At the time of hearing, McFarland described his symptoms as stable because his 
work duties were more predictable and within his physical limitations. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) He 
was preparing for the possibility of surgery by participating in physical therapy and 
losing weight. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) McFarland had an appointment to determine if he is a 
candidate for surgery. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) McFarland hopes to be able to undergo surgery 
and rehabilitate his back so that he can return to his pre-injury activity level at work and 
in his free time. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) 
McFarland was using prescription muscle-relaxers. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) He 
nonetheless experiences tingling and burning in the toes on his right foot, his right calf, 
and in the hamstring area of his right leg. (Hrg. Tr. p. 46) McFarland’s symptoms are 
worse when he is not using muscle-relaxers in such situations so that he has cramping 
and pain in both legs. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 46–47) 
Dahl hired McFarland and his job there started on or about June 21, 2021. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 67) The job is based in Colorado. (Hrg. Tr. p. 47) McFarland and his family had to 
move from Grinnell to Colorado. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 47, 51) His family paid a young man to 
help them move from Iowa to Colorado and for his flight back to Iowa. (Hrg. Tr. p. 51) 
At the time of hearing, McFarland was working as a sales manager for the HVAC 
department. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 47–48) He manages the inventory and works with customers. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 48) McFarland spends most of his day in an office chair, but he can use a 
hot pad or get up and walk around as needed. (Hrg. Tr. p. 48) On occasion, McFarland 
will go to a job site to observe or help with troubleshooting and other issues. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
48) But he does not perform duties of the type he performed at Terpstra. (Hrg. Tr. p. 48) 
The position is a salaried position with no overtime, unlike his position at 
Terpstra. (Hrg. Tr. p. 50) McFarland’s first-year salary at Dahl was approximately sixty-
two thousand dollars. (Hrg. Tr. p. 63) He makes about eight thousand more dollars per 
year than he did at Terpstra with the possibility to earn bonuses. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49) 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 11 
 
McFarland earned a bonus of twenty thousand dollars in his first year on the job. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 63) The bonus brought his overall annual earnings to approximately eighty-two 
thousand dollars. (Hrg. Tr. p. 64) 
McFarland’s new job has benefits that include health insurance, to which he 
contributes just as he did at Terpstra, and retirement plan. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 49, 64) 
McFarland’s new employer provides a vehicle stipend but does not provide a vehicle 
and gas like Terpstra. (Hrg. Tr. p. 50) 
McFarland’s earnings do not go as far in Colorado as they did in central Iowa 
because the cost of living is higher. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49) Housing is more expensive in 
Colorado than it was in Grinnell. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49) Consequently, his increased earnings 
do not go as far in Colorado as they would have in Grinnell. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
A .  
E f f e c t  o f  U n e m p l o y m en t  I n s u r a n c e  D e t e r m i n a t i o n.  
The defendants offered into evidence as Exhibit A, an unemployment insurance 
appeal decision issued by an administrative law judge with the department of workforce 
development under the Iowa Employment Security Law, Iowa Code chapter 96. 
McFarland had no objection to the exhibit. The undersigned admitted the decision into 
evidence.  
Iowa Code section 96.6(3)(b)(4) provides: 
A finding of fact or law, judgment, conclusion, or final order made pursuant 
to this section by an employee or representative of the department, 
administrative law judge, or the employment appeal board, is binding only 
upon the parties to proceedings brought under this chapter, and is not 
binding upon any other proceedings or action involving the same facts 
brought by the same or related parties before the division of labor 
services, division of workers’ compensation, other state agency, arbitrator, 
court, or judge of this state or the United States. 
Thus, Defendants’ Exhibit A, the unemployment insurance appeal decision, has 
limited effect in this proceeding before the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner. 
Neither the findings of fact nor the conclusions of law in it are binding on the 
undersigned. Nonetheless, the findings of fact are generally in line with McFarland’s 
testimony and reinforce the conclusion that he was a credible witness at hearing. The 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 12 
 
conclusions of law under the Iowa Employment Security Law are not controlling on the 
conclusions in this section under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 85. 
B . 
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
The parties dispute how Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), as amended in 2017, 
impacts McFarland’s entitlement to benefits. The defendants contend the statute 
operates to limit McFarland to benefits for only the functional impairment resulting from 
the stipulated work injury because, after the injury, he returned to work with Terpstra at 
the same or higher hourly wage. McFarland argues that he is entitled to permanent 
partial disability benefits for the industrial disability resulting from his work injury 
because he earned less working at Terpstra after the injury than before and his 
employment with Terpstra ended before the hearing.1 Thus, the dispute centers on the 
impact of McFarland’s return to work and separation from employment with Terpstra 
and requires interpretation of section 85.34(2)(v). 
Workers’ compensation is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 
570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d  520, 527 
(Iowa 1992).  And “it is the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the 
act’s benefits may be obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation (apart 
from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a physical 
injury.” Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 2010). 
Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2), the method of compensating permanent partial 
disability caused by a work injury is generally based on whether the injury is to a body 
part itemized in the statutory schedule. Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 
404, 407 (Iowa 1994). “Scheduled permanent partial disabilities . . .  are ‘arbitrarily’ 
compensable according to the classifications of section 85.34(2) without regard to loss 
of earning capacity.” Id. (quoting Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 14–15 
(Iowa 1993)).  
Before 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body part caused by 
a work injury was “compensated by the industrial disability method which takes into 
account the loss of earning capacity.” Id. (citing Mortimer, 502 N.W.2d at 14–15). An 
industrial disability analysis was used regardless of whether the injured employee 
                                                 
1 McFarland also argues that even though his salary, wages, or earnings at his new job with a 
different employer are higher than what they were at Terpstra when he sustained the work injury, the 
agency should consider the cost of living in his new area of residence when determining whether he is 
“receiv[ing] the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than [he] received at the time of injury” under 
section 85.34(2)(v). Because the cost of living in Colorado, where he works and resides, is higher than it 
is in Iowa, McFarland posits, he should be entitled to industrial disability benefits under the amended 
statute. Because McFarland is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits based on the industrial 
disability framework under the statutory text, this decision does not address his alternative argument that 
the statute should be interpreted to require consideration of the cost of living in his area of residence. 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 13 
 
returned to work with the defendant-employer or the level of earnings at the time of 
hearing relative to the date of injury. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 
(Iowa 2009) (quoting Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 
1992)); see also Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 158 (Iowa 1996); Arrow-
Acme Corp. v. Bellamy, 500 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa App. 1993). With the 2017 
amendments, the legislature carved out an exception to this general rule and created a 
mandatory bifurcated litigation process on the issue of permanent disability under 
certain circumstances. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v)). The statute now articulates an exception and the circumstances 
triggering the bifurcated litigation process as follows: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee's 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee's earning 
capacity caused by the employee's permanent partial disability. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).  
Thus, the 2017 amendments changed the statute so that its text expressly 
incorporates the agency’s review-reopening process to create a mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process when certain criteria are met. See, e.g., Garcia v. Smithfield Foods, 
File No. 1657969.01 (Arb. February 16, 2022). Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), 
review-reopening is a process by which a determination of compensation is revisited 
due to a change in the claimant’s condition. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387, 391–95 (Iowa 2009) The bifurcated litigation process created in section 85.34(2)(v) 
allows a claimant to seek a new agency determination of permanent disability using an 
industrial disability analysis when the defendant-employer terminates the claimant’s 
employment after the initial agency award or approval of the parties’ agreement for 
settlement. Presumably, this is because the defendant-employer’s discharge of the 
claimant after the award or agreement for settlement creates a potential change in the 
claimant’s condition that could trigger reopening the determination of permanent 
disability. See id.  
The parties dispute whether section 85.34(2)(v) requires McFarland to follow the 
bifurcated litigation process to obtain a determination of what, if any, industrial disability 
he has sustained due to his unscheduled work injury. The defendants believe 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 14 
 
McFarland must follow it because he returned to work with Terpstra at the requisite 
earnings level after the stipulated work injury. McFarland disagrees because Terpstra 
terminated his employment before the hearing. 
The legislature has not empowered the agency to interpret the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, but the agency necessarily must do so when performing its quasi-
judicial function as tribunal for workers’ compensation contested case proceedings. See 
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518–19 (Iowa 2012); see also Iowa Ins. 
Inst. v. Core Group of Iowa Ass’n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 68 (Iowa 2015). To 
determine McFarland’s entitlement to permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits in this 
case, it is necessary to first determine whether McFarland must use the bifurcated 
litigation process under the statute given the timing of Terpstra’s termination of his 
employment. Therefore, this decision must interpret section 85.34(2)(v). 
The defendants ask the agency to use one sentence of section 85.34(2)(v). Read 
alone, this sentence states that an injured employee is entitled only to PPD benefits for 
functional impairment if the employee “returns to work or is offered work for which the 
employee receives or would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings 
than the employee received at the time of the injury.” Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). As the 
defendants point out, the sentence contains no express requirement that the injured 
worker remain employed after returning to work at the requisite earning level. But the 
analysis of this statutory provision does not end with the punctuation that concludes this 
sentence.  
Iowa statutes are interpreted as a whole, not in part. See, e.g., Doe v. State, 943 
N.W.2d 608, 610 (Iowa 2020).  When interpreting the text of a provision in the Iowa 
Code, courts and the agency must “take into consideration the language’s relationship 
to other provisions of the same statute and other provisions of related statutes.” Id. 
Therefore, the entirety of section 85.34(2)(v) and its interplay with the rest of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act must be considered, not just one sentence. The next 
sentence of section 85.34(2)(v) states an injured employee who “returns to work with 
the same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee’s functional 
impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated 
from employment by that employer” may seek reopening of the agency award or an 
agreement for settlement on the question of permanent disability.  
The Commissioner considered the interplay of these two new sentences in 
Martinez v. Pavlich, Inc., File No. 5063900 (App. July 30, 2020). In Martinez, the 
claimant voluntarily quit employment with the defendant-employer and accepted a 
position with a different employer at higher pay. Id. While the nature of the employment 
separation differs from the one in this case, Martinez is nonetheless guiding. Id.  The 
Commissioner considered how the two sentences cited by the parties in this case 
should be construed and found: 
[W]hen the two new provisions . . . are read together, as they are set forth 
in the statute, it appears the legislature intended to address only the 
scenario in which a claimant initially returns to work with the defendant-

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 15 
 
employer or is offered work by the defendant-employer at the same or 
greater earnings but is later terminated by the defendant-employer. 
Id. at 5 (emphasis added). Put otherwise, the statute requires a bifurcated litigation 
process on permanent disability only under the circumstances its text expressly details.  
Reinforcing the Commissioner’s reading is the traditional statutory construction 
principle of expressio unius est exclusio alterious, which holds that legislative intent is 
expressed by exclusion and inclusion alike with the express mention of one thing 
implying the exclusion of another. Kucera v. Baldazo, 745 N.W.2d 481, 487 (Iowa 
2008). In section 85.34(2)(v), the text expressly requires a bifurcated litigation process 
only when the claimant returns to employment with the defendant-employer or is offered 
work by the defendant-employer at the requisite earnings level and is then discharged 
after an agency award of permanent disability or an agreement for settlement with 
respect to permanent disability. The statute contains no mention of any other 
circumstances that mandate a bifurcated litigation process to determine the extent of 
permanent disability. The legislature could have included such language in the statute 
but did not. This choice implies that the requirement for a bifurcated ligation process 
only applies when the defendant-employer discharges the claimant after the agency 
issues an award or approves the parties’ agreement for settlement on the question of 
permanent disability based on functional impairment.  
Relatedly, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act “is not to be expanded by 
reading something into it that is not there.” Downs, 481 N.W.2d at 527 (citing Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). Because the statutory 
text does not include an express requirement for a bifurcated litigation process when the 
defendant-employer terminates the claimant’s employment before hearing, it would be 
legal error to expand the circumstances under which section 85.34(2)(v) requires such a 
process by reading something into its text that is not there. Compounding the legal error 
that such an interpretation would constitute is the fact it would undermine an important 
purpose of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
In Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130 (Iowa 2003), the Iowa 
Supreme Court considered the Commissioner’s authority to reform a workers’ 
compensation insurance policy. Even though this opinion construed the scope of the 
Commissioner’s authority under section 85.21, its reasoning applies here. Id. at 132–33. 
The court drew on longstanding precedent as the foundation of its holding: 
The fundamental reason for the enactment of this legislation is to avoid 
litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize appeals, and 
afford an efficient and speedy tribunal to determine and award 
compensation under the terms of this act. 
“It was the purpose of the legislature to create a tribunal to 
do rough justice—speedy, summary, informal, untechnical. With this 
scheme of the legislature we must not interfere; for, if we trench in the 
slightest degree upon the prerogatives of the commission, one 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 16 
 
encroachment will breed another, until finally simplicity will give way to 
complexity, and informality to technicality.” 
Id. at 133 (quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921) (citation omitted)).  
The court concluded a “bifurcated litigation process” that is drawn out “is a far cry 
from the efficient and speedy remedy envisioned by the general assembly when it 
adopted the workers’ compensation act.” Id. at 133–34. The court held it would be 
erroneous “to read into the statute a limitation on the [C]ommissioner’s authority to 
decide claims for compensation, particularly when to do so would defeat one of the 
primary purposes of the statute—the provision of a prompt and adequate remedy.” Id. 
Applying Zomer here, expanding the circumstances in which a bifurcated litigation 
process is required under section 85.34(2)(v) requires reading something into the 
statute that is not there and would result in a longer, drawn-out process that would 
hinder the agency’s ability to provide a prompt and adequate remedy, which would 
defeat one of the primary purposes of the Act.   
Lastly, reading the requirement for a bifurcated litigation process to apply only 
under the circumstances expressly stated in section 85.34(2)(v) is consistent with Iowa 
Supreme Court precedent requiring the agency and courts to “apply the workers’ 
compensation statute broadly and liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective: 
the benefit of the worker and the worker’s dependents.” Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. 
Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 2010). Applying the statute as written allows a 
claimant to receive a final determination on permanent disability when the issue is ripe 
for determination. Getting such a determination via a single contested case proceeding 
before the agency means the claimant will receive payment of all PPD benefits to which 
the claimant is legally entitled sooner in time and without having to go through litigation 
of a second contested cast proceeding. Therefore, the result of adhering to the statutory 
text is beneficial to the injured worker and the worker’s dependents. 
Circling back to the agency appeal decision in Martinez, the Commissioner 
specifically considered whether the statute mandates a bifurcated litigation process 
when the claimant quits employment with the defendant-employer and then gets a job 
with a different employer with higher earnings. File No. 5063900 (App. July 30, 2020). 
The Commissioner held reading the statute to require a bifurcated litigation process 
when the claimant quits employment with the defendant-employer and obtains a new 
job with higher earnings before hearing would cause absurd results: 
For example, [such an] interpretation would seemingly “reset” claimant's 
entitlement to benefits and limit them to functional loss any time a claimant 
returns to work or is offered work at the same or greater wages by any 
employer. This would make it virtually impossible for defendants to know 
when to volunteer benefits using the industrial disability method. 
Furthermore, using claimant's interpretation, a claimant entitled to benefits 
under subsection 85.34(2)(v) (2019) might be better off not seeking 
employment after being terminated by a defendant-employer because he 
or she would potentially risk entitlement to benefits under the industrial 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 17 
 
disability analysis should a different employer offer the same or greater 
earnings than the claimant was receiving at the time of the injury. Certainly 
the legislature did not intend to discourage claimants from seeking gainful 
employment after a work injury. 
Id. at 5–6. The Commissioner then concluded, “though claimant in this case was 
earning greater wages at the time of the hearing than he was when he was injured, I 
conclude his earlier voluntary separation from defendant-employer removed claimant 
from the functional impairment analysis and triggered his entitlement to benefits using 
the industrial disability analysis.” Id. at 6.  
On judicial review, the district court disagreed with the Commissioner’s 
interpretation of section 85.34(2)(v). See Pavlich Inc. et al v. Martinez, Ruling on 
Petition for Judicial Review, Case No. CVCV060634 (Iowa D. Ct. Polk Co., Apr. 21, 
2021). Nonetheless, the district court affirmed the Commissioner’s determination of 
permanent disability. See id. Thus, the district court’s analysis of whether section 
85.34(2)(v) mandates a bifurcated litigation process when the claimant quits 
employment with the defendant-employer and obtains a job with higher earnings before 
the hearing is obiter dicta and does not control in this case on the question of whether 
McFarland must go through the bifurcated litigation process outlined in section 
85.34(2)(v). See Nixon v. State, 704 N.W.2d 643, 648 n. 5 (Iowa 2005) (citing Boyles v. 
Cora, 232 Iowa 822, 847, 6 N.W.2d 401, 413 (1942)). As Deputy Grell persuasively 
concluded, “[U]ntil a definitive interpretation is provided by the Iowa appellate courts, [a 
presiding deputy is] bound by the precedent of this agency found in Martinez.” Dague v. 
Unisys Corporation, File No. 1645503.02 (Arb., Mar. 28, 2022). 
For these reasons, section 85.34(2)(v) does not require a bifurcated litigation 
process on the question of a claimant’s permanent disability when the employment 
relationship between the claimant and defendant-employer ends before the agency 
hears the case. The requirements identified in the statute that trigger the bifurcated 
litigation process on permanent disability are not met under these circumstances, which 
means the agency may determine the extent of industrial disability just as it did before 
the 2017 amendments. Because McFarland quit his job with Terpstra before the hearing 
in this case, this decision will determine what, if any, industrial disability he sustained 
because of the stipulated work injury. 
The factors considered when determining industrial disability are: functional 
disability, age, education, qualifications, work experience, inability to engage in similar 
employment, earnings before and after the injury, motivation to work, personal 
characteristics, and the employer’s inability to accommodate the functional limitations. 
See id.; Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 
(Iowa 1976).  
McFarland sustained a functional impairment of 5 percent to the whole body. His 
postsecondary education includes an EMT credential, but the permanent work 
restrictions necessitated by the work injury would prevent him from being able to lift 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 18 
 
weights of the type typically required from EMT workers. This precludes him from using 
this specialized knowledge moving forward in his working life.  
The permanent work restrictions caused by the stipulated work injury also 
prevent him from leveraging his past work experience. He would be unable to return to 
his job at Terpstra or similar employment. This limits his opportunities in the labor 
market, especially in his new home state of Colorado.  
The record shows McFarland is motivated to work. After McFarland returned to 
work with Terpstra, he regularly violated his work restrictions and worked through pain 
to perform job duties. After quitting, he moved to another state to take a job. Relatedly, 
the record shows it is more likely than not McFarland had no plans to retire until it is 
common to do so, in his 60s.  
Whether the defendant-employer is able to maintain the claimant’s employment 
after the assignment of work restrictions is  
Another important factor in the consideration of permanent and total 
disability cases is the employer's ability to retain the injured worker with an 
offer of suitable work. The refusal or inability of the employer to return a 
claimant to work in any capacity is, by itself, significant evidence of a lack 
of employability. Clinton v. All-American Homes, File No. 5032603 (App. 
April 17, 2013); Western v. Putco Inc., File Nos. 5005190 /5005191 (App. 
July 29, 2005); Pierson v. O'Bryan Brothers, File No. 951206 (App. Jan. 
20, 1995); Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 876894 (App. 
Jan. 22, 1993); see also Larson, Workers' Compensation Law, Section 
57.61, pps. 10-164.90-95; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark 385, 609 
S.W.2d 102 (1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 
F.Supp. 865 (W.D. La 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 
R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950). An employer knows the demands that are 
placed on its workforce. Its determination that the worker is too disabled 
for it to employ is entitled to considerable weight. If the employer in whose 
employ the disability occurred is unwilling or unable to accommodate the 
disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have more 
incentive to do so. 
McNitt v. Nordstrom, Inc., File No. 5065697 (Rehrg. July 20, 2020) (aff’d and adopted 
as final agency decision, App. Aug. 7, 2020). 
Here, Terpstra took multiple steps to accommodate McFarland’s permanent work 
restrictions. Nonetheless, to do the job, McFarland worked outside his restrictions. To 
deal with the pain caused by the stipulated work injury, he took breaks in the form of 
sitting on a bucket and sitting on the heated seats in the company truck. This caused 
conflict with Terpstra ownership. Ultimately, Bryan confronted him about sitting in the 
truck, which led to the meeting at which Bryan said, “I’m not paying you to sit on a 
fucking bucket.” This shows that Terpstra had a limited willingness to accommodate 
McFarland’s work injury and resultant work restrictions.  

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 19 
 
Nonetheless, McFarland has been able to find a new job that is less physically 
demanding. His earnings in this job are higher than what he earned at Terpstra. While 
these earnings may not go as far due to the higher cost of living in Colorado, this is not 
a consideration when determining permanent partial disability under the industrial 
disability framework under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
McFarland has met his burden of proof on the question of permanent disability 
under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. The evidence shows it is more likely than 
not the stipulated work injury caused industrial disability. The factors discussed above 
establish McFarland has sustained a 30 percent permanent partial disability to the 
whole body. Multiplying 30 percent by 500 weeks equals 150 weeks of benefits, subject 
to the stipulated credit for benefits previously paid. 
C . 
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated McFarland’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date 
were $1,063.00 per week. They also stipulated he was single and entitled to one 
exemption at the time. Based on the parties’ stipulations, McFarland’s workers’ 
compensation rate is $650.02 per week. 
D . 
C o s t s .  
Iowa Code section 86.40 gives the agency the discretion to tax costs. “Fee-
shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement 
for litigation expenses to those allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 
806 N.W.2d 643, 660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for 
recovery of costs are strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 
N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 1996)).  
Because McFarland prevailed on the disputed issue of permanent disability, the 
following costs are taxed against the defendants: 
 Attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical 
means at hearings and evidential depositions, 876 IAC 4.33(1); 
 Transcription costs when appropriate, 876 IAC 4.33(2);  
 Costs of service of the original notice and subpoenas, 876 IAC 4.33(3); 
 Witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, 876 IAC 4.33(4); 
 Costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said 
costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, 876 IAC 4.33(5); 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 20 
 
 Reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, 876 IAC 4.33(6); 
 Filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees incurred by using 
the payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System 
(WCES), 876 IAC 4.33(7); and 
 Costs of persons reviewing health service disputes, 876 IAC 4.33(8). 
 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to McFarland 150 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of six hundred fifty and 02/100 dollars ($650.02) 
per week from the commencement date of February 26, 2020. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants are to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the 
stipulated amount of 25 weeks at the rate of six hundred fifty-four and 75/100 
dollars ($654.75). 
5) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
6) The defendants shall pay to McFarland the following amounts for the 
following costs: 
a. One hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee; 
b. Three hundred seventy-five and 00/100 dollars ($375.00) for the cost 
of the expert report by Dr. Kuhnlein; 
7) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
 
 
 

MCFARLAND V. TERPSTRA PLUMBING, HEATING, AND COOLING 
Page 21 
 
Signed and filed this 17th day of July, 2023. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nathaniel Boulton (via WCES) 
Rene Charles LaPierre (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents  in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
