Case Number: 21003677.02
Case Title:  MAKABU NSENGA, HORTANCE V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Makabu Nsenga Hortance - 21003677.02d.doc.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
HORTANCE MAKABU NSENGA, 
  : 
 
File No. 21003677.02 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
      D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :                        
TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :                            
 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 2502, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Hortance Makabu Nsenga, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from defendant, Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., as the self-
insured employer.  The case was initially scheduled for trial on April 4, 2024.  On the 
morning of the scheduled hearing, claimant moved for a continuance due to illness.  
That request for a continuance was granted.  The case was rescheduled for hearing on 
May 15, 2024.  Claimant failed to appear for the hearing on May 15, 2024 and 
claimant’s counsel again moved for a continuance.  The second request for continuance 
was granted given the language barriers but claimant was advised that the case would 
proceed to hearing the next time scheduled without further continuance.     
The case was rescheduled again with the arbitration hearing occurring on June 
18, 2024 via Zoom conference call.  Claimant elected to not appear for the hearing and 
called no other witnesses to testify.  Defendant elected to not call any witnesses live at 
the time of hearing.  Instead, the parties offered written exhibits, and the case was 
ultimately submitted on a written record.   
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the arbitration hearing.  On the hearing 
report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those stipulations were 
accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual or 
legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, and Employer’s Exhibits A through H.  All exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record without objection.    
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-15  14:01:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing and, 
again, contains only written exhibits.  Nevertheless, the parties requested the 
opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  Their request was granted, and the parties filed 
their briefs on July 26, 2024.  The case was considered fully submitted to the 
undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained a right knee injury that arose out of and in the 
course of the March 11, 2021 work injury. 
2. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the March 11, 
2021 work injury and, if so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent 
partial disability benefits. 
3. Claimant’s average gross weekly earnings at the time of the work injury and 
corresponding weekly worker’s compensation rate. 
4. Whether defendant is entitled to a credit for overpayment of weekly benefits 
and, if so, the extent of such credit. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
examination fees. 
6. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
Although the parties submitted the weekly workers’ compensation rate as a 
disputed issue in the hearing report, claimant conceded the issue in her post-hearing 
brief, stating claimant “concurs with Defendant’s rate calculation of $538.37 per week.”  
(Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, page 5)  This concession is accepted as a stipulation 
and the applicable weekly rate is found to be $538.37. 
The parties’ stipulation on the weekly rate issue also resolves the disputed issue 
of whether defendant is entitled to a credit for overpayment of weekly benefits.  The 
parties are expected to perform the necessary calculations to determine the 
overpayment of healing period and permanent disability benefits to establish and apply 
the overpayment credit against the award of permanent partial disability benefits in this 
decision.  If further calculation is needed by this agency, a request for rehearing should 
be filed with specific calculations of the alleged overpayment credit set forth by the 
challenging party. 
 
 

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Hortance Makabu Nsenga, claimant, sustained a right ankle injury while working 
for Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., employer, on March 11, 2021.  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1)  
Defendant acknowledges that claimant sustained the right ankle injury at work.  
Claimant also seeks an award of permanent disability benefits for an injury to claimant’s 
right knee as a result of the March 11, 2021 work accident.  Defendant disputes whether 
claimant sustained a right knee injury or permanent disability of the right knee or leg as 
a result of the March 11, 2021 work accident. 
On March 11, 2021, claimant worked as a packager for Tyson.  On that date, a 
pallet on a forklift struck claimant’s right ankle causing a displaced medial malleolar 
fracture of the right ankle and tibia.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1; Defendant’s Ex. A, deposition pp. 
9-11) 
Claimant went to the emergency room on the date of injury.  The emergency 
room personnel obtained x-rays of claimant’s right ankle, diagnosed the fracture, and 
recommended follow-up care with an orthopaedic surgeon.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1)  Thomas 
Gorsche, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon, evaluated claimant on March 18, 2021 and 
recommended surgical intervention for claimant’s right ankle.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 2)  
Claimant consented to the recommended surgical procedure. 
On March 19, 2021, Dr. Gorsche took claimant to surgery and performed an 
open reduction and internal fixation of the right tibia.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 3)  Claimant 
required a period of recovery and physical therapy after the surgery.  None of the 
medical records from Dr. Gorsche or physical therapy report symptoms in claimant’s 
right knee or beyond her right ankle.  
Claimant completed physical therapy on July 28, 2021.  Dr. Gorsche last 
evaluated claimant on August 11, 2021.  Dr. Gorsche declared maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) but identified a loss of range of motion in claimant’s right ankle.  As 
a result of the loss of range of motion, Dr. Gorsche opined that claimant sustained three 
percent permanent functional loss of the right lower extremity as a result of the March 
11, 2021 work injury.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 19)  Dr. Gorsche’s report does not include any 
reference to what guidelines, any tables, or other references he utilized to reach his 
opinion that claimant sustained a three percent permanent functional impairment of the 
right leg. 
Ms. Makabu Nsenga obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by 
Stanley J. Mathew, M.D. on November 20, 2023.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)  Dr. Mathew 
disagreed with the MMI date offered by Dr. Gorsche.  Dr. Mathew opines that claimant 
achieved MMI one year post surgery, or March 19, 2022.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 5) 

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Dr. Mathew references the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.  He opined that claimant sustained a 20 percent permanent 
functional impairment of the whole person as a result of the right ankle loss of range of 
motion and loss of strength.  Dr. Mathew references Table 17-8 of the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition, as the source of his permanent impairment rating.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 6) 
In addition, Dr. Mathew opines that claimant sustained a permanent functional 
impairment of the right lower extremity as a result of a loss of range of motion and loss 
of strength in claimant’s right knee, which he also attributed to the March 11, 2021 work 
injury.  Specifically, Dr. Mathew opines that claimant sustained an additional 10 percent 
permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of the right knee loss 
of range of motion and loss of strength.  Again, Dr. Mathew references Table 17-8 of the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, as the basis for his 10 percent permanent functional loss as 
a result of the injury to claimant’s right knee.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 6) Dr. Mathew offered 
an unrebutted opinion that his independent medical evaluation fees are reasonable and 
typical for the Cedar Rapids area.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 7) 
Defendant responded to Dr. Mathew’s independent medical evaluation report by 
seeking a review and comment of the treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Gorsche.  Dr. 
Gorsche noted that claimant did not receive any treatment for her right ankle or knee 
after August 13, 2021.  Therefore, he reiterated his opinion that claimant achieved MMI 
on August 13, 2021.  Dr. Gorsche responded directly to the impairment rating offered by 
Dr. Mathew, noting that claimant’s impairment rating should be based upon her loss of 
range of motion and not based upon subjective muscle strength loss.  Yet, Dr. Gorsche 
still did not reference the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, or offer any further explanation of 
how he reached his proposed permanent impairment rating.  (Defendant’s Ex. H, p. 73) 
Dr. Gorsche also took specific exception to the permanent impairment rating 
offered by Dr. Mathew for claimant’s right knee.  Dr. Gorsche noted that claimant filled 
out a patient questionnaire at his office on March 15, 2021.  He indicated that claimant 
did not report any injury to her knee in that questionnaire.  Based upon the mechanism 
of injury, Dr. Gorsche opined that claimant did not sustain a right knee injury as a result 
of the March 11, 2021 work accident.  (Defendant’s Ex. H, p. 73) None of the medical 
records introduced (other than the independent medical evaluation) reference any injury 
or permanent functional loss of the right knee.   
Considering the opinions of Dr. Gorsche and Dr. Mathew, I find the opinions of 
Dr. Gorsche to be convincing given that he is the treating orthopaedic surgeon and 
inspected claimant’s ankle intraoperatively as well as multiple times.  On the other hand, 
I note that Dr. Gorsche does not clarify how he reached his permanent impairment 
rating or whether he utilized the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
Ultimately, I accept Dr. Gorsche’s opinion that claimant did not sustain a right 
knee injury on March 11, 2021 or permanent impairment of the right leg as a result of 
any injury to the right knee.  As a result of this finding, I also find that Dr. Mathew’s 

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
permanent impairment rating related to the right knee is not convincing or applicable.  I 
reject Dr. Mathew’s impairment rating in this respect. 
I also accept Dr. Gorsche’s opinion that claimant sustained permanent functional 
impairment of the right ankle as a result of the March 11, 2021 work accident.  However, 
I cannot find that Dr. Gorsche’s impairment rating for the right ankle is from the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Instead, the only 
permanent impairment rating offered for the right ankle that specifically utilizes the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition, is rendered by Dr. Mathew. 
I acknowledge Dr. Gorsche’s critique of Dr. Mathew’s use of strength loss as a 
basis for rendering a permanent impairment rating of the right ankle.  While this critique 
has some merit, including the lack of multiple consistent evaluations on strength, Dr. 
Mathew states that he specifically used the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition and references a 
specific portion of those Guides to render a permanent impairment.  On the record 
presented, I find that the right ankle impairment rating offered by Dr. Mathew is the most 
credible and convincing based solely upon the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
Having reached this finding, I similarly find that claimant proved she sustained a 
20 percent permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of strength 
loss in the right ankle resulting from the March 11, 2021 work accident.  Pursuant to 
Table 17-3 on page 527 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, a 20 percent functional impairment of the whole person converts to a 49-
51 percent functional impairment of the lower extremity.  Dr. Mathew did not clarify this 
conversion or offer a permanent impairment of the lower extremity.  Therefore, I find 
that claimant proved a 49 percent permanent functional impairment of the right leg as a 
result of the Marach 11, 2021 work accident at Tyson. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute in this case is whether claimant has proven her right knee 
condition is causally related or arose out of and in the course of her employment with 
Tyson as a result of the March 11, 2021 accident.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
I found that claimant did not report any right knee symptoms or injuries in her 
medical records or physical therapy records.  I found the opinions of the treating 
orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Gorsche, to be most credible on this issue.  Therefore, I also 
found that claimant failed to prove she sustained permanent disability as a result of a 
loss of strength in the right knee as a result of the March 11, 2021 work accident.  I 
conclude claimant failed to prove a compensable injury to her right knee that arose out 
of and in the course of her employment with Tyson.  I conclude that the right knee injury 
claim is not compensable and decline to award any permanent disability for the right 
knee. 
However, both Dr. Gorsche and Dr. Mathew agree claimant sustained permanent 
functional disability as a result of her right ankle injury that arose out of and in the 
course of her employment on March 11, 2021.  With that in mind, I found that claimant 
proved permanent disability of the right leg as a result of the work accident. 
When considering the competing permanent impairment ratings offered by Dr. 
Gorsche and Dr. Mathew, I found that Dr. Mathew offered a permanent impairment 
rating that he derived from the provisions of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Dr. Gorsche did not reference the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition, and I could not find that his permanent impairment rating specifically 
derived from the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) states:  

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Acknowledging that Dr. Mathew’s impairment rating may have some flaws and 
could be challenged as non-compliant with the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. Mathew’s 
impairment rating is the only impairment rating clearly derived from the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition.  Utilizing Table 17-3 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, I converted Dr. 
Mathew’s impairment rating to the right leg. I found that claimant proved a 49 percent 
permanent impairment of the right leg. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p), the leg is a scheduled member injury 
and compensation for the leg is based upon a 220-week schedule.  When disability is 
less than total in a scheduled member, benefits are awarded proportional based on the 
percentage of permanent functional impairment to the maximum number of allowable 
weeks for the scheduled member.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  Using the maximum 
220-week schedule, a 49 percent permanent functional impairment of the leg results in 
an entitlement of 107.8 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(p), (w). 
In her post-hearing brief, Claimant stipulated that defendant’s weekly rate is 
accurate.  Therefore, I conclude all weekly benefits should be paid to claimant at the 
rate of $538.37 per week.  Defendant paid past weekly benefits at the rate of $606.63 
per week.  Defendant is entitled to a credit for overpayment of the past paid weekly 
benefits against this award of benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(4).   
Claimant also seeks reimbursement of her independent medical evaluation 
expense.  Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice if claimant ultimately 
proves the injury for which the examination occurs is compensable.  Section 85.39 also 
establishes pre-requisites that require an employer-retained physician has previously 
evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is 

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2).  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  Iowa Code § 
85.39(2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
In this instance, the injury to claimant’s right ankle is clearly compensable.  
However, claimant also had her right knee evaluated.  That injury was determined to not 
be compensable.  Given that one of the two conditions evaluated was not ultimately 
determined to be compensable, I conclude that only one-half of claimant’s independent 
medical evaluation fees are reimbursable under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Dr. Mathew opined his fees were reasonable and typical for the Cedar Rapids 
area.  That opinion is not disputed in this record and is accepted.  Dr. Mathew charged 
$3,074.34 for his independent medical evaluation on November 20, 2023.  One-half of 
this charge totals $1,537.17.  I conclude claimant is entitled to reimbursement totaling 
$1,537.17 for her independent medical evaluation with Dr. Mathew.  Iowa Code section 
85.39(2). 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of her costs related to this case.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of this agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  Having 
awarded claimant permanent partial disability benefits for the right ankle, I conclude it is 
appropriate to assess claimant’s costs.  Ms. Makabu Nsenga seeks assessment of her 
filing fee totaling $103.00. (Claimant’s Ex. 3)  This is a reasonable and permissible cost 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  I conclude defendant should be ordered to reimburse 
claimant’s costs in the amount of $103.00. 
ORDER 
Defendant shall pay claimant one hundred seven point eight (107.8) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing on August 12, 2021. 
Weekly benefits shall be paid to claimant at the rate of five hundred thirty-eight 
and 37/100 dollars ($538.37) per week. 
Defendant is entitled to a credit for benefits paid to date, including their 
overpayment of the weekly rate for healing period and permanent partial disability 
benefits. 

MAKABU NSENGA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation fees in the 
amount of one thousand five hundred thirty-seven and 17/100 dollars ($1,537.17). 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred three 
dollars ($103.00). 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits, if any, in a lump sum together with 
interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at an 
annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 11.7.  
Signed and filed this ____15th ___ day of November, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Nicholas Adkins  
(via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang  
(via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
