Case Number: 24008128.04
Case Title:  KLINEFELTER, STEVE V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Klinefelter Steve-24008128.04m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
STEVE KLINEFELTER, 
No. 24008128.04 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
Headnote: 2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
On January 8, 2026, Steve Klinefelter applied to the agency for alternate care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 (2024) and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48 
(2024). This is the fourth time Klinefelter has applied to the agency for alternate care 
relating to work injuries he sustained on August 5, 2024, and for which the defendants 
Old Dominion Freight Line, Inc. (Old Dominion) and Indemnity Insurance Company of 
North America (Indemnity) have accepted liability, because of delays in the 
authorization of care recommended by authorized treating providers. See Klinefelter v. 
Old Dominion Freight Line, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 24008128.01, 2024 
WL 4940965 (Alt. Care, Nov. 22, 2024) (granting care for right knee after the claims 
adjuster broke off communication with claimant’s counsel and the defendants did not 
participate in the hearing); see also Consent Order Re Alternate Care, No. 
24008128.02, 2025 WL 248365 (Jan. 2, 2025) (agreement that the defendants would 
promptly authorize post-surgery physical therapy ordered by the authorized treating 
surgeon); Petition Concerning Application for Alternate Care, No. 24008128.03 (Feb. 
21, 2025) (seeking authorization of the CT scan of the cervical spine ordered by the 
authorized treating surgeon on Jan. 30, 2025, and which was later dismissed without 
prejudice). The defendants did not file an answer. See Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—
4.48(8). 
The agency scheduled the matter for a telephone hearing, which the undersigned 
presided over on January 21, 2026, at 10:30 a.m. Klinefelter participated personally and 
through Attorney Dillon Besser. The defendants participated by and through Attorney 
Stephen W. Spencer. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Jan-21  16:04:30     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 2 
 
II. 
ISSUE 
The issue under consideration is whether Klinefelter is entitled to alternate care 
in the form of a follow-up with authorized treating surgeon Andrew Pugely, M.D. 
III. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The evidentiary record in this contested case proceeding consists of: 
▪ Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 3; and 
▪ Klinefelter’s testimony. 
After careful consideration of the administrative record, the undersigned enters 
the following findings of fact. 
The facts are largely uncontested. At all times material hereto, Klinefelter resided 
in Norwalk, Iowa, which is a southern suburb of Des Moines. Klinefelter sustained 
injuries arising out of and in the course of his employment with Old Dominion on August 
5, 2024. One of the body parts Klinefelter injured was his back. 
The defendants arranged for care at the University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics 
(UIHC). They authorized Dr. Pugely as Klinefelter’s treating surgeon for his cervical 
spine injury. On August 7, 2024, Dr. Pugely performed anterior cervical discectomy and 
fusion (ACDF) surgery to treat Klinefelter’s cervical fracture subluxation caused by the 
work injury. (Ex. 1, p. 1) 
Despite authorizing Dr. Pugely to treat Klinefelter’s cervical spine injury, the 
defendants have not always been responsive to authorizing and arranging care ordered 
by Dr. Pugely to treat Klinefelter’s work injury. The defendants did not authorize post-
surgery physical therapy until after Klinefelter applied to the commissioner for alternate 
care. And they did not authorize a CT scan of the cervical spine ordered by Dr. Pugely 
until after Klinefelter applied for alternate care to the commissioner. This case stems 
from the third instance of the defendants not authorizing care recommended by Dr. 
Pugely.  
Dr. Pugely saw Klinefelter on June 26, 2025, because Klinefelter was 
experiencing ongoing symptoms in his upper extremities. (Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Pugely 
ordered magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electromyography (EMG). (Ex. 1, p. 1) 
Dr. Pugely next saw Klinefelter on July 10, 2025, and articulated the following opinion 
and plan: 
Patient’s new MRI redemonstrates a disc bulge and foraminal narrowing 
at C5-C6. This has not changed much compared to his preoperative MRI. 
He still has symptoms in his upper extremities left greater than right. I 
believe his disc bulge at C5-C6 is contributing to some of the symptoms. I 
am hopeful that his nerves will continue to heal from his previous fusion. I 
stated that nerves can take up to 18 months to fully heal.  

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 3 
 
I am curious to see what his EMG of the right upper extremity will show. I 
will wait to place him at MMI until I have reviewed this. I would also like to 
see patient back in 6 months for hardware surveillance and to monitor his 
symptoms. 
I do believe that the foraminal narrowing at C5-C6 is related to his work 
injury. Future treatments should include physical therapy, injections, 
medications and potential surgical intervention. 
Patient was understanding of our thoughts and discussion. All questions 
answered. 
(Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Dr. Pugely opined on Klinefelter’s functional impairment. (Ex. 1, p. 3) He released 
Klinefelter to return to work without restrictions. (Ex. 1, p. 3) Dr. Pugely also reiterated 
that Klinefelter may need future treatment that “could include non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory medications, periodic corticosteroid injections, physical therapy, and 
possibly revision surgery including but not limited to surgical treatment of adjacent 
segment disease, for which he is at advanced risk after having undergone spinal 
fusion.” (Ex. 1, p. 3) 
On December 30, 2025, claimant’s counsel emailed defense counsel to inquire 
about the follow-up appointment recommended by Dr. Pugely for January 2026. (Ex. 2, 
pp. 7–8) On January 7, 2026, claimant’s counsel followed up with another email and 
attached letter to defense counsel regarding Klinefelter’s dissatisfaction with care. (Ex. 
2, p. 7) Instead of attempting to schedule an appointment with Dr. Pugely—who 
subsequently left UIHC and moved to practice medicine in Bettendorf, Iowa, which is 
about 40 miles east of Iowa City—the defendants attempted to transfer care to Dr. 
Igram at UIHC. (Ex. 2, p. 6) After claimant’s counsel requested an explanation for the 
defendants’ decision to attempt to change the authorized treating surgeon, defense 
counsel replied that they were not changing the provider, only the doctor. (Ex. 2, p. 5) 
Claimant’s counsel re-articulated dissatisfaction with the proposed care because 
Klinefelter wishes to maintain his doctor-patient relationship regarding his injured back 
with Dr. Pugely, and Klinefelter filed the petition from which this case stems. (Ex. 2, p. 4) 
At hearing, Klinefelter gave credible testimony that he and Dr. Pugely discussed 
the doctor’s future move to Bettendorf at their last appointment together. Dr. Pugely 
expressed his desire to continue treating Klinefelter after the move. And Klinefelter 
credibly testified he trusts Dr. Pugely and does not want to change doctors as the 
defendants propose. He does not mind the extra travel to Bettendorf because of their 
strong doctor-patient relationship. (Testimony) 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish care related to an 
employee’s a work injury. Such care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 4 
 
§ 85.27(4). The legislature saw fit to pair this responsibility with the right to choose care. 
Id.; see also Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
“If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee harmless for 
the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no longer 
authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in authorization.” 
Id.; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 771 (Iowa 2016). 
However, an employer’s right to choose care is not absolute under the statute. 
See id.; Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 769. An employee dissatisfied with employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) has the right to seek an alternative. See id.; see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. A dissatisfied employee must first share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer. Id.; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). If the parties cannot reach an agreement on 
care, the employee may apply to the commissioner for alternate care. Id.; see also Iowa 
Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. And after an informal hearing, “the commissioner may, upon 
. . . reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
The dispositive question in an alternate care case is whether the employer-
furnished care is reasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995). “Reasonableness, of course, is a question of fact.” Reynolds, 562 at 436 (citing 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123). As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the 
employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care in question is 
unreasonable. Id. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to satisfy the employee’s 
burden of proof. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
Here, the defendants chose Dr. Pugely and authorized his recommendations 
relating to care for Klinefelter’s back injury. Klinefelter is happy with Dr. Pugely as his 
doctor and trusts him. They have established a good doctor-patient relationship. The 
defendants have not rescinded the authorization of Dr. Pugely but are attempting to do 
so because he left UIHC and moved his practice to Bettendorf, which is about 40 miles 
to the east of the clinic where he practiced with UIHC. 
Now that Dr. Pugely has left UIHC, the defendants contend they have the right to 
change the authorized treating physician because he is no longer practicing medicine at 
the same “provider.” The record shows the defendants use the term “provider” to mean, 
essentially, “the entity that employs the doctor directly providing care to the injured 
worker” as opposed to “the doctor directly providing care to the injured worker.” The 
undersigned finds the defendants’ linguistic argument unavailing. 
The defendants chose Dr. Pugely as the authorized treating physician to treat 
Klinefelter’s work injury to the cervical spine. Klinefelter has established a doctor-patient 
relationship with Dr. Pugely. He trusts Dr. Pugely. A strong doctor-patient relationship 
with a foundation in trust is highly valuable in the care for any injury but especially one 
arising out of and in the course of employment. Further, Dr. Pugely has provided care, 
including a significant surgery, which makes him intimately familiar with Klinefelter’s 
injury and the care for it. 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 5 
 
The defendants attempt to use the raft of agency caselaw protecting an injured 
worker from unreasonably and unnecessarily being forced to travel long distances for 
care with an employer-chosen doctor when there is a closer and more convenient 
alternative. But this reasonableness standard is a shield to protect an injured worker, 
not a sword the employer can use to sever an established doctor-patient relationship 
founded on trust that can be preserved by an extra 80 miles of travel roundtrip. At $0.67 
per mile, that is an increased cost of about $54.00 per appointment, based on the 
change in location. See Iowa Code § 85.27(1)(a) (“The employer . . . shall allow 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such services.”); see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—8.1; Mileage Reimbursement Information, 
https://dial.iowa.gov/current-rate-information (last viewed Jan. 21, 2026).  
This increased cost per appointment is not enough to make it reasonable to 
sever an established doctor-patient relationship founded on trust in order to start over 
with a new physician. The defendants’ argument is even more unpersuasive when one 
considers the need for the new physician to get up to speed on the course of care for 
the injury and the cost of paying the physician to do so. In the undersigned’s 
experience, the increased cost per appointment in mileage reimbursement for 
Klinefelter’s travel to continue to treat with Dr. Pugely in Bettendorf—even if such care 
consists of multiple appointments—will likely be lower than the cost of the medical 
records review necessary for a new practicing surgeon to get up to speed on 
Klinefelter’s medical history. 
Klinefelter has met his burden of proof in this matter. The defendants’ proposal to 
terminate his established doctor-patient relationship with Dr. Pugely because he moved 
his practice 40 miles down Interstate 80 is unreasonable. The requested alternate 
care—maintaining Klinefelter’s doctor-patient relationship with Dr. Pugely and 
authorizing the follow-up appointment they planned for and Dr. Pugely recommended 
on July 10, 2025—is reasonable. Klinefelter’s requested alternate care is granted. 
The defendants have on multiple occasions, and without much explanation, failed 
to authorize and arrange care for Klinefelter’s work injuries that was recommended by 
authorized treating providers. Therefore, it is appropriate for this decision to set forth a 
clear deadline for action by the defendants regarding the appointment with Dr. Pugely in 
order to avoid additional delay. Failure to comply may result in sanctions under Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—4.36. 
V. 
ORDER 
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The application for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) Within fourteen (14) days of the date of this decision, the defendants shall 
complete all action necessary to authorize the follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Pugely, make all necessary arrangements for scheduling the appointment, 
and affirmatively communicate to Klinefelter what, if any, steps Klinefelter 
needs to take to schedule the appointment. 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
3) Failure to comply may result in sanctions under Iowa Administrative Code 
876—4.36. 
 
The interim Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order 
delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. That 
order is attached to the notice of hearing issued in this case. Due to the order of 
delegation, there is no intra-agency appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only 
judicial review in an appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure 
Act, Iowa Code chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 21st day of January, 2026. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Dillon Besser, Attorney for Claimant 
 
Stephen W. Spencer, Attorney for Defendants 
 
 
