Case Number: 20006866.02
Case Title:  CHAVEZ AMAYA, ROSALIA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Chavez Amaya Rosalia-20006866.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROSALIA CHAVEZ AMAYA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 20006866.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
AND CLINICS, STATE OF IOWA 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :               Headnotes:  1402.20, 2502            
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Rosalia Chavez Amaya, filed a petition for arbitration against University 
of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC), a self-insured employer.  The hearing occurred 
before the undersigned on June 15, 2021.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person 
hearing occurring in Des Moines, Iowa. However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in 
Iowa, the Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via 
video means, using CourtCall. Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing 
via CourtCall. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  In the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision.  The parties are bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 5 and Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 13.  Claimant testified on her own behalf with the assistance of an 
interpreter.  Defendant did not call any witnesses.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on June 15, 2021.  The case was considered fully 
submitted upon submission of post-hearing briefs on July 12, 2021. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
her employment with University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics on April 23, 
2020; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-11  08:38:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury caused temporary disability and, if so, the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability or healing period benefits; 
3. Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of the past medical expenses 
contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 5; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
evaluation fee pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27; 
7. Whether defendant is entitled to credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) for 
payment of medical expenses; 
8. Whether costs should be assessed against either party, and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Rosalia Chavez Amaya, a certified nursing assistant, asserts she sustained an 
injury to her neck, right shoulder, and right upper extremity on April 23, 2020.  More 
specifically, Ms. Chavez asserts she sustained the injuries while she was assisting a 
co-worker in lifting an obese patient in order to reposition her to the middle of her bed. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 23)  In the process of lifting the patient, Ms. Chavez heard a 
cracking noise in her neck and experienced immediate pain. (Id.)  From there, Ms. 
Chavez assisted the same co-worker with moving the patient from her bed to a 
wheelchair. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24)  When Ms. Chavez attempted to lift the patient’s feet 
onto the wheelchair’s base, she felt pain from the right side of her neck all the way 
down through her shoulder and arm. (Hr. Tr., p. 24) 
 
Ms. Chavez did not report the injury to her employer until approximately May 25, 
2020. (Ex. 6, p. 34; see Hr. Tr., p. 33)  Ms. Chavez did not request or seek immediate 
medical attention for her alleged conditions.  She did, however, present for medical 
treatment due to other ailments.  In total, Ms. Chavez presented to five (5) different 
medical appointments before finally discussing a work-related injury on May 22, 2020.  
 
On May 2, 2020, Ms. Chavez presented to UIHC with complaints of nausea, 
headache, vomiting, and some myalgia in the lower extremities. (JE1, p. 17)  She did 
not report the alleged work injury or any complaints in her neck, right shoulder, or right 
upper extremity.  

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 3 
 
 
Ms. Chavez first reported symptoms in her right shoulder, elbow, and wrist on 
May 4, 2020. (JE1, p. 22)  The record provides: 
Patient notes the right shoulder pain is chronic and started 3 years ago 
when she was working as [a housekeeper].  She notes after switching to 
nursing assistant job her right shoulder pain improved.  She did do 
physical therapy in the past which helped.  She notes the right shoulder 
pain is back and radiates into her right neck (trapezius muscle). 
(JE1, p. 23)  When speaking with Courtney Carr, PA-C, Ms. Chavez relayed that the 
right elbow pain was “new” and “started this past week.” (Id.)  According to Ms. Chavez, 
the new right elbow pain radiated into her forearm and caused intermittent 
tingling/numbness in the thumb, index finger, and middle finger. (Id.)  Ms. Chavez also 
reported that her hand and wrist felt weak, secondary to pain, and she was having to 
change the way she opened doors and pushed objects at work. (Id.)  On examination, 
Ms. Chavez exhibited tenderness to palpation over the right trapezius muscle from the 
insertion on the back of the neck all the way down the right side of the back. (JE1, p. 25)  
She also demonstrated a positive Tinel’s sign on the right. (Id.)   
Diagnostic imaging revealed no abnormalities in the right shoulder or elbow. (See 
JE1, p. 26)  Ms. Carr diagnosed right elbow pain and chronic right shoulder pain. (JE1, 
p. 27)  She opined, “Patient’s pain sounds like an overuse injury due to work duties 
related to nursing assistant work[.]” (JE1, p. 27)  Ms. Chavez was instructed to wear a 
tennis elbow brace at work, and a carpal tunnel brace at night. (Id.)  She was taken off 
work from May 4, 2020, through May 10, 2020. (Id.) 
Around this period of time, Ms. Chavez asserts she told her supervisor, Austin, 
that she was concerned about the pain she was experiencing in her hand. (Hr. Tr., p. 
25)  According to a letter from claimant’s counsel, Ms. Chavez formally reported her 
carpal tunnel symptoms in her right hand as a work injury on May 4, 2020. (Ex. 1, p. 2; 
see Hr. Tr., pp. 33-34)  The summary provides that Ms. Chavez developed pain in her 
right elbow, wrist, and hand as a result of her work activities. (See Ex. 2, p. 9) 
 
On May 6, 2020, Ms. Chavez was examined for nausea and abdominal pain. 
(JE1, p. 29)  She did not report the alleged work injury or any complaints in her neck, 
right shoulder, or right upper extremity at this appointment; however, Ms. Chavez’s 
chronic right shoulder pain is noted under “History of Present Illness.” (Id.) 
 
Ms. Chavez returned to UIHC on May 18, 2020, with a chief complaint of right 
hand pain that went up her arm. (JE1, p. 33)  The record provides, 
Today on interview, Patient presents with continued right shoulder pain.  
States this started 4 months ago with pain in her hands and tingling.  She 
said she previously was sent to physical therapy which was helpful for her 
and reduced the pain from 6 out of 10 to 2 out of 10 but when she stopped 
physical therapy it came back.  Notes tingling in her fingers, wrist, and 
elbow with a little bit of radiation into the upper arm. 
(Id.)   

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 4 
 
Interestingly, the May 18, 2020, record also provides that Ms. Chavez, “brought 
some paperwork today from occupational health” which included, “an order for an MRI 
of the cervical spine for further evaluation.” (Id.)  The evidentiary record does not 
contain any medical records from occupational health.  It’s possible the medical records 
the physician is referring to come from the May 4, 2020, appointment with Ms. Carr, 
however, that appointment was with Family Medicine, and Ms. Carr did not order an 
MRI of the cervical spine.  Rather, Ms. Carr ordered x-rays of the right shoulder and 
arm, and provided she would consider ordering an EMG for carpal tunnel at Ms. 
Chavez’s next appointment. (JE1, p. 27)  It is also possible, and more likely, that the 
medical records the physician is referring to stem from the previously alleged May 4, 
2020, injury.  If this is the case, it is concerning that the medical records were excluded 
from the evidentiary record.  
 
The May 18, 2020, record concludes with an assessment of Ms. Chavez’s right 
shoulder, chest, and right lower quadrant pain. (JE1, p. 37)  Kelly Krei, D.O. reiterated 
that Ms. Chavez has a longstanding history of right shoulder pain over the course of 
three years.  It is noted that the pain worsened acutely over the prior 4 months and then 
again over the preceding week. (Id.)  Dr. Krei opined Ms. Chavez’s symptoms were 
most consistent with cervical spine etiology. (Id.)  More specifically, Dr. Krei opined Ms. 
Chavez’s pain was most consistent with nerve pain. (Id.) 
 
On May 21, 2020, Ms. Chavez presented to the emergency room at Mercy 
Hospital with complaints of headache and right upper extremity pain. (JE2, p. 114)  
Unfortunately, the discharge instructions are the only page of the medical record that is 
in evidence. (See Id.)  According to the record, the attending physician was concerned 
that Ms. Chavez’s right upper extremity pain stemmed from a pinched nerve in the neck.  
The attending physician told Ms. Chavez that she would likely need to obtain an MRI 
and undergo an evaluation with an orthopedic surgeon.  She then instructed Ms. 
Chavez to follow-up with Steindler Orthopedic Clinic. (Id.)   
 
Following this recommendation for an MRI and referral to an orthopedic surgeon, 
Ms. Chavez presented to Ashley Reed, PA-C, of Steindler Orthopedic Clinic, on May 
22, 2020. (JE3, p. 115)  This is the first instance in which Ms. Chavez described the 
alleged work injury to a physician.  She relayed that she was lifting a patient when she 
felt pain on the right side of her neck, which radiated distally to her right upper extremity 
and into her fingers. (Id.)  X-rays obtained on the date of the examination revealed good 
alignment with well-preserved disc spacing throughout the cervical spine.  On 
examination, there was no cervical spine tenderness to palpation.  Ms. Chavez 
demonstrated generalized weakness on the right, more severe with her triceps and wrist 
flexors. (JE3, p. 116)  Ms. Reed diagnosed cervicalgia with right-sided radiculopathy 
and ordered an MRI of the cervical spine. (Id.) 
 
The May 27, 2020, MRI revealed some mild disc degenerative changes at the 
C5-6 and C6-7 levels.  There was no spinal canal stenosis or foraminal narrowing at 
any level. (JE4, p. 145; see JE3, p. 119) 
 
After analyzing the diagnostic imaging, Ms. Reed opined it did not appear that 
Ms. Chavez had any pathologic neurologic impingement. (JE3, p. 119)  As such, Ms. 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 5 
 
Reed ordered a cervical epidural steroid injection for pain relief. (Id.)  She further 
recommended that Ms. Chavez utilize formal physical or occupational therapy to work 
on her right upper extremity strength. (Id.)   
 
In the last week of May 2020, Dr. Abou-Arab filled out paperwork for Ms. Chavez 
regarding FMLA. (See JE1, p. 42) 
 
Ms. Chavez presented to family medicine physician, Emad Abou-Arab, M.D., on 
June 1, 2020, for abdominal pain. (JE1, p. 38)  Dr. Abou-Arab noted that Ms. Chavez 
had been experiencing numerous medical issues over the past few weeks to months. 
(Id.)  While she primarily presented for abdominal pain, “Her other main concern today 
is that she has missed work for the past month after a possible injury while at work.” 
(Id.)  After examining Ms. Chavez, Dr. Abou-Arab assessed pelvic pain, dysuria, 
fibromyalgia, and chronic neck pain. (JE1, p. 42)  It is difficult to conclude whether the 
“possible injury while at work” refers to the alleged acute injury on April 23, 2020, the 
May 4, 2020, repetitive use injury, or both.  Logically, it would make sense for the 
“possible injury” to be a reference to the May 4, 2020, injury, as Ms. Chavez presented 
to Dr. Abou-Arab with concerns about how much work she had missed over the past 
month, and May 4, 2020, was the date she was taken off work after being assessed 
with an overuse injury. 
 
The C6-C7 interlaminar epidural steroid injection (ESI) was administered on June 
11, 2020. (See JE3, p. 121)  The ESI provided relief of Ms. Chavez’s neck pain, 
however, she continued to experience right upper extremity pain and discomfort in her 
right anterior shoulder, along the bicipital region, in her elbow and forearm, and into all 
of her fingers. (JE3, p. 121) 
 
Ms. Chavez followed-up with Dr. Abou-Arab on July 6, 2020. (JE1, p. 43)  Dr. 
Abou-Arab’s notes provide that Ms. Chavez had returned for a follow-up on her chronic 
musculoskeletal pain in the hip, neck, and right arm. (Id.)  The medical record also 
provides that Ms. Chavez was starting to experience pain on the left side of her neck as 
well. (Id.)  Despite the ESI, Ms. Chavez continued to describe pain and weakness in her 
right arm. (Id.)  On examination, Ms. Chavez demonstrated weakness in the right arm 
when compared to the left. (JE1, p. 46)  Dr. Abou-Arab assessed right hand weakness, 
chronic neck pain, and chronic musculoskeletal pain. (Id.)  He ordered an EMG and 
opined Ms. Chavez also may be suffering from chronic musculoskeletal pain or 
fibromyalgia. (JE1, pp. 46-47) 
 
On July 27, 2020, Ms. Chavez returned to Dr. Abou-Arab’s office for a follow-up 
appointment regarding the weakness in her right hand.  Despite having knowledge of an 
alleged work injury, the July 27, 2020, medical record is the first instance in which Dr. 
Abou-Arab documented the alleged April 23, 2020, acute work injury. (JE1, p. 52)  I am 
troubled by the initial medical record’s lack of any history of injury, coupled by the 
changing history of how the injury occurred (acute versus cumulative).  Dr. Abou-Arab 
interpreted the May 27, 2020, MRI as showing degenerative disease at C5-7. (JE1, p. 
55)  Again, Dr. Abou-Arab opined that Ms. Chavez may be suffering from chronic 
musculoskeletal pain or fibromyalgia. (Id.) 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 6 
 
 
Eventually, Ms. Chavez was referred to Fred Dery, M.D. for a pain management 
consultation. (See JE3, p. 123)  Dr. Dery is a pain management and physical medicine 
and rehabilitation specialist with Steindler Orthopedics.  According to Dr. Dery’s medical 
notes from the August 12, 2020, appointment, Ms. Chavez relayed that the ESI resolved 
her arm pain, but she continued to experience pain in her right trapezius, anterolateral 
neck, and anterior glenohumeral region without obvious radicular pain. (JE3, p. 124)  
On examination, Ms. Chavez demonstrated painless range of motion in the cervical 
spine. (Id.)  Her grip strength was limited due to poor participation, bilaterally. (Id.)   
Prior to the August 12, 2020, evaluation, Dr. Dery analyzed Ms. Chavez’s 
diagnostic imaging and opined the cervical MRI showed minimal degenerative changes 
in the neck, and no evidence of stenosis or disc herniation. (JE3, p. 125)  Dr. Dery 
assessed right trapezius pain that was myofascial in nature, and opined there was no 
evidence of shoulder or cervical pathology. (Id.)  Dr. Dery prescribed Voltaren gel and 
acupuncture treatments.  He also ordered an EMG of the right upper extremity, and 
restricted Ms. Chavez from lifting anything greater than 10 pounds with her right arm. 
(Id.)  
Initially, Ms. Chavez disagreed with Dr. Dery’s assessment and declined his 
recommendations as she believed her pain was coming from her spine. (See Id.)  
However, after speaking with Dr. Dery’s medical assistant in Spanish, Ms. Chavez 
determined she misunderstood Dr. Dery’s assessment.  According to Ms. Chavez, her 
son did not do a good job of translating for her. (JE3, p. 126)  After a detailed discussion 
with Dr. Dery’s medical assistant, Ms. Chavez accepted Dr. Dery’s recommendations. 
(Id.) 
 
The EMG of the right upper extremity returned unremarkable for evidence of 
radicular signs. (See JE3, p. 128)   
 
On August 26, 2020, Ms. Chavez presented to Hussain Banu, M.D. of UIHC, 
reporting low back pain and left-sided neck pain. (JE1, p. 56)   
 
Ms. Chavez returned to Dr. Dery on September 29, 2020, and reported that she 
was doing better until approximately one week prior when some of her pain returned. 
(JE3, p. 127)  She relayed that the vast majority of her pain was located in her neck, 
without radiation. (JE3, p. 127)  She also complained of low back pain. (JE3, p. 128)  
On examination, Ms. Chavez demonstrated predominantly left-sided trapezius 
myofascial pain with palpation. (Id.)  Ms. Chavez requested, and Dr. Dery approved, a 
renewed prescription for physical therapy. (Id.)  After reviewing the EMG, Dr. Dery 
diagnosed myofascial neck pain and released Ms. Chavez to return to work without 
restrictions on September 30, 2020. (Id.)   
 
Unfortunately, Ms. Chavez was not able to pursue the treatment 
recommendations provided by Dr. Dery in a timely fashion as her family contracted 
COVID-19 and had to quarantine. (See JE3, p. 130)   
On October 12, 2020, Ms. Chavez presented to UIHC and reported some back 
and neck pain, as well as anterior neck discomfort, since returning to full duty work. 
(JE1, p. 67) 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 7 
 
By the time Ms. Chavez returned to Dr. Dery’s office on December 2, 2020, the 
tingling in her right upper extremity had returned. (JE3, p. 130)  Ms. Chavez requested 
and received a repeat epidural steroid injection. (JE3, p. 131)  Dr. Dery continued to 
recommend physical therapy and acupuncture for her neck and right upper extremity 
pain. (Id.)  He ended his notes by reporting that outside of repeat injections, he had 
nothing else to offer. (Id.)  As such, Dr. Dery opined Ms. Chavez would be at maximum 
medical improvement once she completed physical therapy and acupuncture 
treatments. (Id.)   
On December 22, 2020, Ms. Chavez was seen for back pain at UIHC. (JE1, p. 
96)  More specifically, Ms. Chavez complained of thoracic and low back pain. (Id.)  She 
reported the back pain was recurrent, and this particular episode started one to four 
weeks prior. According to Ms. Chavez, the pain radiated into her shoulders and arms. 
(Id.)  She also reported progressively worsening numbness in the groin and thighs, as 
well as weakness. On examination, her neck had normal range of motion and was 
supple. (JE1, p. 99)  Due to the possibility of cauda equina, Ms. Chavez was transferred 
to the emergency room via EMS. (JE1, pp. 99-100)  X-rays of the thoracic and lumbar 
spine returned normal. (See Ex. 2, p. 14) 
On December 28, 2020, Ms. Chavez told Dr. Abou-Arab that she was doing well 
with her right shoulder and neck pain; however, she had recently experienced new, mid-
thoracic paraspinal pain. (JE1, pp. 108-109; Hr. Tr., p. 39) 
 
Ms. Chavez returned for a follow-up appointment with Dr. Dery on January 6, 
2021. (JE3, p. 133)  On interview, Ms. Chavez reported that she was hurting all over her 
body, “from head to toe.” (Id.)  She described muscle aches and feeling as though her 
arms were asleep.  She further reported that she was “essentially incapacitated” and 
needed to stay in bed when she was not at work. (Id.)  She also relayed that her most 
recent injection did not provide any relief. (Id.)  On examination, Ms. Chavez 
demonstrated “diffuse patchy tenderness without any focal active trigger points 
throughout the cervical and thoracic region” and normal motor function in both upper 
extremities. (JE3, p. 134)  Dr. Dery opined Ms. Chavez’s diffuse pain was most 
consistent with fibromyalgia. (Id.)  Given this diagnosis, Dr. Dery suggested a treatment 
plan consisting of physical therapy, treatment with a pain psychologist, and an oral 
antidepressant.  Ms. Chavez was amenable to physical therapy and taking 
antidepressant medication. (Id.)  Dr. Dery opined that he did not see anything 
concerning by history, physical examination, or imaging to suggest that Ms. Chavez had 
any nefarious pathology going on. (Id.) 
 
Although she was initially against treating with a pain psychologist, it appears Ms. 
Chavez eventually changed her mind. (See JE3, p. 138; Hr. Tr., p. 27)  Dr. Dery 
referred Ms. Chavez for an initial consultation with Barbara O’Rourke, Ph.D. (JE3, p. 
138; see JE3, p. 140)  The evidentiary record is void of any medical notes from Dr. 
O’Rourke. 
 
Ms. Chavez returned to Dr. Dery on May 6, 2021, and told him for the first time 
that she had a pending workers’ compensation case and that his fibromyalgia 
assessment was not helping her case. (JE3, p. 140)  Dr. Dery’s notes provide, “She did 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 8 
 
not ask that we change anything about the diagnosis but wanted us to know.” (Id.)  
Later in his report, Dr. Dery assessed Ms. Chavez with diffuse symptoms indicative of 
fibromyalgia and explained that he did not feel such a diagnosis had anything to do with 
her workers’ compensation claim. (JE3, pp. 141, 142)  
 
As referenced throughout the above medical summary, this is not the first time 
Ms. Chavez has complained of symptoms in her neck and right upper extremity.   
 
On April 13, 2020, Ms. Chavez reported that the joints in her hands felt inflamed. 
(JE1, p. 1)  She also reported tingling in her hands. (Id.)  On April 14, 2020, Ms. Chavez 
endorsed intermittent paresthesia of her left arm. (JE1, p. 4) 
Medical records indicate that when Ms. Chavez presented to UIHC on May 4, 
2020, she reported chronic right shoulder pain, with radiating pain in the arm and wrist.  
It is noted that the pain started three years ago when she was working in housekeeping. 
(JE1, p. 23)  The record also notes that Ms. Chavez’s right shoulder pain improved 
when she made the transition to nursing assistant. (Id.) 
When Ms. Chavez was seen on May 18, 2020, she reported right shoulder pain 
that started four months prior with pain and tingling in her hands. She stated she 
previously went to physical therapy, which was helpful, but her symptoms returned after 
the physical therapy ended.  The medical record also provides Ms. Chavez’s right 
shoulder pain is a longstanding issue that has occurred over the course of three years, 
and “it worsened acutely over the last 4 months and then again over the last week.” 
(JE1, pp. 33, 37) 
 
Defendant’s post-hearing brief mentions that Ms. Chavez’s pre-existing medical 
records reference a diagnosis of cervical dysplasia and “cervical procedures” which 
occurred in 2003. (JE1, p. 2)  It is important to note that cervical dysplasia is not a 
condition of the cervical spine.  Similarly, the full text of the surgical history reveals that 
Ms. Chavez had, “Colposcopy/Cervical Procedures 2003.” Such procedures would not 
involve the cervical spine.   
 
At this juncture, it is worth noting that the evidentiary record does not contain any 
physical therapy records relating to Ms. Chavez’s pre-existing or current condition.  
However, according to claimant’s counsel’s letter to Dr. Bansal and Dr. Bansal’s 
medical records summary, Ms. Chavez started physical therapy at UIHC on November 
26, 2019, for her low back, left knee, and right elbow.1 (See Ex. 1, p. 1; Ex. 2, p. 15)  
Similarly, according to Exhibit 5, Ms. Chavez consistently presented for physical therapy 
at Select Physical Therapy from May 21, 2020, through April 29, 2021. (See Ex. 5, pp. 
27-29)  Ms. Chavez testified that physical therapy has helped her condition.  As an 
example, Ms. Chavez testified she can now move her hand, which she could not do 
prior to physical therapy. (Hr. Tr., p. 41) 
                                                 
1 The Third Party Administrator denied Ms. Chavez’s claim in a letter dated June 11, 2020.  The 
letter asserts Ms. Chavez was aware of her condition and its potential relationship to work prior to 
November 26, 2019. (Ex. 7, p. 37) 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 9 
 
Similarly, the evidentiary record does not contain the pre-existing medical 
records referenced by claimant’s counsel in a letter to Dr. Bansal, and by defendant in 
its denial letter. (Ex. 1, p. 1; Ex. 7, p. 37) 
 
Ms. Chavez continued working for UIHC after the alleged April 23, 2020, injury.  
She was off work and recovering between May 4, 2020, and July 29, 2020. (Hearing 
Report)  Since her claim was ultimately denied by UIHC, Ms. Chavez had to use 
vacation and sick time for her absence. (See Hr. Tr., p. 37)  She returned to full duty 
work as a nursing assistant on September 30, 2020; however, she eventually 
transferred to a less physically demanding position in the visual monitoring department. 
(See JE1, p. 112; JE3, p. 128) 
 
Ms. Chavez sought an independent medical evaluation, performed by Sunil 
Bansal, M.D.  Dr. Bansal performed the evaluation on January 29, 2021. (Ex. 2, p. 1)  
Dr. Bansal opined Ms. Chavez’s constellation of right shoulder, right arm, neck, 
trapezius, and shoulder blade pain is related to a cervical discogenic problem. (Ex. 2, p. 
17)  Citing to medical literature, Dr. Bansal explained that inflammation from discogenic 
disease can manifest clinically to the surrounding musculature, including the trapezius. 
(Ex. 2, p. 18)  It is worth noting that unlike Ms. Chavez, all patients in the study cited 
had nerve root compression.  While the May 27, 2020, MRI revealed small paracentral 
disc protrusions at C5-6 and C6-7, there was no spinal canal stenosis or foraminal 
narrowing. (JE4, p. 145)  Moreover, both Dr. Abou-Arab and Dr. Dery noted that the 
August, 2020 EMG was normal.  (See JE3, p. 128; JE1, p. 61)   
 
Nevertheless, Dr. Bansal diagnosed C5-C6 and C6-C7 disc bulging and opined 
Ms. Chavez’s pathology is to the cervical spine. (Ex. 2, p. 19)  He placed Ms. Chavez at 
maximum medical improvement as of January 29, 2021, and assessed permanent 
impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 19)  Based on Ms. Chavez’s radicular complaints, guarding, and 
loss of range of motion, Dr. Bansal placed Ms. Chavez in DRE Category II and assigned 
5 percent whole person impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 20)  With respect to restrictions, Dr. 
Bansal advised against lifting anything weighing greater than 25 pounds.  He further 
advised against lifting greater than 10 pounds overhead. (Ex. 2, p. 19)  Lastly, he 
recommended she avoid work or activities that require repeated neck motion, or that 
place her neck in a posturally flexed position for any appreciable duration of time. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Bansal’s IME report is concerning for several reasons.  First, it does not 
appear as though Dr. Bansal had a complete medical history.  The medical records 
summary contained in Dr. Bansal’s report does not provide a summary of any medical 
records prior to May 22, 2020. (See Ex. 2, p. 9)  The summary does not include the May 
4, 2020, or May 18, 2020, medical records from UIHC wherein Ms. Chavez provided 
that her right shoulder pain began 3-4 years prior, and that she underwent physical 
therapy to address the same. (See Ex. 2, p. 12)   
 
The undersigned is cognizant of the fact claimant’s counsel documented the 
medical records that were produced to Dr. Bansal for review.  According to the January 
27, 2021, letter, Dr. Bansal was provided, “Medical Records from University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics (5/4/20-7/27/20).” (Ex. 1, p. 3)  Presumably, the May 18, 2020, 
medical records referenced above were included in this set of records.  That being said, 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 10 
 
some key medical records, such as the May 4, 2020, and May 18, 2020, medical 
records from UIHC, are not referenced in his report.  The records are not included in the 
medical records summary and Dr. Bansal never discusses Ms. Chavez’s 3-year history 
of chronic right shoulder pain in the IME report.   
 
Dr. Bansal’s condensed summary of Ms. Chavez’s treatment is problematic for 
similar reasons.  The summary provides, “Ms. Chavez was evaluated by a physician at 
the University, and was sent to physical therapy.  Her pain continued, and she was 
referred to an orthopedist.” (Ex. 2, p. 15)  While it is true that Ms. Chavez was evaluated 
by physicians at UIHC shortly after the alleged work injury, those physicians were not 
evaluating and treating Ms. Chavez for the alleged workers’ compensation injury.  Dr. 
Bansal’s understanding of the same appears skewed by the fact he was not privy to 
medical records from UIHC predating July 6, 2020.  Moreover, the medical team at 
UIHC did not refer Ms. Chavez to an orthopedic surgeon as implied by Dr. Bansal’s 
summary.  Rather, an attending physician in the emergency department at Mercy 
Hospital referred her for an orthopedic evaluation when she suspected Ms. Chavez’s 
condition could be the result of a pinched nerve. (JE2, p. 114)  Lastly, Dr. Bansal’s 
summary inaccurately provides that Dr. Dery has recommended no further treatment.  
The most recent medical record from Dr. Dery, available to Dr. Bansal at the time, was 
dated January 6, 2021.  In the January 6, 2021, medical record, Dr. Dery recommended 
physical therapy, pain psychology, and an oral antidepressant. (JE3, p. 134)  Again, Dr. 
Bansal’s understanding of Ms. Chavez’s medical history is inaccurate or incomplete. 
From my review of Dr. Bansal's summary and of the medical evidence he was 
provided, many of the records that would be adverse to Ms. Chavez or suggest potential 
other causes of her symptoms were not provided, were not reviewed, or at least were 
not deemed significant enough for Dr. Bansal to summarize. This is concerning and 
damages the credibility of Dr. Bansal's opinions in this case. 
 
Perhaps most concerning is the lack of analysis provided by Dr. Bansal with 
respect to causation.  It is possible the lack of analysis is due to an inaccurate belief that 
causation was not a disputed issue in this case.  The explanatory paragraph Dr. Bansal 
pulled from counsel’s letter essentially asked Dr. Bansal to assume causation had 
already been established.  The paragraph states, “On April 23, 2020, Ms. Chavez 
sustained an injury to her neck, right shoulder, and right upper extremity arising out of 
and in the course of her employment with the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.”  
After the explanatory paragraph, Dr. Bansal outlined the first question: “Did Ms. Chavez 
sustain an injury on or about April 23, 2020, as a result of her work activities with the 
University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics?”  Dr. Bansal simply answered, “Yes.” (Ex. 2, p. 
17)   
 
While later responses were comparatively more thorough, I did not find them to 
be any more helpful.  Instead of analyzing how the alleged injury caused the bulging 
discs at C5-6 and C6-7, Dr. Bansal spent the majority of his report attempting to explain 
how the symptoms in Ms. Chavez’s shoulder could be attributed to a cervical injury. 
Dr. Bansal opined the diagnosis of bulging discs at C5-C6 and C6-C7 is 
consistent with the mechanism of injury.  He explained, “Essentially, she had an acute 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 11 
 
mechanical load to her neck while she was lifting a patient to boost her up in bed.”  This 
is the extent of Dr. Bansal’s causation analysis.  He goes on to quote the American 
Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons on risk factors for disc herniation, asserting, “Many 
jobs are physically demanding.  Some require constant lifting, pulling, bending, or 
twisting.”  The citation provided by Dr. Bansal leads to an electronic article, titled, 
“Herniated Disk in the Lower Back.”2  While one can reasonably assume the same risk 
factors apply whether a herniated disk is in the lumbar, thoracic, or cervical spine, the 
lack of attention to detail throughout the report detracts from the overall credibility 
afforded to Dr. Bansal in this instance.  The excerpt relied upon by Dr. Bansal does not 
offer any additional insight into the diagnosis being consistent with the mechanism of 
injury.  Rather, the excerpt simply establishes that disc herniation can occur with 
physically demanding work.   
 
The need for a thorough explanation is particularly necessary in cases like this 
where it is disputed whether the injury arose out of and in the course of employment.  
The need for a thorough explanation is heightened in this instance as Dr. Bansal’s 
report describes two distinctly different mechanisms of injury.  At one point in his report, 
Dr. Bansal describes Ms. Chavez’s injury as follows, “She was helping with pushing a 
patient up in bed, and felt a pop in her right shoulder.” (Ex. 2, p. 15)  Later in his report, 
Dr. Bansal provides, “Essentially, she had an acute mechanical load to her neck while 
she was lifting a patient to boost her up in bed.” (Ex. 2, p. 18)  It is unclear whether Dr. 
Bansal believed Ms. Chavez’s injury was a result of pushing a patient or lifting a patient.  
It is similarly unclear whether Dr. Bansal knew how Ms. Chavez pushed or lifted the 
patient.  It is reasonable to assume the mechanical load shifts depending on whether an 
individual is pushing, pulling, or lifting.  Similarly, it is reasonable to assume a number of 
factors can impact the location of the mechanical load, such as how the individual is 
pushing, pulling, or lifting, i.e., from waist level, shoulder level, or overhead.    
 
Lastly, Dr. Bansal’s conclusion that Ms. Chavez’s symptoms stem from bulging 
discs at C5-C6 and C6-C7 is at odds with the diagnostic imaging and the medical 
opinions of the physicians who regularly treated Ms. Chavez.  The May 27, 2020, MRI 
revealed no spinal canal stenosis or foraminal narrowing at any level. (JE4, p. 145)  Ms. 
Reed opined that based on the MRI findings there was no pathologic neurologic 
impingement. (JE3, p. 119)  Following his initial evaluation, Dr. Dery found no evidence 
of shoulder or cervical pathology. (JE3, p. 125)  He further opined Ms. Chavez’s MRI 
showed minimal degenerative change throughout the neck, with no evidence of stenosis 
or disc herniation. (Id.)  He believed her pain was myofascial in nature. (Id.)  Dr. Abou-
Arab reviewed the MRI and found no spinal canal stenosis. (JE1, pp. 38, 42)  Ms. 
Chavez’s EMG also returned unremarkable. (See JE1, p. 61)  Dr. Bansal’s report does 
not address the diagnosis of fibromyalgia made by Dr. Abou-Arab and Dr. Dery.  The 
report similarly fails to address Ms. Chavez’s pre-existing right upper extremity 
complaints, and the potential diagnosis and recommendation for further exploration of 
carpal tunnel syndrome. (See JE1, pp. 27, 42, 46-47; JE3, p. 134)   
                                                 
2 http://orthoinfo.aaos.org/topic.cfm?topic=A00534  

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 12 
 
Having considered the medical opinions in the evidentiary record, I find the 
opinions of Dr. Dery and Ms. Reed to be most convincing and credible.  Ms. Chavez 
selected the medical staff at Steindler Orthopedic.  Dr. Dery and Ms. Reed largely 
provided care and offered their medical opinions without knowledge of Ms. Chavez’s 
workers’ compensation claim.  Neither party sought out Dr. Dery’s causation opinion.  In 
fact, Dr. Dery only provided a causation opinion once Ms. Chavez notified him of her 
pending workers’ compensation claim.  Dr. Dery’s diagnosis of fibromyalgia is 
consistent with the opinions of Ms. Chavez’s personal physician, Dr. Abou-Arab.  Dr. 
Dery’s assessment of Ms. Chavez’s diagnostic imaging is consistent with the findings of 
Ms. Reed and Dr. Abou-Arab. 
 
In contrast, Dr. Bansal was hired as a medical expert by claimant’s counsel after 
Dr. Dery had released Ms. Chavez to return to work and provided a diagnosis of 
fibromyalgia.  Dr. Bansal has only examined Ms. Chavez on one occasion.  As 
previously discussed, I did not find Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion to be particularly 
detailed or convincing.  Moreover, Dr. Bansal operated with an incomplete medical 
history and provided no discussion of the complicating factors in this case, including 
pre-existing conditions, inconsistent reporting, and the diagnoses of carpal tunnel 
syndrome and fibromyalgia as alternative explanations for Ms. Chavez’s presentation.  
For these reasons, I reject the opinions of Dr. Bansal in this case. 
 
Ultimately, this case comes down to the credibility of Ms. Chavez’s testimony and 
how the injury allegedly occurred.  Ms. Chavez’s testimony at hearing is not 
corroborated by the contemporaneous medical records.  The initial medical records do 
not refer to an acute injury.  In fact, the alleged April 23, 2020, injury is not discussed in 
any medical record until after the emergency department at Mercy Hospital referred Ms. 
Chavez for a surgical evaluation at Steindler Orthopedic on May 21, 2020.  Similarly, 
the alleged April 23, 2020, injury was not formally reported to the employer until May 25, 
2020.  Ms. Chavez did not provide an explanation as to why she did not report or 
describe the alleged April 23, 2020, injury until at least May 22, 2020.   
 
I acknowledge there are medical notes in the evidentiary record that could 
support a finding that an acute work injury occurred on April 23, 2020.  One such note is 
the May 4, 2020, UIHC medical record.  The record provides that Ms. Chavez’s right 
shoulder pain was “back” and radiating into her trapezius muscle.  She also reported a 
“new” right elbow pain that started the week prior.  Given this description, it could 
reasonably be argued that the pain Ms. Chavez was describing began on April 23, 
2020.  That being said, there is still the question of what caused the symptoms to occur, 
and the May 4, 2020, medical note does not point to an acute work injury.  Ms. Chavez 
did not report an acute injury to the medical staff or correct them when they relayed their 
impression that her symptoms were the result of an overuse injury due to her work 
activities.  She did, however, report the pain in her right elbow, wrist, and hand as a 
repetitive use work injury to defendant on the same day. (See Ex. 2, p. 9; Ex. 1, p. 2) 
 
At hearing, Ms. Chavez testified that she reported the April 23, 2020, incident to 
defendant approximately eight days after the date of injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  Ms. 
Chavez’s testimony is not supported by the evidentiary record as a whole.  Rather, the 
contemporaneous medical records, Ms. Chavez’s answers to interrogatories, and the 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 13 
 
April 23, 2020, injury report, dated, May 25, 2020, support a finding that Ms. Chavez 
only reported her symptoms, not the alleged acute injury, to her employer approximately 
eight days after April 23, 2020.   
According to the medical records in evidence, Ms. Chavez reported symptoms in 
her right shoulder and arm to at least three different medical professionals between 
April 23, 2020, and May 22, 2020; however, she never attributed her symptoms to an 
acute injury. (See JE1, pp. 22-28, 32-38; JE2)  Instead, she related her symptoms to 
her past work as a housekeeper, and eventually her repeated handling of materials 
while restocking rooms. (See Ex. 2, p. 9)  It is difficult to understand how Ms. Chavez 
would fail to mention such a seemingly significant event to multiple medical 
professionals.  It is similarly difficult to accept Ms. Chavez’s testimony that she reported 
the April 23, 2020, work injury to her employer approximately eight days after the injury 
occurred, but failed to report the injury to any medical professionals between the date of 
injury and May 22, 2020.   
 
I acknowledge the potential language barrier between Ms. Chavez and her 
physicians; however, it does not appear as though any potential language barrier played 
a significant role in the reporting of Ms. Chavez’s condition/injury.  At hearing, Ms. 
Chavez testified she can read, write, and speak the English language “a little bit.” (Hr. 
Tr., p. 17)  Ms. Chavez further testified that there were medical appointments where she 
did not have an interpreter present. (Hr. Tr., p. 40)  However, she also testified that her 
primary physician speaks Spanish, and she would sometimes have her son interpret for 
her. (See id.)  There is also evidence that Ms. Chavez sometimes declined 
interpretation services. (See JE1, p. 22)  While I acknowledge the impact a language 
barrier can have, Ms. Chavez has not asserted that she reported her injury to the 
medical professionals and the medical professionals failed to document the same.  
Moreover, the medical records in evidence are fairly detailed and consistent.  It is hard 
to imagine there was a significant language barrier given such consistent reporting.  
 
The April 23, 2020, injury report, dated May 25, 2020, similarly supports a finding 
that Ms. Chavez reported her symptoms, but not the alleged acute injury, to her 
employer approximately eight days after April 23, 2020. (Ex. 6)  The injury report notes 
that Ms. Chavez spoke with her supervisor on April 30, 2020, and told him of the 
symptoms she was experiencing in her right shoulder, arm, and hand. (Ex. 6, p. 35)  
The report does not provide that Ms. Chavez told her supervisor of an acute injury 
occurring on April 23, 2020. (See Id.)  According to Ms. Chavez, the supervisor 
recommended she have her own physician evaluate her condition. (Id.)  The injury 
report further provides Ms. Chavez presented to her physician on May 4, 2020. (Id.)  
According to the evidentiary record, the only medical professional Ms. Chavez 
presented to on May 4, 2020, was Ms. Carr of UIHC Family Medicine. (JE1, p. 22)  A 
complete summary of this medical record can be found on page 4 of this decision.  
Importantly, Ms. Chavez did not report an acute injury to Ms. Carr, and Ms. Carr 
assessed her with an overuse injury related to her work activities. (JE1, pp. 22, 27)  It is 
difficult to believe Ms. Chavez reported the alleged acute injury to her employer on or 
about April 30, 2020, was told by her supervisor to present to her own physician for an 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 14 
 
evaluation of said injury, and then failed to detail an acute injury when she presented to 
her physician of choice.    
Further contradicting Ms. Chavez’s testimony is the fact she formally reported the 
pain in her right elbow, wrist, and hand as a repetitive use work injury on May 4, 2020. 
(See Ex. 2, p. 9; Ex. 1, p. 2)  She did not formally report the April 23, 2020, injury until 
May 25, 2020.  Ms. Chavez provided no explanation as to why she chose to formally 
report the symptoms in her right elbow, wrist, and hand as a repetitive use injury on May 
4, 2020, three weeks prior to formally reporting the alleged April 23, 2020, acute injury, 
on May 25, 2020.   
While it is possible Ms. Chavez did not immediately connect her symptoms to the 
April 23, 2020, work injury, such an assertion contradicts Ms. Chavez’s hearing 
testimony that she reported the April 23, 2020, incident to her employer approximately 
eight days after it happened.  Given her statements on the symptoms she experienced 
on the date of injury and their impact on her functional abilities, it would be difficult to 
find Ms. Chavez did not immediately connect her symptoms to the alleged April 23, 
2020, work injury. (See Ex. 9, pp. 46-47; Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24) 
 
After comparing Ms. Chavez’s testimony to the evidentiary record as a whole, I 
find that there are simply too many discrepancies to accept Ms. Chavez’s testimony that 
she reported the alleged April 23, 2020, incident to her supervisor approximately eight 
days after the date of injury.  Instead, I find Ms. Chavez did not report the alleged April 
23, 2020, work injury to her employer until May 25, 2020.   
As previously alluded to, the evidentiary record leaves much to be desired.  It is 
concerning to the undersigned that the pre-existing medical records, physical therapy 
records, and the occupational health records mentioned in Joint Exhibit 1, page 33, are 
referenced throughout the evidentiary record, however, they were not submitted into 
evidence.  It is equally as concerning that these seemingly relevant records were not 
provided to Dr. Bansal for review.   
Given the two theories of injury initially asserted by Ms. Chavez, and the noted 
deficiencies in the evidentiary record, claimant needed to provide convincing and 
credible testimony to explain the actual cause or mechanism of injury.  Similarly, given 
the lack of contemporaneous medical records detailing the mechanism of injury, Ms. 
Chavez needed to produce a medical opinion that clearly and convincingly addressed 
causation.  It is possible Ms. Chavez sustained an injury on April 23, 2020.  It is also 
possible the injury occurred as a result of Ms. Chavez’s work activities on or about May 
4, 2020, or the cumulative effect of her job duties over time.  Of course, it is also 
possible this injury could be the result of pre-existing or degenerative conditions.  
Unfortunately, Ms. Chavez did not present sufficiently credible testimony and the 
evidentiary record does not make any of these possibilities more likely than the others. 
 
Having accepted the opinions of Dr. Dery and Ms. Reed, I find that Ms. Chavez 
failed to carry her burden of proving that her neck, right shoulder, and right upper 
extremity injuries and related conditions are causally related to, or were materially and 
significantly aggravated by, her work activities at UIHC on April 23, 2020.  Having 
reached this finding, I similarly find that none of the medical expenses sought by Ms. 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 15 
 
Chavez are causally related to the alleged April 23, 2020, work injury, and Ms. Chavez 
has not proven she sustained temporary or permanent disability as a result of the 
alleged work injury on April 23, 2020.  
 
With respect to Ms. Chavez’s request for reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s 
independent medical evaluation, I find that Dr. Bansal is the only physician that 
rendered a permanent impairment rating in this case. I specifically find that defendant 
did not obtain a permanent impairment rating from a physician of their choosing prior to 
Dr. Bansal's record review and independent medical evaluation report being authored.  
 
All other issues, including whether Ms. Chavez is entitled to alternate medical 
care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27, and whether defendant is entitled to credit 
under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) are moot.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The initial disputed issue is whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of 
and in the course of her employment on April 23, 2020. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 16 
 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
 
In this case, I found inconsistencies between claimant’s testimony and the 
contemporaneous medical records.  I rejected Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion and 
accepted the opinions of Dr. Dery and Ms. Reed as most convincing.  Having accepted 
those opinions, I ultimately found that claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of 
the evidence that her work activities on April 23, 2020 caused, or materially aggravated, 
accelerated, or lit up her neck, shoulder, or upper extremity condition(s).  Having found 
claimant failed to prove the necessary causation issues, I conclude that claimant failed 
to carry her burden of proof to establish a compensable work injury on April 23, 2020.  I 
further conclude that claimant failed to establish her conditions and medical treatment 
are causally related to her employment activities at UIHC.  Therefore, I conclude that 
claimant failed to establish entitlement to any weekly or medical benefits related to her 
alleged injuries. 
 
The next disputed issue I must address is whether claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of Dr. Bansal's independent medical evaluation fees pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39. Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-
retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee 
believes that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination. Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has strictly interpreted the requirements of Iowa Code 
section 85.39. Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 
(Iowa 2015). 
 
In this instance, claimant failed to establish that the defendant obtained a 
permanent impairment rating from a physician of its choosing before Dr. Bansal’s 
evaluation.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant failed to establish the necessary pre-

CHAVEZ AMAYA V. UNIVERSITY OF IOWA HOSPITALS AND CLINICS 
Page 17 
 
requisites to qualify for reimbursement of an evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39. Claimant's request for reimbursement of Dr. Bansal's evaluation fee must be 
denied. 
 
All other disputed issues are rendered moot by the above findings of fact and 
conclusions of law. 
 
Lastly, claimant seeks assessment of her costs. Assessment of costs is a 
discretionary function of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. Claimant was not 
successful in this case.  As such, I conclude it is not appropriate to assess claimant's 
costs.  I conclude that all parties shall bear their own costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant shall take nothing. 
 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Signed and filed this ____11th ___ day of February, 2022. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Gabriela Navarro (via WCES) 
Amanda Rae Rutherford (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
