Case Number: 22008635.01
Case Title:  DEVORSS, DANIEL V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Devorss Daniel-22008635.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
DANIEL DEVORSS, 
Nos. 22008635.01, 22004720.01,  
22008634.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, 
INC., 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ACCIDENT FUND INSURANCE CO., 
Headnotes:  1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Daniel DeVorss seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer Sears Manufacturing Homes, Inc. (Sears) and insurance carrier 
Accident Fund Insurance Co. (Accident Fund), as follows: 
 Under No. 22008635.01, for an alleged work injury to his neck on February 
28, 2021; 
 Under No. 22004720.01, for an alleged work injury to his right shoulder on 
October 21, 2021; and 
 Under No. 22008634.01, for an alleged work injury to his whole body on 
December 20, 2021. 
The agency consolidated the cases into one proceeding and scheduled an 
arbitration hearing. The undersigned presided over the hearing on June 28, 2023. 
DeVorss participated personally and through attorney Brian F. Keit. Both defendants 
participated by and through attorney Lindsey E. Mills. Shannon Kennedy-Barton served 
as the legal representative for Sears. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report under each file number defining the claims, defenses, and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Feb-06  09:35:41     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
issues submitted to the presiding deputy commissioner. Each of the hearing reports was 
approved and entered into the record via an order because it is a correct representation 
of the disputed issues and stipulations in this case.  
A .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 8 6 3 5. 0 1 ,  A l l e g e d  F e b r u a r y  2 8 ,  2 0 2 1  I n j u r y.   
The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did DeVorss sustain an injury to his neck arising out of and in the course of 
his employment with Sears on February 28, 2021? 
2) Did DeVorss give timely notice of the alleged injury? 
3) Is DeVorss entitled to temporary partial disability (TPD), temporary total 
disability (TTD), or healing period (HP) benefits from December 1, 2021, to 
May 16, 2023? 
4) What is the extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the alleged 
injury? 
5) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) 
benefits, if any are awarded? 
6) Is DeVorss entitled to payment of medical expenses? 
7) Is DeVorss entitled to alternate care? 
8) With reference to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) Are the listed expenses causally connected to the work injury? 
b) Were the requested expenses authorized by the defendants? 
9) Are the defendants entitled to a credit for medical or hospitalization expenses 
paid through a United Health group health policy? 
10) Is DeVorss entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME)? 
11) Is DeVorss entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
B . 
N o .  2 2 0 0 4 7 2 0. 0 1 ,  A l l e g e d  O c t o b e r  2 1 ,  2 0 2 1  I n j u r y.  
The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did an employer-employee relation exist between DeVorss and Sears at the 
time of the alleged injury? 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
2) Did DeVorss sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Sears on October 21, 2021? 
3) Did DeVorss give timely notice of the alleged injury? 
4) Is DeVorss entitled to temporary partial disability (TPD), temporary total 
disability (TTD), or healing period (HP) benefits from December 1, 2021, to 
May 16, 2023? 
5) What is the extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the alleged 
injury? 
6) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) 
benefits, if any are awarded? 
7) Is DeVorss entitled to payment of medical expenses? 
8) Is DeVorss entitled to alternate care? 
9) Are the defendants entitled to a credit for medical or hospitalization expenses 
paid through a United Health group health policy? 
10) Is DeVorss entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME)? 
11) Is DeVorss entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
C . 
N o .  2 2 0 0 8 6 3 4. 0 1 ,  A l l e g e d  D e c e m b e r  2 0 ,  2 0 2 1  I n j u r y.  
The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did DeVorss sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Sears on December 20, 2021? 
2) Did DeVorss give timely notice of the alleged injury? 
3) Is DeVorss entitled to temporary partial disability (TPD), temporary total 
disability (TTD), or healing period (HP) benefits from December 1, 2021, to 
May 16, 2023? 
4) What is the extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the alleged 
injury? 
5) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) 
benefits, if any are awarded? 
6) Is DeVorss entitled to payment of medical expenses? 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
7) Is DeVorss entitled to alternate care? 
8) Are the defendants entitled to a credit for medical or hospitalization expenses 
paid through a United Health group health policy? 
9) Is DeVorss entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME)? 
10) Is DeVorss entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
The parties entered into stipulations for each file number as detailed below. The 
parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into this 
arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision contains 
no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations except as 
necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
A .  
N o .  2 2 0 0 8 6 3 5. 0 1 ,  A l l e g e d  F e b r u a r y  2 8 ,  2 0 2 1  I n j u r y.  
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between DeVorss and Sears at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Although entitlement to TPD, TTD, or HP benefits cannot be stipulated, 
DeVorss was off work from December 1, 2021, through May 6, 2023. 
3) Any permanent disability resulting from the alleged work injury is to the whole 
body. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) DeVorss’s gross earnings were $723.07 per week. 
b) DeVorss was single. 
c) DeVorss was entitled to one exemption. 
5) With reference to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) The fees or prices charged by providers are fair and reasonable. 
b) The treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c) Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
d) Although causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot be 
stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to the 
medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based. 
B . 
N o .  2 2 0 0 4 7 2 0. 0 1 ,  A l l e g e d  O c t o b e r  2 1 ,  2 0 2 1  I n j u r y .  
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between DeVorss and Sears at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Although entitlement to TPD, TTD, or HP benefits cannot be stipulated, 
DeVorss was off work from December 1, 2021, through May 6, 2023. 
3) Any permanent disability resulting from the alleged work injury is to the 
scheduled member of his shoulder. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) DeVorss’s gross earnings were $1,015.65 per week. 
b) DeVorss was single. 
c) DeVorss was entitled to one exemption. 
5) With reference to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) The fees or prices charged by providers are fair and reasonable. 
b) The treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c) Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
d) Although causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot be 
stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to the 
medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based. 
C . 
N o .  2 2 0 0 8 6 3 4. 0 1 ,  A l l e g e d  D e c e m b e r  2 0 ,  2 0 2 1  I n j u r y .  
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between DeVorss and Sears at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
 
2) Although entitlement to TPD, TTD, or HP benefits cannot be stipulated, 
DeVorss was off work from December 1, 2021, through May 6, 2023. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
3) Any permanent disability resulting from the alleged work injury is to the 
scheduled member of his whole body. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a. DeVorss’s gross earnings were $1,015.65 per week. 
b. DeVorss was single. 
c. DeVorss was entitled to one exemption. 
5) With reference to the disputed medical expenses: 
a. The fees or prices charged by providers are fair and reasonable. 
b. The treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c. Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
d. Although causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot be 
stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to the 
medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE-1 through JE-9; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 6;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through G; and 
 Hearing testimony by DeVorss and Kennedy-Barton.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
DeVorss was 54 years old at the time of hearing. (Hearing Transcript p. 8) He 
grew up in and graduated from high school in Nebraska. (Hrg. Tr. p. 8) DeVorss 
obtained HVAC certification in EPA, but both had lapsed at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 8) He also obtained a journeyman’s license as a sheet-metal installer. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) 
After graduating from high school, DeVorss began working in the (HVAC) field. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 10) The bulk of his employment history was in service work and fabrication 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
in HVAC. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 10–12) DeVorss also worked as a funeral home director, as a 
borer installing cables in the ground, a plumber, and an electrician. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 10–12) 
While working for J & L Heating at roughly the age of 30, DeVorss was working 
on an installation job that required him to pull Freon tanks through a crawlspace. (Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 13–14) Because of the tight space he was in, turning around was difficult. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 13) When DeVorss turned around in the crawlspace, he felt a pop in his right 
shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13) After the pop, DeVorss had a bone protruding from the top of 
his right shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 13–14) However, he testified he did not experience pain 
or functional limitation because of the right-shoulder injury. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 13–14) 
DeVorss began experiencing low-back pain in or around 2014. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) 
He made a workers’ compensation claim relating to the injury and received benefits 
while off work, though he could not recall for how long. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17) DeVorss 
received a prescription of pain medication for his symptoms and did not undergo 
surgery. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) He ultimately returned to work. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17) 
DeVorss worked at Bishop’s Plumbing and Heating between 2014 and 2017. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 15) In 2015 or 2016, DeVorss was using a ladder while working for Bishop’s 
when the wind blew it and caused him to suffer an injury to his right shoulder that 
caused some soreness in the area of the bone protruding from the top of his right 
shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 13–14) He received a steroid injection and the symptoms 
resolved. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 14–15)  
On February 11, 2015, DeVorss saw Jonathan Buzzell, M.D., at OrthoWest with 
left shoulder complaints. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1) DeVorss told Dr. Buzzell that he was not sure 
when exactly he started working for Bishop’s or when exactly his complaints began. (Ex. 
JE-1, p. 1) He initially stated he had experienced aches and pains for about a year and 
then estimated his symptoms began about four months prior after the incident with the 
ladder while working at Bishop’s. (Ex. JE-1, p. 1) Dr. Buzzell noted, “Overall he is a poor 
historian and is unclear of the dates surrounding the time of his injury, as well as the 
time of his employment.” (Ex. JE-1, p. 1) 
Dr. Buzzell diagnosed DeVorss with left acromioclavicular joint post-traumatic 
arthritis. (Ex. JE-1, pp. 2, 4) He opined that it was more likely than not an exacerbation 
of a preexisting condition. (Ex. JE-1, p. 2) Dr. Buzzell further opined: 
On his history, he had initially stated that he had had symptoms in the left 
shoulder for approximately a year, and he had stated that they began in 
approximately January of 2014, however, made worse by this event that 
occurred approximately four months ago. These dates of the aches and 
pains being for a year predate the time that he had started working at 
Bishop’s from the dates that he had told me. 
Dr. Buzzell assigned no work restrictions and recommended nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatories. (Ex. JE-1, p. 2) 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
Sears is a business based out of Iowa that specializes in setting modular homes. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 23) The company removes trailers from trailer parks and installs modular 
homes in them. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) This entails transporting the modular home component 
parts to the park, placing the homes in the parks, performing ductwork, sanding and 
painting, laying carpet, and setting up water and electricity. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24)  
DeVorss saw an advertisement in the paper for an open position at Sears. (Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 20–21) He called and spoke with John Kennedy, a supervisor, and they met for 
lunch in Glenwood, Iowa. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 20–21) Kennedy offered DeVorss the job in 
Glenwood, retracted it after receiving the results of a background check on DeVorss,1 
and later called DeVorss back to renew the job offer. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) Ultimately, Sears 
hired DeVorss on or about August 21, 2019. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20)  
DeVorss performed work for Sears in South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, and 
Iowa. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) The job was physically demanding. It included a variety of 
strenuous duties. 
DeVorss performed plumbing work on water and gas lines. (Hr’g Tr. p. 24) He did 
electrical work, including hooking up a home’s electricity and air-conditioning units. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 24) DeVorss performed ceiling, drywall, sanding, and painting work. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
26) He also performed ductwork in the attics. (Hr’g Tr. p. 24) 
Sears also installed roofs on the modular homes. DeVorss performed this aspect 
of the installation. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) Because the homes are shipped, the roofs must be 
folded down for transportation on trucks across highways. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 37–38) At the 
installation site, DeVorss and other Sears’ workers had to jack up the roofs on a crane 
to install them. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) Then they shingled the roofs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) 
DeVorss and his colleagues set up modular homes on concrete blocks. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 24) He helped to level the ground where they would install the blocks. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
34–35) They also had to move and set up concrete blocks for each home. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
31–32) This included lifting concrete blocks that weighed up to 35 pounds each. (Hr’g 
Tr. pp. 32–33) 
DeVorss lifted and helped install five-by-five beams that ranged from two to 15 
feet in length and weighed up to 200 pounds each. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 26–27) To install beams 
on double-wide homes, DeVorss often had to help carry and set up a mod jack that 
weighed about 200 pounds. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 30–31) 
                                                 
1 DeVorss testified that he had a decades-old felony conviction for assault, which is not a crime of 
dishonesty. The age and nature of the crime gives evidence of the conviction no probative value in this 
case. The undersigned has given it no weight. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
In 2020, DeVorss broke his left thumb while working for Sears. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 12–
13) He reported the injury to Sears and received care for the injury. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 12–13) 
DeVorss was ultimately released to return to work without restrictions. (Hr’g Tr. p. 13) 
DeVorss did not experience symptoms in his abdomen before he started his 
employment with Sears. (Hr’g Tr. p. 66) He began to experience pain with urination and 
ejaculation. (Hr’g Tr. p. 66) DeVorss also had swelling in his abdomen. (Hr’g Tr. p. 66) 
DeVorss informed Kennedy-Barton he had pain and swelling in his abdomen and 
showed her his swollen abdomen. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 41–42) He also told her he was 
experiencing neck pain. (Hr’g Tr. p. 42) According to DeVorss’s hearing testimony, “the 
issue was, . . . when can I get off to go to an appointment.” (Hr’g Tr. p. 42) DeVorss did 
not testify that he informed her of an acute incident at work that triggered his symptoms 
or that he felt his complaints were related to his work. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 43–44) Kennedy-
Barton testified he did not report that he felt his complaints were work related. (Hr’g Tr. 
pp. 101–02) 
Kennedy-Barton instructed him to use his health insurance to get care. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 42) After DeVorss scheduled an appointment, Kennedy-Barton assigned him to work 
at a site fairly close to the provider and instructed him to take a Sears’ truck to the 
appointment. (Hr’g Tr. p. 43) DeVorss used the truck to drive to and from the 
appointment. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 42–43) 
On February 22, 2021, DeVorss saw Sara Rygol, P.A.C., for sharp and pressure-
like pain in his right lower abdomen. (Ex. JE-2, p. 5) He told Rygol the symptoms began 
about one week prior, occurred frequently after work, and were worsening. (Ex. JE-2, p. 
5) Rygol noted that certain positions aggravated the symptoms. (Ex. JE-2, p. 5) In 
addition to the abdomen pain, DeVorss reported muscle spasms in his neck due to 
heavy lifting at work. (Ex. JE-2, p. 5) 
Rygol prescribed the muscle relaxant methocarbamol and Tylenol or ibuprofen 
as needed for his pain. (Ex. JE-2, p. 7) She also recommended using a heating pad to 
aid in pain relief. (Ex. JE-2, p. 7) Rygol recommended that if the symptoms continued, 
DeVorss should undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his abdomen and 
consult with a surgeon to rule out a hernia. (Ex. JE-2, p. 7) 
DeVorss returned to see Rygol on March 2, 2021, with complaints of ongoing 
abdomen and neck pain. (Ex. JE-2, p. 9) He reported the methocarbamol was not 
providing much relief from his symptoms. (Ex. JE-1, p. 10) Rygol continued the 
methocarbamol and advised DeVorss to obtain an MRI of his abdomen. (Ex. JE-2, p. 
12) 
On Rygol’s referral, DeVorss went to the Nebraska Spine and Pain Center on 
March 8, 2021, for his left-sided neck pain. (Ex. JE-3, p. 15) He reported that his hand 
had been going numb at night on occasion and this had “been present for a very 
extended period,” but denied significant radiation into the upper extremities. (Ex. JE-3, 
p. 15) Michael Longley, M.D., noted, “He reports that this started spontaneously about 2 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
weeks ago without any antecedent trauma.” (Ex. JE-3, p. 15) After an examination and 
x-ray of the cervical spine, Dr. Longley found normal cervical alignment, no significant 
disc space narrowing or substantial cervical spondylosis, no instability, no lytic or 
destructive changes, and evidence of mild left C3-4 and C4-5 facet arthropathy. (Ex. JE-
3, pp. 16–17)  
Dr. Longley recommended physical therapy and over-the-counter Voltaren cream 
twice a day. (Ex. JE-3, pp. 18–19) He released DeVorss to work with no restrictions 
relating to his neck complaints. (Ex. JE-3, p. 18) DeVorss participated in physical 
therapy with Joseph Connell, P.T., who noted on March 19, 2021, DeVorss had 
complaints of primarily left-side neck pain “for several weeks with no mechanism” of 
injury and the pain was worse with lifting, moving, and turning. (Ex. JE-4, p. 33)  
On April 5, 2021, DeVorss returned to see Rygol for “ongoing neck pain.” (Ex. 
JE-3, p. 27) He reported little relief from physical therapy, cervical traction, or 
medication. (Ex. JE-3, p. 27) Because of the ongoing pain and impact on his activities of 
daily living, Rygol recommended an MRI of the cervical spine. (Ex. JE-3, p. 31) Rather 
than undergo the recommended MRI, DeVorss sought a second opinion. 
DeVorss went to Medical Clinic, P.C., in Hamburg, Iowa, on April 16, 2021. (Ex. 
JE-6, p. 47) Jaylene Zanker, P.A.C., examined him and made no notes about the onset 
of his neck or abdominal pain. (Ex. JE-6, pp. 47–50) Zanker noted: 
Patient carries a lot of tension in his neck and it is more of a strain at this 
point than a cervical issue. If he has problems with his cervical spine we 
will review the x-rays and discuss this with him. He does have some 
chronic issues of arthritis in his lumbar back with degenerative disc. At this 
point, it is not his biggest issue. 
(Ex. JE-6, p. 50) She also diagnosed him with a hernia that she felt may be multiple 
hernias and advised him to monitor his condition because it was not a significant issue 
for him at the time. (Ex. JE-6, p. 50) 
DeVorss returned to Zanker on April 30, 2021, with complaints of lumbar and 
cervical back pain. (Ex. JE-6, p. 51) He rated his pain as 9 out of 10, on average 6 out 
of 10 with it rising to a level of 10 at its worst. (Ex. JE-6, p. 51) Zanker found DeVorss 
had “significant tenderness to palpation” around C3, C4, and C5 of the cervical spine 
and L5 and S1 of his lumbar spine. (Ex. JE-6, p. 53) She further noted, “Patient has a 
difficult time standing up, walking. He walks with a stooped gait. He is very slow. He 
hangs on to the wall and door frames.” (Ex. JE-6, p. 53) Zanker continued 
cyclobenzaprine, started him on gabapentin, and prescribed a 7-day course of 
Tramadol, and recommended injections after a computed tomography (CT) scan of the 
neck. (Ex. JE-6, p. 53) 
On May 17, 2021, DeVorss underwent a CT scan of the soft tissue in his neck 
that Don Evans, M.D., read to reveal no acute findings that would explain his symptoms. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
(Ex. JE-6, pp. 60–61) Two days later, he had a CT scan of his cervical spine that 
Steven Osborn, M.D., read to show: 
Moderate left facet hypertrophy with subchondral cystic/erosive changes 
at C4-C5. Findings are most consistent with changes related to facet joint 
synovitis, however recommend clinical correlation for concerns of an 
infectious facet joint. 
Moderate to severe left and mild right neural foraminal stenosis at C4-C5. 
Mild left neuroforaminal stenosis at C3-C4. 
Trace degenerative anterolisthesis of C4 and C5. 
(Ex. JE-3, pp. 62–63) 
DeVorss went to George C. Grape Community Hospital (Grape) on June 1, 2021, 
and saw Kipley Anderson, C.R.N.A., at the pain management clinic. (Ex. JE-7, p. 64) He 
reviewed the results of the CT scan. (Ex. JE-7, pp. 64–67) Anderson noted they could 
not identify the cause of his abdominal pain on the CT scan. (Ex. JE-7, pp. 64–65) 
Anderson opined that, based on the CT scan, the issue in his neck looked more arthritic 
in nature and there was little reason to believe an injection would help him. (Ex. JE-7, p. 
66) Anderson recommended more PT. (Ex. JE-7, p. 66) 
Zanker next examined DeVorss on June 4, 2021, and noted, “He states that he 
does work a lot of hours and works fairly hard, which he acknowledges causes wear 
and tear on his neck.” (Ex. JE-6, p. 54) They reviewed the CT scan, which showed 
moderate left facet hypertrophy and some subchondral changes at C4-5, most likely 
related to synovitis, and mild to moderate neuroforaminal stenosis at C3 to C5 and trace 
degenerative anterolisthesis. (Ex. JE-6, p. 56) Zanker prescribed meloxicam and a 
Medrol Dosepak and renewed his prescriptions for tramadol and Flexeril. (Ex. JE-6, p. 
56) 
That same day, DeVorss returned to see Anderson in the pain clinic. (Ex. JE-7, 
pp. 68–70) Anderson noted DeVorss had complaints of neck pain with radicular 
symptoms into his left upper extremity and, “Patient describes an insidious onset 
beginning back in January.” (Ex. JE-7, p. 68) Put otherwise, DeVorss told Anderson that 
his condition “progress[ed] gradually with inapparent symptoms.” Stedman’s Medical 
Dictionary 448320 (2014) (viewed on Westlaw on December 21, 2023). DeVorss 
complained of consistent pain that worsened throughout the day, especially with activity 
such as lifting. (Ex. JE-7, p. 68) Anderson again prescribed a PT regimen to address the 
symptoms. (Ex. JE-7, p. 69) DeVorss participated in PT at Grape from June 4, 2021, 
through July 14, 2021, and reported some improvement with PT, but the demands of his 
employment exacerbated his symptoms and made it difficult to assess the long-term 
impact. (Ex. JE-7, pp. 72–79) 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
On October 22, 2021, DeVorss returned to see Zanker because “he awoke with 
severe numbness and burning pain going from his neck all the way down his right arm.” 
(Ex. JE-6, p. 57) DeVorss complained of pain he rated at 10 out of 10 and an inability to 
grip with his right hand. (Ex JE-6, p. 57) According to Zanker’s notes in the medical 
records, DeVorss denied “any trauma.” (Ex. JE-6, p. 57) Zanker opined his symptoms 
were most consistent with changes related to facet joint synovitis and referred him to a 
neurologist. (Ex. JE-6, p. 59) Imaging interpreted by Michele Peterson-Jones, M.D. 
showed no acute abnormality of the right shoulder and moderate acromioclavicular 
osteoarthritis. (Ex. JE-7, p. 71) 
DeVorss went to MD West One in Omaha, Nebraska on November 15, 2021, 
where David Siebels, PA-C, and John Treves, M.D., examined him. (Ex. JE-8, pp. 80–
81) They provided an overview of DeVorss’s complaints in the records and made no 
note of an incident at work precipitating an onset or worsening of symptoms. (Ex. JE-8, 
p. 80) Specifically, they noted,  
It sounds like he flared up his neck several months ago and underwent 
physical therapy at Mercy in Council Bluffs as well as the Hamburg 
Hospital. Therapy included the use of traction. He was getting by fairly well 
until he injured his right shoulder again while at work. He complains of 
discomfort at and around the right shoulder girdle.  
(Ex. JE-8, p. 80) This is the first reference in the medical records to DeVorss tying a 
complaint to his employment. 
They opined that the left neck and shoulder complaints were secondary to the 
right clavicle and shoulder complaints. (Ex. JE-8, p. 81) They further opined that the 
imaging of his left neck did not support surgical intervention. (Ex. JE-8, p. 81) The pair 
felt that DeVorss’s right clavicle and shoulder complaints should be addressed by an 
orthopedist and offered him options for receiving such an examination. (Ex. JE-8, p. 81)  
About a month later, on December 16, 2021, DeVorss went to CHI Health in 
Nebraska City, Nebraska, where Samantha Boyer, D.O. examined him and noted: 
Right shoulder/collar bone discomfort. He admits that this started after an 
injury 10/21/21 when he was loading a pipe and felt a pop in his right 
shoulder. He has had pain in his collarbone and shoulder ever since. He 
admits to previously being seen at Grape Community Hospital in 
Hamburg, Iowa and worked up. Had filed workers’ comp claim but was 
denied so patient decided to come to our facility to help get [workers’] 
comp to pay for his treatment. States he does have chronic neck pain that 
has been present for months prior to that injury. Does have a new pain 
more anteriorly on the right side of his neck as well and often feels like 
pressure type sensation that is new since the injury. States that the pain is 
debilitating and unable to work and was let go from his job. 
(Ex. JE-9, p. 85)  

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 13 
 
DeVorss asked Dr. Boyer to complete a form stating his injury was work related, 
but she declined because he had already obtained care with another provider and this 
was her first time examining him. (Ex. JE-9, p. 87) She offered to help treat his right-
shoulder/clavicle complaints. (Ex. JE-9, p. 87) To that end, DeVorss signed a release to 
allow Dr. Boyer to obtain medical records from other providers. (Ex. JE-9, p. 87) She 
recommended scheduled NSAIDS and following up in two weeks, to which DeVorss 
was agreeable. (Ex. JE-9, p. 87)  
On December 20, 2021, Cole Marolf, M.D., diagnosed DeVorss with at least one 
hernia. (Ex. JE-9, p. 93) An ultrasound on December 30, 2021, allowed Dr. Marolf to 
identify three hernias in DeVorss’s abdomen. (Ex. JE-9, p. 94) Dr. Marolf next saw 
DeVorss on February 24, 2022, and noted that, at the time, he “[did] not know that we 
have a way to help with [his] litigation pursuit,” but wanted to ensure an accurate 
diagnosis and effective care. (Ex. JE-9, p. 95) He recommended a consultation with a 
surgeon regarding his candidacy for corrective surgery on his hernias. (Ex. JE-9, p. 96)  
On February 28, 2022, Stephen Nagengast, M.D., recommended outpatient 
surgery to repair the hernias. (Ex. JE-9, p. 102) DeVorss planned to report back after 
being approved for Medicaid. (Ex. JE-9, p. 103) At hearing, DeVorss testified he had not 
undergone additional care because he could not afford it. (Hr’g Tr. p. 68) 
DeVorss saw Dr. Marolf again on August 26, 2022, with complaints of “low back 
pain, fairly acute onset Tuesday morning [three days] ago.” (Ex. JE-9, p. 110) Imaging 
showed no fracture or malalignment of the lumbar spine, no dynamic instability, mild 
multilevel degenerative changes, and atherosclerosis. (Ex. JE-9, p. 112) 
DeVorss returned to see Dr. Boyer on December 12, 2022. (Ex. JE-9, p. 115) 
She noted some asymmetry when comparing his right collarbone to his left, but no 
significant deformity. (Ex. JE-9, p. 115) Dr. Boyer discussed with DeVorss that 
sometimes after an injury such as his, “you can get asymmetry in your clavicle bone but 
that does not indicate dysfunction, and it may never go back to its previous state looking 
the same. (Ex. JE-9, p. 115)  
The defendants arranged for DeVorss to undergo an examination with Douglas 
W. Martin, M.D., under Iowa Code section 85.39(1). (Ex. A) The examination included a 
review of medical records, discussion with DeVorss, and in-person examination on May 
15, 2023. (Ex. A, pp. 1–5) Dr. Martin issued an expert report dated May 16, 2023, in 
which he answered questions posed by defense counsel. (Ex. A) 
Dr. Martin expresses his understanding of what DeVorss stated caused his 
alleged work injuries to be cumulative trauma. (Ex. A, p. 2) Dr. Martin notes in his report 
that DeVorss “reports that he has had no specific acute traumatic event such as a fall, 
someone running into him, etc., but believes that sometime during the course of the 
year 2021 that he developed difficulties with abdominal pain, right shoulder pain, and 
neck pain.” (Ex. A, p. 2) With respect to DeVorss’s neck condition, Dr. Martin notes, “he 
says that he has had gradual onset of neck stiffness and radiation of numbness and 
tingling and pain down to the right upper extremity that will also go into his fingers.” (Ex. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 14 
 
A, p. 2) Dr. Martin states in his report that DeVorss “denies specifically any previous 
acute impact trauma with regards to his chest or his shoulder.” (Ex. A, p. 3) Dr. Martin’s 
report contains little in the way of specifics regarding the onset of DeVorss’s abdominal 
complaints. (Ex. A, pp. 2–3) 
Dr. Martin devotes a section of his report to the question of causation with 
respect to each alleged work injury. (Ex. A, pp. 5–6) On the hernias, Dr. Martin opines 
that in the workers’ compensation context, a hernia is generally considered to arise out 
of and in the course of employment when it arises from “an acute lifting incident” that 
includes an “acute incidental increase in abdominal pressure,” which the medical 
records and his discussion with DeVorss did not establish as having occurred before his 
onset of symptoms. (Ex. A, p. 6) In Dr. Martin’s opinion, DeVorss’s hernias were more 
likely caused by chronically increased abdominal pressure caused by obesity, ascites, 
and other factors as well as a predisposed weakness of the connective tissue. (Ex. A, p. 
6) 
On DeVorss’s neck complaints, Dr. Martin opines: 
With regards to the cervical degenerative disc disease we know that these 
factors are created by a combination of age, genetics, and 
anthropomorphic factors. They are not trauma related. There is no 
argument here for any type of cumulative trauma situation. The literature 
simply does not support that. 
(Ex. A, p. 6) 
Dr. Martin addresses the question of causation with respect to DeVorss’s right 
clavicle/shoulder as follows: 
With regards to his right clavicle or collarbone issue, most cases of 
sternoclavicular joint abnormalities which include dislocations and other 
trauma usually are due to significant traumatic events. This gentleman is 
not giving me a history of that. Typically, these SC and AC joint 
abnormalities would not be due to any type of cumulative trauma situation. 
More than likely, his AC changes are probably degenerative. 
(Ex. A, p. 6) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for DeVorss to undergo an independent medical 
examination (IME) with Sunil Bansal, M.D. at the Iowa Injury Institute in Urbandale, 
Iowa. (Ex. 4) The IME consisted of a review of medical records, interview with DeVorss, 
and in-person examination on May 16, 2023. (Ex. 4, pp. 62–73) Dr. Bansal then issued 
a report, dated May 29, 2023, in which he summarizes DeVorss’s medical history, his 
discussion with DeVorss and examination findings, and answers questions posed by 
claimant’s counsel. (Ex. 4) 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 15 
 
In the “Subjective” section of Dr. Bansal’s report, he notes that DeVorss told him 
that, during the course of his work at Sears, he “began to notice protrusions in his 
abdominal and umbilical area as well as persistent neck pain, which radiated down to 
his shoulder blades.” (Ex. 4, p. 71) Dr. Bansal’s report contains no description of an 
acute event leading to the onset of DeVorss’s abdominal complaints. (Ex. 4) However, 
with respect to the alleged neck injury, Dr. Bansal states in his report: 
The situation escalated during a particularly strenuous project in Carroll, 
Iowa in February 2021. Mr. DeVorss was tasked with threading pipe for 
the installation of three modular homes within a single week. During this 
task, he experienced a sharp, sudden pain in his neck, akin to a ligament 
or tissue snapping, and he noticed swelling in his neck. 
(Ex. 4, p. 71) 
Dr. Bansal goes on to note the following with respect to DeVorss’s right 
clavicle/shoulder: 
He also reports an acute trauma to his right shoulder that occurred on 
October 12, 2021 when he was loading heavy pipe in his truck for work 
and felt a pop in the area of his right shoulder and collarbone followed by 
a protuberance over the right clavicle. 
(Ex. 4, p. 72) 
On the question of causation with respect to DeVorss’s abdominal complaints, 
Dr. Bansal writes: 
In my medical opinion, the repetitive heavy lifting and bending with his 
work at Sears Homes would lead to increased intra-abdominal pressure. 
This would lead to increased protrusion of abdominal contents through the 
ventral incisional opening as well as the umbilicus. 
Studies have shown that occupational lifting is a significant risk factor for 
recurrence of incisional hernias. 
(Ex. 4, p. 74) However, Dr. Bansal does not discuss what, if any, distinction is made in 
the literature between repetitive lifting and a single acute event. (Ex. 4, p. 74) 
On DeVorss’s neck complaints, Dr. Bansal opines the work duties DeVorss 
“performed on a cumulative basis for Sears Homes was a significant contributory factor 
for the aggravation of his cervical facet arthropathy, coming forward to February 2021.” 
(Ex. 4, p. 75) Dr. Bansal answered the question on causation with respect to DeVorss’s 
shoulder complaints thusly: 
[H]e had an acute traumatic injury to his right shoulder on October 12, 
2021 for lifting pipe over his shoulder. He aggravated his right shoulder 
impingement in the process. The “pops” he heard in his right shoulder was 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 16 
 
most likely tearing of the rotator cuff. Unfortunately, an MRI has not yet 
been performed. 
(Ex. 4, p. 76) 
The threshold question for each injury is whether the evidence shows DeVorss 
sustained work injuries arising out of and in the course of his employment. At hearing, 
DeVorss testified to the circumstances at work under which he sustained his injuries. 
The problem is that when he sought care for his complaints, he did not share a similar 
story with respect to how his symptoms began. DeVorss saw multiple providers for his 
complaints and none of them documented information suggesting the symptoms were 
related to an incident at work similar to what DeVorss recounted in his hearing 
testimony. 
With respect to the alleged neck injury of February 28, 2021, DeVorss has failed 
to meet his burden of proof. The evidence shows that he did not report an acute trauma 
on or around February 28, 2021, to any treating physician. And when DeVorss saw Dr. 
Longley on March 8, 2021, he said he had experienced numbness in his hand for “a 
very extended period” of time. (Ex. JE-3, p. 15) The records relating to a PT session on 
June 4, 2021, note an “insidious onset” of his symptoms “beginning back in January.” 
(Ex. JE-7, p. 68)  
Moreover, DeVorss did not identify any acute incident at work that triggered his 
symptoms during Dr. Martin’s examination of him on May 15, 2023. Apparently for the 
first time, DeVorss related his neck complaints to a specific incident at work when Dr. 
Bansal examined him on May 16, 2023, when he ties his neck complaints to a 
strenuous job on February 2021, in Carroll, Iowa. The undersigned finds it is more likely 
than not DeVorss provided an accurate history of his symptoms to his treating 
physicians closer in time to their onset. The weight of the evidence does not support 
finding that they commenced in February 2021 while working for Sears in Carroll, Iowa, 
which undermines Dr. Bansal’s opinion on causation with respect to the alleged neck 
injury and makes Dr. Martin’s opinion more persuasive.  
DeVorss also alleges a right clavicle or shoulder injury. When he initially sought 
care at Medical Clinic, P.C., in Hamburg on October 22, 2021, the medical records note, 
“he awoke with severe numbness and burning pain going from his neck all the way 
down his right arm” and “[h]e denies any trauma.” (Ex. JE-6, p. 57) There is similarly no 
reference to a traumatic event in the medical records relating to the treatment he sought 
with various providers between then and an examination by Dr. Boyer in December, 
when she notes, “He admits that this started after an injury 10/21/21 when he was 
loading a pipe and felt a pop in his right shoulder.” (JE-9, p. 85) He did not reference 
this incident during Dr. Martin’s examination on May 15, 2023, but did during Dr. 
Bansal’s examination on May 16, 2023. The contradictory statements to care providers 
and examining physicians prevent DeVorss from meeting his burden of proof on 
causation with respect to his alleged right clavicle or shoulder injury. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 17 
 
With respect to the hernias, DeVorss did not identify an acute incident when 
discussing the onset of his symptoms with any providers. Dr. Bansal opined that 
cumulative job duties caused increased pressure in DeVorss’s abdomen that resulted in 
the hernias. However, Dr. Bansal did not discuss the distinction between an acute event 
and a cumulative trauma with respect to the hernias. Dr. Martin did, specifically opining 
that the literature does not support a cumulative trauma resulting in multiple hernias, 
only a traumatic event. Because the record does not establish it is more likely than not 
DeVorss sustained a traumatic event while working at Sears that resulted in one or 
more of the hernias, he has failed to meet his burden of proof on causation. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
The alleged dates of injury in this case are all in the year 2021. Agency 
precedent holds that the edition of the Iowa Code and Iowa Administrative Code in 
effect on the date of injury govern in workers’ compensation cases. See Stiles v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., No. 5064673, 2020 WL 6037539 *2 (Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r, Oct. 
2, 2020) (App. Decision). Therefore, in the current case, Iowa Code (2021) and Iowa 
Administrative Code (2021) apply. All references in this decision to the Iowa Code and 
Iowa Administrative Code are to the 2021 editions unless otherwise noted. 
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must “provide, 
secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability for 
recovery of damages or other compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). “[W]here an accident occurs to an employee in the usual course of his 
employment, the employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and proximately 
flow from the accident.” Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 266 N.W. 480, 482, opinion 
modified on denial of reh'g, 222 Iowa 764, 269 N.W. 925 (Iowa 1936).  
“[T]he burden of proof is on the claimant to prove some employment incident or 
activity was a proximate cause of the health impairment on which he bases his claim.” 
Anderson v. Oscar Mayer & Co., 217 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1974). “[A] possibility is 
insufficient; a probability is necessary.” Id. The claimant must prove causation by a 
preponderance of the evidence. See, e.g., St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 
652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996)). 
“‘Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” IBP, Inc. v. 
Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency, “as the fact finder, determines the weight to 
be given to any expert testimony.” Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 
1998). The agency must weigh the evidence in a case and accept or reject an expert 
opinion based on the entire record. Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. The agency may 
accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in part. Sherman, 576 N.W.2d at 321. 

DEVORSS V. SEARS MANUFACTURING HOMES, INC. 
Page 18 
 
As discussed above, DeVorss has failed to meet his burden of proof on the 
question of causation with respect to the three alleged work injuries. The different 
statements to care providers and examining physicians with respect to the cause and 
onset of his symptoms prevent DeVorss from being able to establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence that any of the alleged work injuries arose out of and in 
the course of his employment with Sears. Because DeVorss has failed to meet his 
burden of proof on the question of causation, this decision does not address the other 
issues disputed by the parties. 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) DeVorss shall take nothing more from this case. 
2) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs.  
Signed and filed this 6TH day of February, 2024. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Brian F. Keit, Attorney for Claimant 
Lindsey E. Mills, Attorney for Defendants 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
