Case Number: 24700714.01
Case Title:  MADRID, LILIBETH V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA
Doc Type:    Decision - Commissioner
Source:      Madrid Lilibeth-24700714.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LILIBETH MADRID, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 24700714.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
OWNERS INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :       Head Note Nos.:    1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
   1403.30, 1603, 1803, 2701, 2907, 
 
 
  : 
   3001, 3002, 4000.2 
          
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Lilibeth Madrid, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, Mexico Lindo Grill & Cantina, as the employer, 
and Owners Insurance Company, as the insurance carrier.  Hearing was held on 
September 9, 2025 via Zoom video conference.  The undersigned heard this case as a 
deputy workers’ compensation commissioner.  Since hearing this case, the undersigned 
was appointed as the interim workers’ compensation commissioner.  Having heard this 
case originally and for purposes of administrative efficiency, this decision is entered as 
final agency action pursuant to Iowa Code sections 10A.321(5); 17A.15(1).  Any appeal 
from this decision must be taken as judicial review pursuant to Iowa Code sections 
10A.322; 17A.19. 
The parties submitted a hearing report prior to the commencement of the 
evidentiary hearing.  On that hearing report, the parties entered into certain stipulations.  
Those stipulations are accepted and relied upon in this decision without further factual 
findings or conclusions of law.   
At the commencement of hearing, three sets of exhibits were offered.  The 
parties offered Joint Exhibit 1.  Claimant offered Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 6, and 
defendants offered Defendants’ Exhibits A through J.  All exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record without objection.   
Claimant testified live and called no other witnesses.  Defendants called Moises 
Correa Perez and Rocio Correa-Mata to testify.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the arbitration hearing. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Jan-02  13:38:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 2 
 
 
Following the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing, the undersigned ordered 
counsel to file post-hearing briefs.  Counsel filed their briefs simultaneously on October 
13, 2025.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
her employment with Mexico Lindo Grill & Cantina on July 28, 2024. 
2. Whether this claim is barred pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.16 as a willful 
act by a third party directed against claimant for reasons personal to claimant. 
3. Whether the alleged injury caused temporary disability and, if so, whether 
claimant is entitled to temporary disability, or healing period, benefits from 
July 30, 2024 through September 24, 2024. 
4. Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, including a 
dispute about whether the injury should be compensated industrially or only 
with functional impairment. 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded. 
6. Claimant’s gross average weekly earnings and corresponding weekly rate. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care for future 
treatment. 
8. Whether penalty benefits should be awarded for defendants’ alleged denial of 
weekly benefits without a reasonable basis or excuse, as well as an alleged 
failure by defendants to contemporaneously convey the basis for their denial. 
9. If penalty benefits are indicated, the amount of penalty that should be 
imposed. 
10. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the exhibits and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Lilibeth Madrid, claimant, is a 22-year-old woman, who was born in Guatemala.  
She came to the United States in 2109 and completed high school in Philadelphia, 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 3 
 
 
Pennsylvania.  (Transcript, page 14)  She moved to Iowa in June 2023.  (Tr., p. 16)  
She has learned a significant amount of English in her short time in the United States 
and was able to testify without the use of an interpreter.  (Tr., p. 15) 
Ms. Madrid has worked in a bakery, a warehouse, as a pizza shop cashier, and 
took employment with Mexico Lindo Grill & Cantina, the employer, in June 2023.  (Tr., 
pp. 15-17) Specifically, Ms. Madrid worked as a food server for the employer.  (Tr., p. 
16)  Her only compensation for her services was tips from customers.  The employer 
apparently paid her no hourly wages.  (Defendants’ Ex. B)  Ms. Madrid testified that she 
earned approximately $900.00 per week in tips from her work at Mexico Lindo Grill & 
Cantina.  (Tr., pp. 17-18)  She testified she worked approximately 53 hours per week 
over five and a half days each week.  (Tr., p. 17) 
Defendants dispute claimant’s contention that she earned $900.00 per week 
working for Mexico Lindo Grill.  Instead, defendants contend that claimant earned an 
average gross weekly wage totaling $641.00 per week prior to the alleged injury on July 
28, 2024.  The evidence in favor of either contention is slim. 
Claimant relies upon her own testimony that she earned approximately $900.00 
per week in tips.  (Tr., pp. 17-18)  Claimant’s testimony offers no explanation of specific 
weeks worked, leaves from her job, or specific earnings during any given week leading 
up to the date of injury.   
Defendants’ evidence is not much better.  Defendants put forward Defendants’ 
Exhibit J, which includes one page of payroll (“Employee Sales”) records.  Defendants 
offered no testimony or other evidence to explain the payroll records. 
Defendants’ Exhibit J, page 33, provides payroll information for six employees.  
Claimant is not specifically identified on the payroll records, though I determine that the 
entry for “Lili” is most likely referring to the claimant.  That payroll documentation 
indicates claimant received tips totaling $22,258 between December 1, 2023 and July 
30, 2024. 
Defendants submitted Defendants’ Exhibit J, page 34, which is their purported 
attempt to explain how they reached their gross weekly wage calculations.  Defendants 
contend claimant earned $22,258 in tips for the 34.714 weeks between December 1, 
2023 and July 30, 2024.  Based on these gross figures for the 34.714 week period, 
defendants calculate that claimant averaged $641 in earnings/tips per week prior to the 
alleged injury date. 
Defendants’ documentation provides no insight into the number of hours claimant 
worked during any of the weeks, the amount earned during any specific week, whether 
claimant was on vacation or absent for reasons personal to her, and preclude any 
analysis of whether a particular week was representative of claimant’s typical earnings. 
I find that claimant’s earnings are based upon daily performance, or her output, 
given that she received tips for her work performed.  I find that defendants’ payroll 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 4 
 
 
records, without further context of when tips were received or the hours worked in a 
given week, do not provide sufficient detail to determine if any week prior to the injury 
date is typical or representative of claimant’s customary earnings.   
Realistically, both parties’ assertions are concerning.  Both parties have legal 
responsibilities to track this information for tax purposes.  Neither party appears to have 
maintained good records, or at least did not produce detailed earnings records.  From a 
practical standpoint, the employer had the best opportunity to document earnings on a 
daily and weekly basis.  The employer should possess time records for claimant’s 
employment prior to the injury date.  Ideally, the employer would pay its employees an 
hourly wage and document those wages and tips on a daily or weekly basis.  However, 
claimant may have also received cash tips that may not be recorded by the employer.  
None of this is explained in this evidentiary record.   
Ultimately, I do not find defendants’ records sufficiently detailed to provide 
enough information to determine claimant’s typical, or customary, weekly earnings for 
any of the weeks preceding the alleged injury date.  Although claimant’s testimony 
about her earnings is equally vague, it likely contains an estimate that would include all 
tips received, including in this case.  Therefore, I accept claimant’s testimony as the 
best evidence to establish her customary earnings each week.  I find claimant’s gross 
weekly earnings prior to the date of injury were $900.00 per week. 
This case centers around a physical altercation that occurred during Ms. Madrid’s 
work hours at Mexico Lindo Grill & Cantina.  On July 28, 2024, claimant returned from 
her lunch and began serving customers at the restaurant again at approximately 5:00 
p.m.  While she was delivering food to customers, she encountered another employee, 
Margarita, in a hallway.  The two brushed against each other as they passed and it 
caused claimant to spill food onto her clothes.  Claimant returned to the kitchen area 
and there appears to have been an exchange of words between the two women in the 
kitchen.  The exact content of that conversation cannot be determined from the video.  
(Defendants’ Ex. I) 
Precisely what transpired after the initial incident is not agreed upon by the 
parties.  However, the incident escalated and is captured on surveillance video.  After 
Ms. Madrid delivered her customers’ food, she found her aunt, who also worked at the 
restaurant.  Claimant sat in a booth in the dining area of the restaurant.  As claimant 
and her aunt were rolling silverware into napkins, claimant apparently was talking about 
the incident.  Margarita approached claimant, there was an exchange of words (the 
exact content of that exchange is disputed), and Margarita struck claimant on the left 
side of her face.  (Defendants’ Ex. H)  Again, the incident is captured on a surveillance 
video and is more accurately depicted in that video than explained in this decision.  
(Defendants’ Ex. H & I)  However, it is clear that claimant was assaulted by a co-worker 
while at work in a place and at a time where claimant was supposed to be performing 
her work duties. 
Again, there is debate about who instigated the exchange, what was said, and 
how the incident escalated.  However, there is no doubt that the incident transpired at 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 5 
 
 
work, during working hours, in a location where claimant was supposed to be 
performing her duties. 
The initial exchange appears to occur as a result of claimant and Margarita both 
performing their duties.  Similarly, the escalation appears to be on the work site as both 
women were performing work duties.  Claimant testified she met Margarita at work.  
She testified she did not know Margarita personally outside of work.  (Tr., p. 22)   
Mexico Lindo’s owner, Rocio Correa-Mata, conceded during her testimony that 
she has no reason to believe claimant and Margarita knew each other outside of work.  
She has no knowledge of these women socializing outside of work.  She also 
acknowledged that she does not know the cause of the July 28, 2024 altercation or if it 
was related to anything outside of work.  (Tr., p. 84) 
Moises Perez is a manager at Mexico Lindo.  He has served as a manager since 
Mexico Lindo started business, which was ten years prior to the hearing.  Mr. Perez 
manages a different restaurant location.  However, after this altercation, he came to 
claimant’s location and investigated the incident.  Mr. Perez conceded he was not 
aware of any friendship between claimant and Margarita.  (Tr., p. 48)  Mr. Perez also 
testified that in prior conversations, Ms. Madrid had expressed to him that Margarita 
would try to provoke her.  (Tr., pp. 48-49)  In fact, Mr. Perez must have discussed these 
concerns with Margarita prior to the date of the assault and been reassured by her that 
there was no issue of concern between the two women.  (Tr., p. 49) 
However, Mr. Perez testified that he understood Margarita was jealous or 
resentful of claimant because claimant was scheduled to leave on a two-week vacation 
shortly after the altercation.  (Tr., p. 50)  Neither Mr. Perez or any other evidence 
explains why Margarita would assault claimant simply because she was jealous or 
resentful of her impending vacation.  Mr. Perez also testified that claimant aggravated 
people at the restaurant in an aggressive way during her employment.  (Tr., p. 49)  
Ultimately, Mr. Perez’s testimony is based mostly on hearsay from witnesses that could 
have been called to testify but were not in this case.1 
Considering the evidence submitted, I accept the testimony of Ms. Madrid as 
credible and the most reliable on the issue of the cause of the altercation.  I find that 
claimant and Margarita did not have any type of relationship and did not socialize 
outside of work.  Any disagreement, history, or cause for the July 28, 2024 altercation 
was the result of a work relationship and circumstances surrounding the employment of 
 
1 Margarita has returned to employment with Mexico Lindo and presumably could have been 
located to be subpoenaed or compelled to testify in support of the employer’s affirmative defense.  (Tr., p. 
71)  Similarly, other co-workers with direct observations and knowledge could have been called to testify 
but were not.  The manager of the specific location could have been called to testify as to any 
observations, but was not.  Instead, defendants rely almost exclusively upon hearsay testimony from Mr. 
Perez in support of their affirmative defense.  Ms. Madrid’s testimony is considered credible and 
convincing on this issue and is accepted. 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 6 
 
 
Ms. Madrid.  I do not find that there is any specific issue personal to Ms. Madrid that led 
to the July 28, 2024 altercation and assault. 
After the incident, the employer immediately terminated Margarita.  (Tr., p. 47)  
Claimant left the restaurant that evening.  Unbeknownst to the employer, she proceeded 
to the police station to make a police report of the incident.  She then returned to Mexico 
Lindo to collect her tips for the day, and then went to the emergency room at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) in downtown Iowa City. (Tr., pp. 23, 29-
31) 
She was ultimately transferred to the main emergency room at the UIHC 
campus, evaluated, and released the same evening.  (Joint Ex. 1)  The emergency 
room staff imposed no work restrictions upon claimant and she returned to work for the 
employer each of the two days following her altercation with Margarita.  Ms. Madrid then 
went on a pre-planned two-week vacation to Miami, New York, and Philadelphia.  (Tr., 
p. 33) 
Upon claimant’s return, she presented for work at Mexico Lindo.  She was not 
allowed to return to work because she had never presented appropriate documentation 
of her ability to work legally in the United States.  The employer proclaims that it did not 
terminate claimant, but rather, required her to present necessary documentation before 
she could resume work.  Claimant never presented necessary documentation so she 
was never returned to the work schedule.  (Tr., pp. 72-76, 79-83)  Claimant testified that 
she was terminated by the employer.  (Tr., p. 18)  In either event, claimant’s work for the 
employer involuntarily ceased as of two days after her injury occurred.  For purposes of 
determining whether claimant is entitled to industrial disability benefits, I find that 
claimant was terminated from her employment because she failed to provide 
documentation of her ability to legally work in the United States. 
Since the date of injury, Ms. Madrid obtained employment in September 2024 at 
Estela’s Fresh Mex in Iowa City.  She worked at Estela’s as a cashier and performing 
food preparation.  She worked at Estela’s from September 2024 until the end of 
February 2025.  Claimant earned $13.00 per hour at Estela’s and worked approximately 
40 hours per week in that position.  (Tr., pp. 19-20) 
Since her employment at Mexico Lindo Grill & Cantina ended, claimant also 
obtained further educational training.  Specifically, she obtained a nail technician 
certification.  Claimant left Estela’s Fresh Mex to utilize her nail technician training.  She 
started new employment in February 2025 and now works as a nail technician, working 
49 hours per week, and earning approximately $900.00 per week.  (Tr., p. 20) 
Ms. Madrid has not obtained any medical treatment for her injuries since the date 
of her altercation with Margarita.  (Tr., p. 31)  Claimant testified she did not have health 
insurance and did not have sufficient funds to pay for medical care.  (Tr., pp. 36-37)  
She has worked at the subsequent employers without formal medical restrictions and 
has not had any work restrictions until she submitted to an independent medical 
evaluation solicited by her attorney.   

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 7 
 
 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., performed the independent medical evaluation on July 24, 
2025.  Defendants point out several misunderstandings, misstatements, or incorrect 
information given by claimant to Dr. Bansal contained within his report.  For instance, 
defendants contend that Dr. Bansal’s history inaccurately states claimant “collided with 
her co-worker, which caused all of the plates to fall and the hot food spilling on her.”  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 4)  Defendants accurately point out that the plates did not fall to the 
floor.  (Defendants’ Ex. I)  Among other challenges to the credibility of his report, 
defendants challenge Dr. Bansal’s understanding that claimant had “complete amnesia 
of the actual assault, and has no memory of the specific blows or sequence of events 
during the attack.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 4)  Defendants appropriately point out that 
claimant provided a detailed answer to interrogatory and testimony at hearing detailing 
her memory of the altercation. 
Defendants further urge that Dr. Bansal is not qualified to render the opinions he 
offers.  They contend that Dr. Bansal, as an occupational medicine physician, is not 
qualified to render an opinion on a mental diagnosis and issue.  In their post-hearing 
brief, defendants point to other cases in which it was found that Dr. Bansal’s credentials 
were lacking for opinion pertaining to a mental diagnosis.  Some of those cases 
involved comparing Dr. Bansal’s credentials against mental health specialists.  
Ultimately, in this case, there is no contrary medical evidence in this record.  Nor is 
there any evidence in this case that challenges Dr. Bansal’s credentials.  Dr. Bansal is a 
licensed physician and his opinions are accepted into evidence in many cases before 
this agency. 
Dr. Bansal diagnoses claimant with post-traumatic stress disorder, which he 
opines, “In my medical opinion, Ms. Madrid has developed post-traumatic stress 
disorder as a direct result of the workplace assault that occurred on July 28, 2024, at 
the Mexico Lindo Grill and Cantina.”  (Claimants’ Ex. 1, p. 7)  Dr. Bansal then provides 
an explanation of why he believes claimant’s condition meets his diagnosis.  (Claimant’s 
Ex. 1, pp. 7-8)  Some of the information may be inaccurate or misunderstood.  Yet, 
again, there is no contrary medical opinion to refute Dr. Bansal’s conclusions.  Dr. 
Bansal’s diagnosis and causation opinion are accepted as the most credible and 
convincing evidence in this record.  I find claimant proved by a preponderance of the 
evidence that she sustained post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a result of the 
July 28, 2024 assault at work. 
Dr. Bansal opines that claimant has achieved maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) as of the date of his evaluation, July 24, 2025.  However, Dr. Bansal also 
recommends additional medical care for claimant, including mental health counseling 
and medication management.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 10)  I accept Dr. Bansal’s opinions 
that claimant requires ongoing medical management, including mental health 
counseling and potential medication management.  However, I also accept that claimant 
is now at MMI as of July 24, 2025. 
Finally, Dr. Bansal opines that Ms. Madrid requires permanent work restrictions 
that include avoidance of “high crowd density or significant interpersonal congestion.”  
(Claimants’ Ex. 1, p. 9)  Dr. Bansal further recommends claimant be able to take breaks 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 8 
 
 
as needed when she experiences anxiety from triggering environments. (Claimant’s Ex. 
1, p. 9)  Dr. Bansal also recommended claimant “be restricted from work environments 
with unexpected loud noises, sudden movements, or approaches from behind.  Her 
workspace should be arranged to provide visual awareness of her surroundings, 
avoiding situations where people can approach unseen.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 10)  
Finally, Dr. Bansal recommended against employment in confined spaces or narrow 
corridors where unexpected physical contact may occur.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 10)  I 
accept Dr. Bansal’s restrictions as the most credible and convincing evidence in this 
record. 
I acknowledge defendants’ critiques and challenges to Dr. Bansal’s opinions.  
However, there are no competing medical opinions in this case.  Certainly, some of the 
challenges asserted by defendants could impact the credibility of Dr. Bansal’s opinion.  
If there was a competing, credible medical opinion in this record, I may well have 
discounted Dr. Bansal’s opinion.  However, as this record was submitted, Dr. Bansal 
offers the most credible, convincing evidence about claimant’s medical condition.  In 
fact,  Dr. Bansal offers the only medical opinion on these issues in the record and his 
opinion is accepted. 
Therefore, I find that claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that 
she sustained post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the assault she sustained on 
July 28, 2024 at work.  That injury arose out of claimant’s employment activities and 
occurred at a time and place where claimant was supposed to be located to perform her 
work duties.  Therefore, I find that the injury occurred in the course of claimant’s work 
duties for Mexico Lindo.   
I accept Dr. Bansal’s diagnosis that claimant sustained post-traumatic stress 
disorder as a result of the assault she sustained at work on July 28, 2024.  I find that 
claimant requires permanent work restrictions as a result of the injury, as outlined by Dr. 
Bansal.  I find that claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the work injury. 
Given that the opinion is not rebutted, I accept Dr. Bansal’s opinion that claimant 
achieved maximum medical improvement on July 24, 2025.  I also find that the injury 
resulted in permanent disability and a loss of future earning capacity to claimant.  
However, I also find that the injury had a minor impact on claimant’s future earning 
capacity.  Claimant has obtained two new positions since her date of injury.  She has 
obtained a new nail technician certification.  She currently has earnings similar to those 
she earned at Mexico Lindo.   
Ms. Madrid is clearly motivated to continue working.  Claimant is quite remote 
from her anticipated retirement age.  She has proven the ability to retrain.  Therefore, 
considering claimant’s age, her educational background, employment history, ability to 
retrain, her ability to obtain two different jobs since the injury, her motivation, proximity 
to retirement, as well as all other factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I find that Ms. Madrid sustained a 10 percent loss of future earning 
capacity as a result of the July 28, 2024 work injury.   

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 9 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issues are whether claimant’s injury arose out of and in the 
course of her employment.  The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance 
of the evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and 
in the course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 
1996); Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising 
out of” refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the 
time, place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 
128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship 
exists between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury 
must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not 
merely incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 
2000); Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment 
when it happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be when performing employment duties and while the employee is 
fulfilling those duties or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
In this case, I found that the assault occurred during claimant’s work shift, while 
she was performing work duties.  Although an assault is not something that is generally 
considered a rational consequence of working as a food server, the altercation clearly 
grew out of interactions with a co-worker and I conclude arose out of claimant’s 
employment activities. 
The injury occurred on the employer’s premises, during claimant’s work hours, 
and occurred in a location and at a time where claimant was expected to be while 
performing duties she was expected to perform.  I conclude that claimant’s injury also 
occurred in the course of her employment. 
Having reached these conclusions, I must consider the employer’s affirmative 
defense.  Iowa Code section 85.16(3) provides, “No compensation under this chapter 
shall be allowed for an injury caused … (3) By the willful act of a third party directed 
against the employee for reasons personal to such employee.”  I found that the assault 
against claimant occurred as a result of a relationship that was limited to the work 
setting.  I found no evidence that claimant deviated from her employment duties.  Xenia 
Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250 (Iowa 2010).  Defendants did not prove 
that the injury was directed against claimant for reasons personal to the claimant.  
Instead, it appears that a work argument arose between claimant and a co-worker, 
which escalated, and resulted in the assault.  I conclude defendants failed to prove their 
affirmative defense under Iowa Code section 85.16(3). 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to an award of temporary disability, 
or healing period, benefits from July 30, 2024 through September 24, 2024.  Claimant 
contends that she was off work after July 29, 2024 and was not offered work by the 
employer upon her return from vacation.  Therefore, claimant contends she is entitled to 
an award of healing period benefits.  

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 10 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Iowa Code section 
85.34(1), provides that healing period benefits are payable: 
beginning on the first day of disability after the injury, and until the 
employee has returned to work or it is medically indicated that significant 
improvement from the injury is not anticipated or until the employee is 
medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar to the 
employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of injury, 
whichever occurs first. 
I conclude that claimant never qualified for an award of healing period benefits.  
Although claimant was terminated and not offered work after returning from her 
vacation, claimant has not established that she was ever disabled after the injury.  
Claimant never had work restrictions between the date of injury and the claimed end of 
her healing period on September 24, 2024.  During the asserted healing period, 
claimant remained medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar to 
the employment in which she was engaged at the time of injury.  Therefore, claimant 
failed to prove entitlement to healing period benefits. 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 11 
 
 
The next dispute is whether claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability 
benefits.  Ms. Madrid proved by a preponderance of the evidence that she sustained 
PTSD as a result of the work injury.  PTSD is not a scheduled injury contained within 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u).  Therefore, this injury should be compensated as an 
unscheduled injury pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Ms. Madrid returned to work for two days after this injury but was terminated by 
the employer after returning from a vacation shortly after the injury.  Therefore, this 
injury is not limited to an award of functional disability.  Instead, this injury is evaluated 
to determine if claimant sustained industrial disability.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961).  Claimant’s 
proximity to retirement, or the number of years in the future it was reasonably 
anticipated that the employee would work at the time of the injury, is also a relevant 
factor that must be considered in determining industrial disability.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v). 
Considering all of these relevant industrial disability factors, I found that claimant 
proved she sustained a permanent disability and that the injury resulted in a ten percent 
loss of future earning capacity.  This is equivalent to a ten percent industrial disability.  
Industrial disability is calculated based on a percentage of 500 weeks of benefits.  
Therefore, a ten percent industrial disability is equivalent to 50 weeks of permanent 
partial disability (PPD) benefits.  I conclude claimant proved entitlement to 50 weeks of 
PPD benefits. 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  
Having found that claimant achieved MMI on July 24, 2025, I conclude PPD benefits 
should commence on July 25, 2025. 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 12 
 
 
The next disputed issue is the proper weekly rate at which benefits should be 
paid.  The basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the time of 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36 (2015).  Weekly earnings are the gross salary, wages, or 
earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  Id.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment.  Id. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by thirteen the earnings over the thirteen-week period 
immediately preceding the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36(6) (2015).  Any week that does 
not fairly reflect the employee’s customary earnings is excluded, however.  Id. 
In this case, the parties did not present detailed evidence to substantiate 
claimant’s customary or typical earnings prior the date of injury.  Claimant clearly 
worked for the employer longer than 13 weeks prior to the date of injury.  I found that 
her earnings were payable based upon her daily work, or output, since her entire 
compensation was via tips from customers.  
The employer’s earnings records do not detail claimant’s earnings on a daily or 
weekly basis.  Nor were any records introduced to document claimant’s hours worked 
during the weeks immediately preceding the injury date.  I ultimately accepted the 
claimant’s testimony regarding her weekly earnings and found that claimant earned 
$900.00 per week immediately prior to the date of injury. 
The weekly benefit amount payable to an employee shall be based upon 80 
percent of the employee’s weekly spendable earnings, but shall not exceed an amount, 
rounded to the nearest dollar, equal to 66-2/3 percent of the statewide average weekly 
wage paid employees as determined by the Department of Workforce Development.  
Iowa Code section 85.37.   
The weekly benefit amount is determined under the above Code section by 
referring to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Manual in effect on the applicable injury 
date.  Having found that claimant’s gross average weekly wage was $900.00, having 
accepted the parties’ stipulations that claimant was single and entitled to one exemption 
at the time of injury, I utilize the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Disability Compensation 
Rates by Income and Tax Status Spreadsheet with effective dates of July 1, 2024 
through June 30, 20252 and determine that the applicable weekly rate for temporary 
total disability (healing period) benefits is $577.11.  
 
2 https://dial.iowa.gov/media/9003/download?inline 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 13 
 
 
Ms. Madrid asserts a claim for alternate medical care.  Specifically, claimant 
seeks an order directing defendants to provide mental health counseling and medication 
management, as recommended by Dr. Bansal. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). 
In this case, defendants have not provided any medical care for claimant’s 
condition.  However, claimant also has not sought any medical care or pursued a claim 
for alternate medical care prior to this arbitration hearing.  Ultimately, I conclude 
claimant is entitled to ongoing medical care for her injuries.  Defendants will be ordered 
to provide claimant with a mental health consultation to determine what additional care 
is needed as well as a medical consultation with a mental health specialist to determine 
if she needs medication management for her PTSD. 
The next substantive issue that must be decided is whether claimant is entitled to 
an award of penalty benefits.  Ms. Madrid asserts that defendants unreasonably denied 
or delayed payment of weekly benefits in this claim. 
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 10A.315(4) 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4) (2023); Robbennolt v. 
Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236-37 (Iowa 1996).  
“Benefits may be delayed, without penalty, during such time as an employer’s 
liability is “fairly debatable”. Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 14 
 
 
109, 111 (Iowa 1995).  A delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable 
investigation is not unreasonable.  Id.  
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  Rodda v. Vermeer Mfg., 734 N.W.2d 
480, 483 (Iowa 2007).  An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in 
favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993).  An issue of 
fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which would support a finding 
favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194, 199 (Iowa 
2001).  
“An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ does not make it 
so.”  Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  The 
employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner could reasonably find that the 
claim was “fairly debatable.”  Id.   
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 
254, 259 (Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the 
penalty include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available 
to the employer and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 
at 238. 
An employer may not unilaterally decide to deny, delay, or terminate benefits 
without adhering to section 10A.315. Iowa Code § 10A.315 (2023).  Section 
10A.315(4)(c) creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow, to show the 
employer met its burden of a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1)-(3).3   First, the 
employer’s excuse must be preceded by a reasonable investigation and evaluation into 
whether the benefits were owed.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1); Baker v. 
Bridgestone/Firestone & Old Republic Inc., 872 N.W.2d 672, 678 (Iowa 2015).  Second, 
the results of the reasonable investigation were “the actual basis . . . 
contemporaneously” relied on by the employer for the denial, delay or termination of the 
benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(2).   Third, the employer “contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of their denial, delay or termination.”  Iowa Code § 
10A.315(4)(c)(3).  An employer cannot unilaterally decide to terminate benefits without 
adhering to section 10A.315.   Iowa Code § 10A.315.  
In this case, claimant has not proven entitlement to an award of any benefits until 
PPD benefits commenced on July 24, 2025.  Those benefits commenced upon claimant 
 
3 See also unpublished opinion.  Pettengill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 
740 (Iowa Ct. App. 2015).   

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 15 
 
 
achieving MMI at Dr. Bansal’s IME.  Of course, defendants did not even yet have Dr. 
Bansal’s report at that time.  Although their evidence was excluded, defendants 
apparently attempted to secure competing medical evidence after receipt of Dr. 
Bansal’s report.  This case proceeded to hearing 46 days after claimant established 
entitlement to permanent disability benefits.  On the other hand, defendants failed to 
prove they had investigated this claim prior to July 24, 2025, other than to ask claimant 
for the couple of days after the injury if she was okay.  The employer did not timely 
report the injury to the insurance carrier.  No medical evaluation was performed and 
there was not a reasonable basis expressed at the time of hearing as to why benefits 
did not commence after July 24, 2025.   
On the other hand, defendants put forth testimony from Mr. Perez that perhaps 
the assault was the result of Margarita being jealous or upset about claimant’s 
impending personal vacation.  At a very minimum, this could be perceived as a reason 
for denial pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.16(3).  This reason was conveyed to 
claimant in a minimally compliant correspondence dated October 4, 2024. (Defendants’ 
Ex. E, p. 17)  Defendants had no reason to believe claimant’s work status changed, that 
she required permanent work restrictions, or that she sustained industrial disability until 
they received Dr. Bansal’s report.  Ultimately, I conclude defendants had a weak, but 
arguably viable basis for denial under Iowa Code section 85.16(3).  They conveyed that 
basis for denial to claimant in a minimally compliant letter and reasonably close to 
claimant’s inquiry and request for treatment.  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved a 
delay in payment of PPD benefits but defendants had previously expressed a 
reasonable basis for denial of benefits.  I conclude no penalty benefits are owed on this 
record. 
The final issue submitted for determination is whether costs should be assessed 
against either party and, if so, in what amount.  Assessment of costs is within the 
discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  In this instance, claimant 
prevailed and I conclude claimant’s costs should be assessed. 
Claimant did not introduce specific costs for assessment.  I conclude claimant’s 
filing fee ($125.00) should be assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant fifty (50) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on July 25, 2025. 
 
Defendants shall pay all weekly benefits at the rate of five hundred seventy-
seven and 11/100 dollars ($577.11) per week. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 

MADRID V. MEXICO LINDO GRILL & CANTINA 
Page 16 
 
 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
 
Defendants shall provide claimant future medical care, including the 
recommended mental health counseling and medication management for her PTSD. 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the 
amount of one hundred twenty-five and 00/100 dollars ($125.00). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this __2ND _ day of January, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          INTERIM  WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
Sejla Numic (via WCES) 
Matthew Phillips (via WCES) 
 
