Case Number: 1666216.03
Case Title:  STRABLE, REGENA V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      15. Ruling on Petition and Cross-Petition for Judicial Review- Order Granted.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
 
Petitioner, 
 
   v. 
 
REGENA STRABLE, 
 
Respondent/Cross-Petitioner. 
 
 
  Case No. CVCV069711 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION AND CROSS-
PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
On December 5, 2025, the above-captioned matter came before the Court for a 
hearing on the petition and cross-petition for judicial review. Petitioner Second Injury Fund 
of Iowa (the “Fund”) was represented by Assistant Attorney General Sarah Timko. 
Respondent/Cross-Petitioner Regena Strable (“Strable”) appeared through Alethea 
Gauthier and Gregory Taylor. After hearing the arguments of counsel and reviewing the 
court file, the briefs filed by the parties, and the certified administrative record, the Court 
enters this ruling. 
I.  
Relevant History 
 
This matter concerns the denial of workers’ compensation benefits sought against 
the Second Injury Fund of Iowa under Iowa Code sections 85.63 to 85.69 (the “Second 
Injury Compensation Act”). Specifically, this matter addresses the limitations of benefits 
contemplated under 85.64, which limits the Fund’s liability to the increased disability 
amount remaining after deducting the employer’s liability. 
 
The procedural background of this matter is lengthy; only the most pertinent facts 
will be discussed. In 2019, Strable injured her left ankle during a work shift at Altoona 
Nursing and Rehab Center (“ANR”). The injury was severe enough to require surgery and 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 11

2 
 
later produced related mental health ailments as well as pain in her back (sacroiliitis), 
hips, left arm, and left lower leg. Strable sought workers’ compensation benefits. Prior to 
the arbitration hearing, Strable entered into a settlement with ANR for the ankle injury and 
later a compromise settlement to include the related sequelae. Both settlements were 
approved by the Workers’ Compensation Commission. 
 
Strable also sought additional compensation from the Second Injury Fund. Strable 
based her claim on a prior 2009 injury to both of her wrists, resulting in bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome. The Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner found that Strable 
had failed to prove her left ankle injury (with the sequelae) was a qualifying second injury, 
because the entire injury viewed as a whole made it an unscheduled injury. The 
Commissioner later reversed the Deputy’s decision, finding the ankle injury (regardless 
of any sequelae) was a qualifying second injury. The Fund was ordered to pay Strable a 
calculated benefit. The Fund petitioned for judicial review. The District Court found the 
ankle injury was an unscheduled injury and reversed the Commissioner’s benefit award. 
Strable initiated an appeal to the Iowa Supreme Court.  
 
The Iowa Supreme Court ultimately upheld the Commissioner’s benefit award. The 
Court found that the ankle injury indeed qualified as a second injury. However, there was 
an issue in how to appropriately calculate the award. The Court set down rationale and 
directions for measuring the benefit using a three-step formula. The case was remanded 
to the Commissioner.  
Both Strable and the Fund take issue with the Commissioner’s remand decision. 
The parties argued separately for a rehearing based on the Commissioner’s purported 
failure to observe the three-step formula, specifically applying the third step improperly. 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 11

3 
 
Strable also insisted that the Commissioner’s calculation of benefits in step one was 
improper. 
On July 22, 2025, the Commissioner issued a decision on the rehearing. The 
Commissioner ultimately retained his remand decision calculation method. The Fund was 
ordered to pay a benefit amount; however, the Commissioner shifted his original benefit 
starting date in agreement with the Fund’s arguments. Both the Fund and Strable 
continue to take issue with the Commissioner’s final calculations of benefits. 
The Fund now petitions for judicial review and Strable has cross-petitioned. Both 
parties essentially seek the same relief, a remand to the Commissioner with directions to 
recalculate any potential second injury benefits using the Iowa Supreme Court’s three-
step formula.         
II.  
Standard of Review  
 
 
Iowa's Administrative Procedure Act governs the court’s review of final agency 
actions and decisions. Iowa Code § 17A.19. “Section 17A.19(8) provides that a party may 
successfully challenge an agency decision when the party's substantial rights have been 
prejudiced because the agency action ‘is unsupported by substantial evidence’ or ‘is 
affected by other error of law.’”  Titan Tire Corp. v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 641 N.W.2d 752, 754 
(Iowa 2002). When the district court exercises its judicial review power it acts in an 
appellate capacity to correct errors on the part of the agency. Grundmeyer v. 
Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002). A party challenging agency action 
bears the burden of demonstrating the action's invalidity and resulting prejudice. Iowa 
Code § 17A.19(8)(a).  
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 11

4 
 
The actual standard of review depends upon the nature and type of agency action 
taken as well as the basis for relief asserted under the enumerated portions of 
17A.19(10). Colwell v. Iowa Dep't of Hum. Servs., 923 N.W.2d 225, 231 (Iowa 2019). If 
the claim of error challenges an agency’s findings of fact, the review is for substantial 
evidence to support the action. Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006). If 
the claim challenges an interpretation or application of a law, the review is for correction 
of the error without deference to the agency. Id. If the challenge lies against the “ultimate 
conclusion reached,” then the review is for application of law to facts under an abuse of 
discretion standard. Id. “When an agency decision… involves mixed questions of law and 
fact, care must be taken to articulate the proper inquiry for review instead of lumping the 
fact, law, and application questions together within the umbrella of a substantial-evidence 
issue.” Id. 
III.  
Merits and Findings  
 
An aggrieved party may petition for judicial review of agency action, but only after 
exhausting all available remedies and upon a final agency determination. Iowa Code § 
17A.19(1). Judicial review of contested agency actions must also be timely filed. Id. at § 
17A.19(3). Both parties aver that they have exhausted all remedies prior to filing the 
petition and cross-petition. The ruling on rehearing was July 22, 2025. The Fund’s petition 
was filed on August 14, 2025. And Strable’s cross-petition was filed on August 18, 2025. 
The Court is satisfied that it has jurisdiction over this matter.  
 
Both parties take issue with the Commissioner’s remand decision and subsequent 
rehearing ruling; specifically, the application of the three-step formula handed down by 
the Iowa Supreme Court. Strable and the Fund challenge the calculation made under step 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 11

5 
 
three. Additionally, Strable challenges the calculation used in step one. The parties assert 
relief must be granted under the litany of Iowa Code section 17A.19(10), subsections (a)-
(n). D0001, Pet. at ¶ 6 (8/14/2025); D0004, Answer and Cross-Pet. at ¶ 6 (8/18/2025). 
Because the parties argue primarily that the Commissioner erred in his calculation 
method, the Court’s analysis is for corrections of error at law. Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. 
The Iowa Supreme Court takes the general position that the Commissioner lacks authority 
to interpret the workers’ compensation statutes in chapter 85. Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality 
Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016). Thus, the Court’s analysis primarily 
concerns Iowa Code section 17A.19(10)(c) for the potential erroneous interpretations of 
law.  
 
A. The Three-Step Method 
 
Under Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Strable, Strable’s ankle injury qualified for 
benefits irrespective of any sequelae. 14 N.W.3d 742, 747-49 (Iowa 2024). The Iowa 
Supreme Court then considered how to calculate benefits when “the second qualifying 
injury extends beyond the qualifying member.” Id. at 749. 
To calculate the Fund's liability, the Commissioner must first assess 
Strable's industrial disability considering both qualifying injuries, i.e., the 
bilateral carpal tunnel and the lower left leg—including its sequela injuries 
to her hip, lower back, and mental health. The Commissioner should then 
subtract the 20 weeks associated with the bilateral carpal tunnel. Finally, 
the Commissioner should also subtract the discrete industrial disability 
associated with the lower left leg and sequela without considering the effect 
of Strable's bilateral carpal tunnel. The result is that ANR is allocated that 
amount of Strable's overall industrial disability associated with the left lower 
leg and its sequela injuries, while the Fund is liable for the remaining amount 
of Strable's industrial disability associated only with the combination of her 
carpal tunnel and lower left leg—without considering the sequela injuries. 
 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 11

6 
 
Id. at 750 (emphasis added). “So, it is more accurate to say that the Fund is liable for the 
incremental increase in Strable's disability associated with the combined effect of both 
enumerated injuries.” Id.  
 
B. The Step-One Challenge 
 
Strable asserts that the Commissioner “misapplied the law to the facts when 
he determined her industrial disability for all conditions was 70 percent when he had 
previously concluded her industrial disability for only her arm and leg conditions was 70 
percent.” D0011, Resp.’s Br. at 10 (10/23/2025) (emphasis in original). Strable argues 
that the Commissioner found her “sequelae injuries had zero impact on her loss of earning 
capacity.” D0014, Resp.’s Reply Br. at 2 (11/14/2025). Essentially, Strable contends the 
Commissioner failed to assess her industrial disability for both injuries to include the 
required sequelae. 
 
Under step one, “the Commissioner must first assess Strable's industrial disability 
considering both qualifying injuries, i.e., the bilateral carpal tunnel and the lower left leg—
including its sequela injuries to her hip, lower back, and mental health.” Strable, 14 
N.W.3d at 750. The formula is designed to produce an overall combined disability 
determination from which certain calculations are then deducted to leave only the 
incremental increase in disability for which the Fund would be liable. Id. at 747-50. 
Because the formula relies upon deducting certain amounts, it is imperative that the step 
one determination includes an assessment of the total combined disability first. 
 
In the remand decision, the Commissioner states his determination under Strable 
“is to find the Fund’s liability only for the industrial disability associated with claimant’s 
carpal tunnel and claimant’s left lower extremity, without considering… the sequelae 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 11

7 
 
injuries.” D0007, Certified Admin. R., “Remand Decision” at 29 (9/10/2025). Based on the 
Commissioner’s legal assumption, it appears he was searching for the end result prior to 
performing the stepped calculations. See Strable, 14 N.W.3d at 750 (where the formula’s 
end result backs out the sequelae but only after performing the stepped calculations). It 
is unclear whether the Commissioner properly first considered the sequelae as required 
under step one. As discussed previously, it is imperative to include the sequelae in the 
step one calculation.  
 
The Commissioner’s conclusions of law only mention a 70 percent calculation for 
the wrist and ankle injuries, which was determined to result in 350 weeks of benefits. 
D0007 at 31. There is no mention of any sequelae inclusion. From this calculation, the 
Commissioner then moves on to deducting the 20 weeks wrist injury under step two. Id. 
This is precisely the same calculation used by the Commissioner prior to the appeal 
decision made in Strable. See id. at 158 (“While she is limited by her combined injuries 
to her upper extremities and left lower extremity… I find claimant has established she has 
sustained 70 percent industrial disability, entitling her to 350 weeks of … benefits.”). In 
reviewing both the remand decision and the arbitration appeal decision, the 
Commissioner then and now failed to consider the sequelae injuries in his calculations of 
total combined industrial disability. 
The Commissioner also found “claimant’s first injury… was a minimal factor in 
increasing her industrial disability.” Id. at 30. Here again, it is unclear whether the 
Commissioner applied this assumption to his step one calculation. To do so, however, 
would be improper since this factor is accounted for under the deduction made in step 
two. 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 11

8 
 
Because the Commissioner’s remand decision does not adequately articulate the 
precise steps utilized, attempted to reach the end result prior to a full step one calculation, 
and potentially failed to consider the sequalae injury, the Court finds that the 
Commissioner’s determination is at odds with the three-step formula as directed by the 
Iowa Supreme Court.  
 
C. The Step-Three Challenge 
 
Both the Fund and Strable argue that the Commissioner erred in the step three 
calculation. Both parties assert that the Commissioner did not perform a “discreet and 
separate” calculation of Strable’s second injury. As briefed by the Fund, the Commissioner 
essentially apportioned only a percentage of the total step one liability to ANR and ordered 
the Fund to pay the remainder. D0009, Pet’r’s Br. at 12 (9/24/2025). 
 
Under step three, the Commissioner is directed to calculate a benefit amount 
associated only with the second injury and its sequelae. Strable, 14 N.W.3d at 750. 
“Finally, the Commissioner should also subtract the discrete industrial disability 
associated with the lower left leg and sequela without considering the effect of Strable's 
bilateral carpal tunnel.” Id. (emphasis added). As directed by the Iowa Supreme Court’s 
formula, the Commissioner must determine the benefit amount of the second injury and 
its sequelae as if they were the only injury affecting the claimant.  
 
In the remand decision, the Commissioner determined that “most of claimant’s 
industrial disability is found to be due to claimant’s left ankle, hip/back and mental health 
injuries.” D0007 at 31 (emphasis added). It was found that “80 percent, or 280 weeks” 
were attributed to the second injury. Id. However, it is unclear whether the Commissioner 
was attributing this deduction in relation to the overall total disability calculated in step 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 11

9 
 
one. A review of the remand decision suggests the Commissioner determined his third 
calculation as a product derived from the first calculation, which would be improper.  
At this stage, the Commissioner is only tasked with calculating the benefits owing 
from ANR. After deducting the employer’s discrete liability from the second injury all that 
should remain is any incremental increase in disability. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa v. 
Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 473 (Iowa 1990) (holding that the employer’s liability must be 
“fixed” prior to determining the Fund’s liability). It is the “incremental increase” for which 
the Fund would be liable. Strable, 14 N.W.3d at 750. The Commissioner should deduct 
the entire second injury without consideration of whether the amount constitutes the 
“most” of claimant’s overall combined disability. Id. (“[T]he Fund should get a credit for the 
full amount of the employer's liability for the second qualifying injury.”). 
 
Furthermore, it is unclear whether the Commissioner’s finding that “claimant’s first 
injury… was a minimal factor in increasing her industrial disability” was also referring to 
his calculation in step three, step one, or both. D0007 at 30. The third step specifically 
instructs the Commissioner to exclude any carpal tunnel injury from this determination. 
Because the Commissioner’s remand decision does not adequately articulate 
whether full credit was given for the second injury, the Court finds that the Commissioner’s 
final determination is at odds with the three-step formula prescribed by the Supreme 
Court. Furthermore, since the Court finds the step one calculation fails to account for the 
sequelae injury, any final calculation resulting from the step three deduction would also 
require readjustment.      
IV.  
Conclusions and Rulings 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 11

10 
 
For all the reasons set forth above and upon consideration of the totality of the 
facts and circumstances in the record before it, the Court concludes the Commissioner 
failed to adequately apply the stepped formula set down under Strable. The 
Commissioner’s decision was therefore based upon an erroneous interpretation of the 
law in violation of Iowa Code section 17A.19(10)(c). Upon remand, the Commissioner 
should provide a detailed accounting of the steps, figures, and formulae used in his 
decision and determinations, consistent with this Court’s findings.  
IT IS THE ORDER OF THE COURT that the Petition and Cross-Petition for Judicial 
Review and requested relief are hereby GRANTED. 
IT IS FURTHER THE ORDER OF THE COURT that this matter is REMANDED to 
the Workers' Compensation Commissioner, with directions to recalculate any potential 
award against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa, in accordance with the formula and 
principles herein established. 
Costs are assessed to the Petitioner. 
SO ORDERED. 
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 10 of 11

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV069711
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA VS REGENA STRABLE
Type:
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2026-01-08 11:13:28
E-FILED                    CVCV069711 - 2026 JAN 08 11:13 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 11 of 11
