Case Number: 24700445.01
Case Title:  MARKS, BRIAN V. PDM PRECAST
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Marks Brian-24700445.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRIAN MARKS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 24700445.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
PDM PRECAST, 
  : 
           ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
THE HARTFORD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
              Head Note No.: 1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Brian Marks, filed a petition for arbitration on May 30, 2024, and 
seeks workers’ compensation benefits from PDM Precast, employer, and The Hartford, 
insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Attorney Nick Platt.  The 
defendants were represented by Attorney Ben Merrill. 
The matter came on for hearing on June 23, 2025, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, Joe Walsh, in Des Moines, Iowa, via Zoom video 
conference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7; Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 9; and Defense Exhibits A through R.  Prior to hearing, there were 
significant evidentiary disputes.  Both parties took effort to preserve error and a 
significant amount of time was used addressing the objections on the record.   
Claimant objected to several late reports from defendants’ treating physicians, as 
well as a number of substance abuse records which claimant contended were unfairly 
prejudicial and offered little probative value.  The record was held open for 30 days to 
allow claimant to secure a rebuttal report from his expert, Claimant’s Exhibit 9.  I 
overruled those objections and allowed all those exhibits in with the exception of 
Defense Exhibits S and T, which were excluded as late and unfairly prejudicial.  
Claimant also objected to a late-disclosed witness.  That witness was excluded and not 
allowed to testify.  I did allow defense counsel to make an offer of proof as to what he 
expected the witness to testify to.  (Transcript, pages 161-162)  Defense counsel made 
a concise offer of proof, which is not considered evidence in this case.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Feb-04  10:21:09     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 2 
 
The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to Mark Anthony.  Darcy Kriens 
served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on August 11, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant’s January 9, 2024, work injury is a cause of any permanent 
disability. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from April 23, 
2024, through January 27, 2025. 
3. If the claimant has proven permanent disability, the nature and extent thereof. 
4. The claimant’s gross wages preceding the injury. 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to costs set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 8. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on January 9, 2024. 
3. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits, if any are 
owed, is January 27, 2025. 
4. The claimant was single and entitled to one exemption for rate calculation 
purposes. 
5. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit of 18 weeks of 
compensation. 
6. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Brian Marks, was 38 years old as of the date of hearing.  He resides in 
Des Moines, Iowa, and he completed the 10th grade before securing his GED in 
approximately 2004.  He attended some coursework at DMAAC.  He also has a laser 
specialist certificate he secured in Dallas, Texas, in 2023.  He testified live and under 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 3 
 
oath at hearing.  He is found to be generally credible.  He is articulate and his answers 
to questions were generally short and responsive.  He did not appear to overstate his 
symptoms in any way, and his testimony was highly consistent with the 
contemporaneous medical records.  There was nothing about his demeanor which 
caused me to be concerned about his truthfulness.  While the defendants have placed 
his credibility at issue, I find that he is credible. 
The evidence demonstrates that Mr. Marks has struggled with drug addiction for 
most of his adult life.  (Defendants’ Exhibits C - H)  This included run-ins with the law 
resulting in conviction and imprisonment.  His work history is generally inconsistent.  
Prior to this injury he does not have a solid work history where he had been gainfully 
employed for extended periods of time.   
He began working for PDM Precast in 2021, but after about 4 months he 
relapsed and his employment ended.  His addiction sponsor, a supervisor at PDM, 
instructed him to take some time off, take care of himself, and call when he completed 
treatment.  He worked for American Spirit Graphics doing pallet work before returning to 
PDM in May 2022, as a raw material handler and lull operator.  The lull is a machine 
similar to a forklift, which lifts and hauls metal beams off semi-trailers.  This position 
required him to lift or otherwise manipulate metal beams and materials weighing up to 
100 pounds.  Mr. Marks further testified that he was asked by PDM to develop a 
mentorship program for “second chance” employees like himself.  (Tr., p. 31)  According 
to the testimony of Mr. Marks and the employment records in evidence, prior to his work 
injury, PDM had never given Mr. Marks any formal discipline of any kind.  In fact, his 
performance evaluations for 2022 and 2023 were both excellent.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 5, 
pp. 48-49) 
Mr. Marks was also involved in some type of a business venture related to a 
tattoo removal service.  In 2023, he secured his laser specialist certificate, and with 
several partners, he attempted to run a business called Clean Slate Iowa.  Mr. Marks 
was the CEO.  He testified that he never earned any wages for this business, other than 
tips from customers.  The defendants dispute this and contend Mr. Marks may have 
defrauded his business partners and suggest that he may have earned money from this 
venture.  He testified he was voted out or removed as CEO in September 2024.  I find 
that none of these alleged facts have any material bearing on this case. 
On January 9, 2024, Mr. Marks sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment.  This fact is stipulated.  He testified that on this date he was 
off-loading a beam from a semi that weighed between 9 and 11 thousand pounds using 
his lull.  As he was driving the beam through the snow in the yard, his lull hit a rut.  The 
weight of the beam caused the lull to rock.  He attempted to steady the beam to avoid 
injury to others, and the beam impacted his lull, causing him to be banged around in the 
cab of the lull.  (Tr., pp. 46-47)  He reported the injury immediately, and an incident 
report was filled out.  (Def. Ex. L, p. 42)  This report documented that he should have 
walked the yard before performing this task and marked any ruts to avoid this type of 
accident from happening. 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 4 
 
Mr. Marks testified that following the accident he had a broken tooth, his neck 
was tight and he had a headache.  (Tr., p. 48)  His first visit to any medical provider was 
to a dentist, Melani Fulton, DDS, on January 11, 2024, where he was diagnosed with a 
fractured #31 tooth and periodontal disease.  (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 5)  The tooth was 
crowned and cemented two weeks later on January 25, 2024.  There was “mobility” in 
two of his other teeth at this time.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) 
On January 15, 2024, Mr. Marks attended an appointment with Occupational 
Health.  The following is documented: 
The patient is a 37 year old male, presenting for a new patient visit with 
the following condition(s): 
PRESENTING PROBLEM:  Face/Head injury. 
WORK RELATEDNESS:  Patient indicated on intake that their injury 
occurred while at work. 
SIGNS / SYMPTOMS:  Change in Appetite.  Sweats.  Light Headedness.  
Blurred vision and Headache. 
LOCATION:  Head. 
QUALITY:  Constant and Pressing. 
SEVERITY:  Patient rates their pain as 4 on a scale of 0 to 10. 
DURATION:  6 Days. 
CONTEXT / MECHANISM:  Hurt by Lull machine. 
AGGRAVATING FACTORS:  Moving around. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8)   
He was diagnosed with a contusion and head injury. He was provided 
information in the event his symptoms changed or worsened and was instructed to 
return to work without restrictions on the same day, January 15, 2024.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
12-13) 
Mr. Marks was referred to Shawn Spooner, M.D., at UnityPoint Concussion 
Center and was evaluated in March 2024. 
Brian is a 37-year-old male who presents for evaluation of headaches and 
fatigue, which began following a work-related incident in January.  During 
the incident, a 60-foot beam caused the machine he was operating to 
shake, resulting in the patient hitting his face inside the cab.  Post-
incident, he underwent dental work for a tooth fracture etc, including 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 5 
 
receiving a crown. 
He describes experiencing headaches that last between five to ten 
minutes and occur approximately five to ten times daily.  He has been self-
medicating with Tylenol for relief.  The headaches are noted to be more 
frequent during work hours, and he now finds noise and motion 
bothersome, a new development since the incident.  Additionally, he 
reports neck pain, blurry vision occasionally throughout the day, and 
occasional balance issues on and off. 
Current Status: 
He is experiencing some changes in mood, with increased irritability and 
restlessness.  He has no history of head injuries, learning difficulties, or 
depression, but does acknowledge experiencing some anxiety.  Follow-up 
with an occupational health doctor resulted in a suspected concussion 
diagnosis; however, no work accommodations were initiated as of 
currently.  Referred here for further evaluation.  Otherwise well. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25)   
Dr. Spooner performed a thorough workup and diagnosed him with concussion 
without loss of consciousness, cervicalgia, post-concussion headache, vision problem, 
convergence insufficiency, photophobia, sound sensitivity, other fatigue and irritability.  
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 29)  Treatment recommendations were made for each of his conditions 
individually, with the primary treatment recommended being physical therapy.  Dr. 
Spooner did not place any restrictions on him at this visit.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 33) 
PDM terminated Mr. Marks on April 23, 2024.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 50; Def. Ex. M; Def. 
Ex. A, pp. 1-4)  At the time of his termination, he had no medical restrictions other than 
to work “as tolerated.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 33)  He had been doing his regular job without 
restrictions as a material handler until that date.  He was, however, undoubtedly under 
active, authorized medical care at the time of his termination.  He was not at maximum 
medical improvement.  The defendants contend that Mr. Marks was on his personal cell 
phone on April 19, 2024, and not working.  This was the final event which led to his 
discharge.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 2)  Mr. Marks applied for and was denied unemployment 
insurance benefits as Iowa Workforce Development determined he had committed 
work-connected misconduct. 
In spite of his termination, Mr. Marks continued to follow up for his authorized 
medical treatment.  Specifically, he returned to Dr. Spooner on or about May 9, 2024.  
He reported some improvement with his sleep; however, the medical notes indicate he 
was struggling with anxiety, agitation and irritability.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 34)  Dr. Spooner 
continued to diagnose the same conditions.  He placed restrictions on Mr. Marks of no 
“working at heights/balancing.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 41)  He ordered more therapy and a vision 
appointment.  On May 14, 2024, the eye doctor prescribed special glasses for the 
concussion; stating that he may need them indefinitely.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 77) 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 6 
 
Sometime in May 2024, however, Mr. Marks had started employment with Kodiak 
Security.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23)  He earned $20.00 per hour for providing security services 
for clients.  Unfortunately, in this record, it is impossible to tell which weeks he worked 
precisely or for how many hours.  He testified that he continued to work for Kodiak 
through October 2024, and finally left this job because of the travel. 
Mr. Marks continued to follow up with therapy and with Dr. Spooner.  Dr. Spooner 
modified his restrictions in June 2024, and again in July 2024, placing an additional 50-
pound lifting restriction for his conditions.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 42-43)  In August 2024, Dr. 
Spooner again documented his ongoing symptoms and reiterated the treatment plan. 
History and exam consistent with resolving sequelae of concussive injury.  
At this point essentially persistent functional vision issues.  Some minor 
cognitive symptoms, however, difficult to ascertain how much is truly 
secondary to injury versus other factors.  Anxiety much better with 
fluoxetine and we will continue to utilize that for now.  At this stage we will 
continue following up with optometry who may also advocate for further 
vision therapy which I would agree with and support.  Otherwise minimal 
limitations as a [sic] pertains to work, essentially avoiding digital screens 
while operating mechanical equipment etc.  At this point we will follow-up 
as needed per optometry disposition. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 48) 
 
After he stopped working for Kodiak Security, Mr. Marks had started employment 
with Experience the Vibes, a business that connected some type of AI system with golf 
simulators for customers in October 2024.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23)  He earned $20 per hour 
and worked about 10 hours per week according to his written discovery answers.  He 
testified he was physically able to perform this work without restrictions.  Again, 
however, he testified that this was ultimately not a good fit for him due to the travel.  And 
again, he offered no further evidence of the wages he earned or even dates he worked 
while employed at Experience the Vibes. 
On January 27, 2025, Dr. Spooner continued to document memory loss issues, 
headaches, vision issues and anxiety.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 51)  Dr. Spooner, however, opined 
that there was no long-term cognitive impairment from the injury, noting that he may 
have exacerbated his anxiety, causing cognitive issues.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 56)  Dr. Spooner 
placed him at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and advised him to continue use of 
his prescription glasses and medications.  He released him to work without any 
restrictions. 
Dr. Westpheling evaluated Mr. Marks on February 18, 2025.  His expert opinion 
was slightly different.  He advised that Mr. Marks did not need further treatment, 
including medications, but agreed that Mr. Marks was at MMI.  He assigned a 5 percent 
permanent impairment rating for his dental condition, 1 percent for his concussion 
issues, and 1 percent for his vision condition, totaling a 7 percent whole body rating for 
the combined impairments per the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 97)  Mr. 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 7 
 
Marks testified this was a short evaluation without any testing.  (Tr., pp. 58-59) 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., evaluated Mr. Marks on March 26, 2025, however, did not 
submit his report until May 16, 2025, just prior to the case completion deadline.  (Cl. Ex. 
1)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed: 
HEAD/NEUROLOGIC: 
Post-concussion syndrome. 
 
Dizziness 
 
 
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
 
Headaches 
 
Cognitive impairment 
 
DENTAL 
Fractured distolingual (DL) cusp of tooth #31, requiring full coverage 
ceramic crown restoration. 
Mild traumatic concussion of teeth #6 through #10 with class I mobility. 
 
VISION 
Convergence insufficiency. 
Bilateral spasm of accommodation. 
Irregular eye movements. 
 
NECK 
Cervical facet syndrome. 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12)   
 
He ultimately assigned a 19 percent whole body impairment rating for these 
conditions, assigned rather prohibitive permanent medical restrictions and 
recommended an array of further treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 14-16) 
 
Several physicians provided rebuttal reports.  As previously mentioned, claimant 
objected to these reports as untimely, which I overruled.  Jeffrey Westpheling, M.D., 
provided an expert rebuttal report on May 19, 2025, wherein he essentially reasserts his 
original ratings provided in February 2025.  (Def. Ex. C)  He disputed Dr. Bansal’s rating 
for the alleged vertigo and neck symptoms.  Having reviewed the entire file in full 
context, I agree with Dr. Westpheling’s opinions regarding the vertigo and neck 
conditions.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 9)  I find that Dr. Westpheling’s opinions are the most 
accurate overall assessment of claimant’s permanent condition. 
 
Dr. Fulton provided a detailed rebuttal report regarding claimant’s dental 
condition on June 5, 2025.  (Def. Ex. Q)  She essentially opined that his ongoing dental 
problems were purely the result of his preexisting chronic periodontal disease.  I do not 
find this late rebuttal report convincing.  Dr. Fulton did not address the appropriate legal 
standard for medical causation.  Furthermore, her report conflicts with defendants’ other 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 8 
 
physician, Dr. Westpheling, who assigned permanent impairment for the dental 
condition.  Again, I find that Dr. Westpheling had the best overall grasp of claimant’s 
permanent medical condition. 
Dr. Spooner also provided a similar rebuttal report on June 8, 2025.  (Def. Ex. P)  
Like Dr. Fulton, he opined that he really could not relate any of claimant’s ongoing 
symptoms to his work injury.  Again, I do not find this believable.  In fact, Dr. Spooner 
treated Mr. Marks for several months for these exact conditions that he now claims are 
not work-connected.  His opinion also conflicts with the opinion of Dr. Westpheling, who 
defendants chose to provide the permanent impairment rating. 
The record was held open to allow a rebuttal from Dr. Bansal, which he did.  (Cl. 
Ex. 9)  Dr. Bansal stated the various reasons he disagrees with the opinions of the other 
experts.  (Cl. Ex. 9, pp. 58-62)  While I generally agree with his critiques of the rebuttal 
opinions of Dr. Spooner and Dr. Fulton, I find that his primary disagreement with Dr. 
Westpheling revolves more around the extent of impairment.  To this end, I have found 
that Dr. Westpheling’s opinions regarding the severity of impairment is more accurate 
than the opinion of Dr. Bansal. 
In addition to the foregoing, Mark Anthony, Director of Steel Operations, testified 
on behalf of the defendants.  He was generally credible.  He testified that Mr. Marks was 
placed on a performance improvement plan after his injury.  (Tr., p. 137)  He testified 
that while he was on the plan, his performance improved slightly.  (Tr., p. 142)  After he 
was taken off the improvement plan, however, his challenges with urgency and attitude 
returned.  (Id.)  He testified that following the work accident, Mr. Marks made constant 
mistakes and only put forth a “bare minimum effort.”  (Tr., p. 132)  He further testified 
that the bonus received by Mr. Marks was a regular bonus received by all employees 
based upon “company profitability and reaching their target.”  (Tr., p. 158)  He confirmed 
that Mr. Marks had no formal discipline prior to the work injury. 
Mr. Marks testified that at the time of hearing, he continued to have moderate 
symptoms he associated with his work injury.  He continues to have headaches and 
difficulties with bright lights and looking at screens.  He contends he has memory issues 
and intermittent neck soreness.  (Tr., pp. 50-57) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant is entitled to any temporary 
disability benefits between April 23, 2024, and January 27, 2025. 
 Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are:  (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 9 
 
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
It is well settled in Iowa that a healing period may be intermittent. Waldinger 
Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 
1986). Healing period may terminate and then begin again. Willis v. Lehigh Portland 
Cement Co., I-2 Iowa Ind. Comm'r Decisions 485 (Review Reopening 1984); Clemens 
v. Iowa Veterans Home, I-1 Iowa Industrial Comm'r Decisions 35 (Review Reopening 
1984); Riesselman v. Carroll Health Center, III Iowa Ind. Comm'r Report 209 (App. 
1982); Junge v. Century Engineering Corp., II Iowa Industrial Comm'r Report 219 (App. 
1981).  
Injured workers who are working at a reduced pay during a period of recovery 
may also be entitled to temporary partial disability benefits. 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  Iowa Code § 
85.33(2) (2015).  An employee is temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is 
not capable medically of returning to employment substantially similar to the 
employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of the injury but is able to 
perform other work consistent with the employee's disability.  Id.  Temporary partial 
benefits are not payable upon termination of temporary disability, healing period, or 
permanent partial disability simply because the employee is not able to secure work 
paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's weekly earnings at the time of the 
injury.  Id. 
In this case, Mr. Marks had returned to work at his regular job following his work 
injury from the date of his injury through the date of his termination; January 9, 2024, 
through April 23, 2024.  When he was terminated, however, he was still under active 
medical treatment for his stipulated work injury with Dr. Spooner.  On May 9, 2024, Dr. 
Spooner placed a medical restriction on him of no working at heights or balancing.  (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 41)  A couple of months later, Dr. Spooner added a lifting restriction.  (Jt. Ex. 3, 
pp. 42-43)  Then in August 2024, Dr. Spooner added a restriction of no use of digital 
screens.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 48)  It appears that all of these restrictions were maintained until 
Dr. Spooner lifted his medical restrictions on January 27, 2025. 
I agree with Mr. Marks that an injured worker may be entitled to temporary 
benefits when he is provided medical restrictions for his work injury, even after his 
termination while he is still recovering.  The problem for Mr. Marks is that he became 
employed in May 2024, and he presented no evidence of his actual wages from May 9, 
2024, through January 27, 2025.  I find that it is his burden to prove the extent of his 
entitlement to temporary disability benefits, and he failed to do so.  In this record, I am 
unable to award claimant any healing period benefits because it appears he was 
working during this timeframe.  Without access to pay records from his two jobs, I am 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 10 
 
unable to calculate his entitlement to any temporary partial disability. 
The next issue is his rate of pay. 
The basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the time of 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36 (2015).  Weekly earnings are the gross salary, wages, or 
earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  Id.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment.  Id.  
The parties have submitted dueling rate exhibits.  (Compare Def. Ex. R, with Cl. 
Ex. 4)  The primary dispute revolves around a regular production bonus received in the 
amount of $1,067.91.  There were also two weeks which claimant excluded from his 
calculation as nonrepresentative.  I agree with the claimant that the two weeks should 
be excluded and the regular production bonus should be included in his average weekly 
wage.  Consequently, I adopt the wage calculation of the claimant.  (Cl. Ex. 4)  His 
average wage prior to the injury was $1,110.16 per week.  I conclude that the 
appropriate rate of compensation therefore is $695.50. 
The next issue is the nature and extent of his entitlement to permanent partial 
disability benefits. 
I find that Mr. Marks sustained an unscheduled disability under Iowa Code 
Section 85.34(2)(v).  Following his recuperation, he was terminated from his job and he 
is not earning the same or greater wages.  Consequently, I conclude that his permanent 
disability must be calculated industrially. 
 Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 11 
 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995).  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894, (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark. 385, 609 S.W.2d 
102 (1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. 
La. 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
Having reviewed the entire file in context, I find that Mr. Marks has sustained a 
moderate industrial disability from this injury.  From a medical standpoint, I find the 
medical summary of Dr. Westpheling is the best evidence of his permanent medical 
conditions.  He sustained a fairly significant concussion and some dental damage as a 
result of his work injury.  The dental injury resulted in some impairment; however, the 
damage healed fairly well and has a minimal impact on his ability to earn wages in the 
competitive job market.  The concussion has resulted in some cognitive challenges, 
vision problems and an exacerbation of his anxiety symptoms.  At the time of hearing he 
was 38 years old with a GED.  He does not have much work history due to his history of 
drug problems and incarceration.  The employer chose to terminate Mr. Marks for 
performance issues.  In this record, I find it is likely his performance issues were at least 
partially caused by his concussion.  He was still in a period of recovery and active 
treatment from this condition and he started making mistakes at work which he had not 
made previously.  He now wears prescription glasses to alleviate his vision challenges 
from this injury.  Considering all of the relevant factors of industrial disability, I find that 
Mr. Marks has sustained a 25 percent loss of earning capacity as a result of his January 
9, 2024, work injury.  I conclude this entitles him to 125 weeks of compensation 
commencing on January 27, 2025. 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 12 
 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Having reviewed Claimant’s Exhibit 3, I find that Mr. Marks is entitled to the 
medical expenses in Claimant’s Exhibit 3, including mileage in the amount of $252.93. 
The next issue is penalty.  The claimant advances a penalty theory on the basis 
of failure to pay temporary disability benefits (either healing period or temporary partial).  
Since I have awarded no such benefits, I conclude that he is not entitled to any penalty.  
I do note here that once Mr. Marks was given restrictions in May, July and August 2024, 
the defendants should have inquired as to his work status, but failed to do so.  It is likely 
he was entitled to some temporary partial disability benefits during this timeframe.  
Claimant, however, appeared at hearing with no evidence of his actual wages between 
May 2024 and January 2025, the period temporary benefits may have been due. 
The final issue is costs. 
Iowa Code section 10A.328 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed 
in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 13 
 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons engaged 
in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report or 
evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report under 
our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009). 
 
I find that the costs set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 8 are reasonable and 
appropriate. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant one hundred twenty-five (125) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of six hundred ninety-five and 50/100 
dollars ($695.50) per week from January 27, 2025. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the 18 weeks previously paid. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3, including mileage in the amount of two hundred fifty-two and 93/100 dollars 
($252.93). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of six hundred twenty-eight and 
75/100 dollars ($628.75). 
Signed and filed this _4th _ day of February, 2026. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

MARKS V. PDM PRECAST 
Page 14 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
 
Benjamin Robert Merrill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
