Case Number: 5066181
Case Title:  BOTELLO-LIRA, MARIA V. SPARBOE FARMS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Arbitration
Source:      Botello-Lira Maria-5066181D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARIA BOTELLO-LIRA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5066181 
SPARBOE FARMS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NATIONWIDE AGRIBUSINESS 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  :    Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1402.40, 1803, 
 
Defendants. 
  :    2907, 3203 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Maria Botello-Lira, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Sparboe Farms, Inc., employer and Nationwide 
Agribusiness Insurance Company, insurance carrier and from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa as defendants.  Hearing was held on October 24, 2019 in Des Moines, Iowa. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Maria Botello-Lira and Nita Nurmi were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
Ms. Botello-Lira testified via the use of interpreter, Karen Deters.  The evidentiary record 
also includes Joint Exhibits JE1-JE10, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-13, and Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-B, and Second Injury Fund Exhibits AA-FF.  All exhibits were received 
without objection, with the exception of Exhibit 9 of the Joint Medical Exhibits.  
Defendant employer objected to JE9 on the basis that those records were not served 
timely and defendants did not have an opportunity to respond to the information 
contained in the record.  Defendants’ objection was overruled.  Joint Exhibit 9 was 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Mar-05  08:14:04     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
admitted into evidence.  However, the evidentiary record was left open to allow the 
defendant employer an opportunity to obtain rebuttal evidence.  The rebuttal evidence 
was marked as Defendants’ Exhibit C-001 through C-004 and received on December 5, 
2019 and the evidentiary record was closed at that time.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on January 13, 2020, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained any permanent disability as the result of the 
November 28, 2016 work injury.  If so, the extent of disability she sustained to 
her left lower extremity. 
2. Whether defendant employer is responsible for past medical expenses. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to be reimbursed pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39 for the independent medical evaluation (IME). 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
5. Whether claimant sustained a prior qualifying loss to her right lower extremity 
on January 1, 2004. 
6. Claimant’s entitlement, if any, to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa. 
7. The commencement date for any benefits from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa. 
8. Whether the Second Injury Fund of Iowa is entitled to a credit under Iowa 
Code section 85.64.  If so, the extent of that credit. 
9. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Maria Botello-Lira, began working for Sparboe Farms, Inc. in June of 
2015.  At the time of hearing she was 46 years old and lived in Mesa, Arizona. 
Ms. Botello-Lira asserts that she sustained an injury to her left lower extremity on 
November 28, 2006, while working at Sparboe Farms.  At that time, she was working as 
a machine operator in the breaking room.  This job involved removal of inferior eggs 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
from a breaking machine.  On November 28, 2006, Ms. Botello-Lira slipped and fell on 
some oil and water near a drain in front of a hand washing station.  She testified that her 
left foot slipped out in front of her and she fell onto her left knee and her left knee 
cracked.  She screamed because of the pain and she was unable to move.  Jim, her 
supervisor, was called over.  He tried to help her up, but she instructed him not to touch 
her and not to move her.  Another employee was called over, and the supervisor and 
other employee helped to get her into a wheelchair.  Ms. Botello-Lira was screaming in 
pain while they put her in a wheelchair.  She was wheeled to the office to complete an 
injury report.  She was then taken to the hospital.  (Testimony; Claimant’s Exhibit 3, 
page 4)  
Ms. Botello-Lira was seen at Mercy Medical Center in New Hampton.  The notes 
indicate that she had anterior left knee pain.  X-rays were taken.  The diagnosis was 
contusion of the left knee.  (JE2, pp. 4-6)    
The next day Ms. Botello-Lira went to Allen Occupational Health.  She reported 
ankle pain and anterior left knee pain.  She rated her pain as 7.5 out of 10.  An x-ray of 
the left ankle showed soft tissue swelling surrounding the lateral malleolus, but no 
osseous abnormality.  X-rays of the left knee showed no fractures or dislocation, no 
cortical erosion or irregularity, and joint spaces were normal.  The diagnosis was a 
contusion to the left knee and left ankle strain.  She was provided a knee brace, a splint 
for her ankle, and a set of crutches.  (JE3, pp. 19-26) 
Ms. Botello-Lira returned to Allen Occupational on December 7, 2016.  Her knee 
was better.  She had been wearing a splint during the day.  They referred her for 
physical therapy.  She returned to Allen Occupational on December 21, 2016.  She was 
better, but continued to have symptoms.  An MRI was recommended.  (JE3, pp. 27-35) 
Ms. Botello-Lira underwent a left knee MRI on January 5, 2017.  The MRI 
demonstrated that the medial and lateral meniscus were intact.  Additionally, the 
anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments were preserved.  There was mild increased 
signal in the medial fibers of the quadriceps tendon near the patella which could 
represent a strain.  The MRI also showed a small amount of fluid deep to the distal 
patellar tendon which suggested bursitis.  (JE3, pp. 36-37)   
On January 9, 2017, Ms. Botello-Lira returned to Allen Occupational.  She 
reported her knee pain was still a 6 or 7 out of 10.  She arrived at her appointment 
wearing a brace and using crutches.  There was a discussion about the fact that the 
MRI showed no internal knee problems.  They recommended a visit to an orthopaedic 
doctor for probable injury to her patella.  She was to continue with physical therapy.  
(JE3, pp. 38-41) 
Ms. Botello-Lira saw Roswell M. Johnston, D.O. at Cedar Valley Medical 
Specialists on January 23, 2017.  Dr. Johnston noted that she had been in therapy 
without any improvement.  Ms. Botello-Lira had been using the braces on both her knee 
and her left ankle.  Dr. Johnston felt that she sustained a direct contusion to the left 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
knee when she fell and a degree of sprain in her left ankle.  He found no indication of 
anything surgical.  He felt continued use of her braces and continued restricted duties 
were reasonable.  (JE4, pp. 52-53) 
On February 9, 2017, Ms. Botello-Lira saw Kenneth McMains, M.D. at UnityPoint 
Occupational Health.  Dr. McMains noted that she had completed a series of physical 
therapy and she reported that it did help somewhat, but she said once she stopped 
therapy the knee would not move again and she could not bend her knee without 
discomfort.  Dr. McMains indicated that she was not progressing as one would expect, 
with an essentially normal MRI and therapy.  He noted that she was complaining of low 
back pain, which was first reported today, and started approximately two weeks ago, 
while she was using crutches.  Her left ankle was continuing to improve and had full 
range of motion.  He recommended a second orthopod for a consultation to provide 
help in treating her knee, likely with an injection to the patellar area.  He recommended 
that she continue with therapy.  (JE3, pp. 42-48) 
Ms. Botello-Lira saw Robert Bartlet, M.D. for a second opinion at Cedar Valley 
Medical Specialists on February 15, 2017.  She reported to Dr. Bartlet that she did not 
think therapy was helping.  His diagnosis was left knee pain with distal quadriceps 
strain.  He felt there was no indication for surgical treatment.  He recommended 
continued therapy and seated work only.  Ms. Botello-Lira returned to Dr. Bartlet on 
March 3, 2017.  Again, he found no surgical indication.  He recommended an ultrasound 
of her left leg to make sure she did not have a deep vein thrombosis (DVT).  The 
ultrasound was performed on March 8, 2017 and was normal.  Dr. Bartlet felt it was 
difficult to determine maximum medical improvement (MMI) because this was a 
somewhat unusual case.  (JE4, pp. 54-57; JE2, p. 17)   
On March 13, 2017, Ms. Botello-Lira returned to Dr. McMains.  He noted that 
Ms. Botello-Lira had failed to improve with conservative treatment and was referred for 
two orthopedic consultations.  She also failed to improve after 23 sessions of physical 
therapy.  She continued to report pain in her left knee and leg both anteriorly and 
posteriorly to the foot.  She then developed pain in her shoulder on the right due to use 
of a crutch on that side.  She had discontinued therapy and been on light duty status.  
She continued to use a crutch and knee brace, with marked limited motion of her knee 
with pain in all areas of the knee and calf on light touch and pain in the shoulder area 
with light touch, rating her pain at a 7 or 8 out of 10.  Dr. McMains noted that she had 
consistently shown a non-physiological pain drawing, which he felt demonstrated no 
evidence of true dermatomal muscle or joint pain.  After a chart review, interview lasting 
30 minutes, and an examination, Dr. McMains set forth his answers to the questions 
posed to him by the nurse case manager.  His diagnoses included non-physiological left 
knee pain and non-physiological right shoulder pain.  Dr. McMains stated there were no 
objective findings and that her complaints were subjective.  He recommended that Ms. 
Botello-Lira return to normal activity because there was “no evidence of any injury per 
se to her extremity, either her left leg or right shoulder.”  (JE3, p. 50)  He felt she should 
discontinue use of the crutch and that would help clear up the shoulder symptoms.  He 
also recommended she start using her legs without the braces because she had a 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
normal work up of her legs.  He released her to full activity.  He placed her at MMI as of 
March 13, 2017 with no permanent partial impairment and no restrictions.  (JE3, pp. 49-
50)  
On March 23, 2017, Dr. McMains issued a missive to the nurse case manager.  
He noted that Ms. Botello-Lira had presented to the clinic with complaints of leg pain.  It 
was explained to her that her case was closed on March 13, 2017 and that she should 
follow-up with her primary care physician.  (JE3, p. 51)    
Ms. Botello-Lira has sought some treatment on her own for her left knee.  On 
March 29, 2017 she saw a doctor in New Hampton, Iowa at Mercy Medical Clinic.  The 
impression was left knee pain.  They recommended she ice and use Tylenol or 
ibuprofen as needed.  (JE5, pp. 58-59) 
On April 16, 2018, Ms. Botello-Lira went to Stem Health in Lincoln, Nebraska.  
The assessment was pain in the left knee.  Ms. Botello-Lira wanted another MRI and 
the medical provider was going to request one.  She returned to this same clinic on 
January 2, 2019, with pain in left knee, left hip, and left foot.  She described her pain as 
deep and intense.  X-rays of her left foot and knee were negative.  She reported that 
she had lost her balance and strength in her leg and fell.  She then underwent a short 
course of physical therapy at Lincoln Orthopedic Physical Therapy.  (JE6, pp. 65-75; 
JE8)     
At the request of the defendant employer and insurance carrier, Ms. Botello-Lira 
underwent an IME with Dean K. Wampler, M.D. on May 13, 2019.  Dr. Wampler stated 
that she sustained a contusion to her left anterior knee and possibly a left ankle sprain 
due to the November 28, 2016 work injury.  He noted that her left ankle sprain had 
resolved.  He felt that her initial exam findings and response to treatment appeared 
appropriate.  However, approximately 8 weeks after the fall her condition turned into an 
abnormal pattern of pain behavior.  He is not able to provide a medical basis or logical 
explanation for her continued pain complaints.  He felt she had pain behavior without 
objective knee abnormality.  Because there were no exam or diagnostic findings to 
explain her severe knee pain, he felt there was no diagnosis to assign.  Based on his 
examination, he felt that her knees had identical crepitus and therefore did not 
experience an aggravation to her patellofemoral arthritis.  He opined she did not require 
any permanent activity restrictions due to the fall at work.  Additionally, he did not feel 
she had sustained any permanent impairment.  (Defendants’ Ex. A) 
On August 22, 2019, Ms. Botello-Lira underwent a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) with Todd Schemper, P.T.  This was performed at the request of claimant’s 
attorney.  Ms. Botello-Lira was found to have given maximum effort.  During the FCE, 
the therapist measured ranges of motion.  (Cl. Ex. 7) 
Also on August 22, 2019, Ms. Botello-Lira underwent an IME, at the request of 
her attorney, with Sunil Bansal, M.D.  She told Dr. Bansal that she could only stand for 
30 minutes.  Dr. Bansal stated that she had injured her left knee on November 28, 2016 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
and her right ankle in 2004.  For her left knee, Dr. Bansal placed Ms. Botello-Lira at MMI 
as of August 22, 2018.  He placed her at MMI for the 2004 injury 6 months after the 
surgery date for her right ankle.  Dr. Bansal assigned 10 percent lower extremity 
impairment for her left knee for having 102 degrees of knee flexion.  For the 2004 injury 
he assigned 2 percent lower extremity impairment due to 14 degrees inversion of the 
right ankle.  He permanently restricted Ms. Botello-Lira to no frequent kneeling or 
squatting, avoid multiple stairs, and no prolonged standing or walking greater than 20 
minutes at a time.  Due to her right ankle injury he also restricted her to avoid walking 
on uneven ground.  (Cl. Ex. 9) 
Ms. Botello-Lira has also received treatment in Arizona.  On April 24, 2019, she 
reported right-sided inguinal pain and vaginal irritation for the past day.  The clinic 
wanted to rule out appendicitis.  (JE9, pp. 90-91)   
She was seen on June 17, 2019 at Su Clinica Del Valle in Arizona.  She reported 
that she had a work injury while living in Nebraska.  She was on light duty for a hand 
injury when she bent down to pick up a lid and was pushed in the back by a forklift and 
she fell forward.  She reported that she had persistent back pain and was terminated on 
January 4.  She was unable to sit for longer than one hour.  She felt worse when at rest 
and slightly better when walking.  On July 10, 2019, she returned to review the findings 
of the lumbar MRI.  In mid-August she returned for follow up on her symptoms of 
herniated disk.  (JE9, pp. 92-97) 
Ms. Botello-Lira returned to the Arizona clinic on August 24, 2019 with left knee 
pain and swelling.  She reported that she had left knee pain since an accident in Iowa.  
She reported that she was told that her knee likely required surgery.  The pain radiated 
between the low back and the knee.  An MRI of the left knee was recommended.  An 
August 26, 2019 MRI of the left knee was performed.  Again, the menisci and ligaments 
were intact.  The impression was suspect mild lateral patellofemoral 
impingement/patellofemoral tracking abnormality, but no significant patellofemoral 
chondromalacia.  She was seen again for left knee pain on September 3, 2019.  The 
treatment recommendations included seeing an orthopedic surgeon, begin course of 
physical therapy, and have a trial of SynovX tendon and ligament injections.  (JE9, pp. 
98-101; JE10, p. 104)  
The last clinical notes in evidence from Su Clinica Del Valle are dated September 
26, 2019.  Ms. Botello-Lira was seen for back pain.  (JE9, pp. 102-03) 
Following the November 28, 2016 injury, Ms. Botello-Lira continued to work at 
Sparboe Farms until she voluntarily quit sometime around May of 2017.  She did not 
miss any time from work due to her injury except for appointments.  Ms. Botello-Lira 
testified that shortly after she was returned to work full-duty and was denied further 
medical care, she gave her two weeks’ notice and moved to Nebraska to be with her 
children.  However, in her answers to interrogatories she stated that she left Sparboe 
Farms in approximately June 2017, which is several months after she returned to 
unrestricted work.  (Cl Ex. 2, p. 3) 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
After Sparboe Farms, Ms. Botello-Lira went to work for American Staffing, a temp 
agency in Nebraska.  She worked there for approximately one month.  In late 2017 she 
took a job at Golden Corral in Lincoln, Nebraska.  This was a full-time job that involved 
cutting meat.  She was on her feet for her entire shift.  In February of 2018, Ms. Botello-
Lira went to work for Universal Pure, a meat packing plant.  She worked a full-time job 
that involved her removing meat from boxes and stacking the meat to thaw.  Her job 
required her to either be on her feet or her knees.  Her job there ended in January of 
2019.  The only other place she has worked since was at a Burger King for three days 
in Mesa, Arizona.  (Cl. Ex, 2, p. 2; Testimony)  
Ms. Botello-Lira contends that she sustained permanent disability as the result of 
the November 28, 2016 injury to her left lower extremity.  Three doctors have rendered 
their opinions on the issue of permanent impairment of her left knee as the result of the 
November 18, 2016 work-related injury.   
Dr. McMains opined that Ms. Botello-Lira does not require any permanent 
restrictions and did not sustain any impairment as the result of the November 28, 2016 
knee contusion.  (JE3, p. 50)  Dr. Wampler examined her on May 13, 2019 and opined 
that there are no “exam or diagnostic findings to explain Ms. Botello’s [sic] severe knee 
pain.”  (Ex. A, p. 7)  He noted she had equal mild patellofemoral arthritis and crepitus in 
both knees.  He opined that she did not require any work-related restrictions and 
sustained zero percent impairment as the result of the November 28, 2016 work injury.  
After reviewing additional medical documentation provided to him, he reaffirmed his 
opinions in a December 4, 2019 report.  (Ex. A, pp. 8-9; Ex. C)   
Dr. Bansal has also offered his opinions.  He is the only doctor to opine that Ms. 
Botello-Lira sustained any permanent impairment as the result of her November 28, 
2016 injury.  However, I do not find the opinions of Dr. Bansal to be persuasive.  His 
report fails to provide any rationale for why he believes she sustained an injury to her 
left knee which resulted in any permanent disability on November 28, 2016.  He fails to 
explain why her alleged lost range of motion to her left knee is related to the fall.  He 
also does not address the gap in medical treatment prior to December of 2018.  
Additionally, he does not address the fact that she worked for Sparboe Farms for 
approximately two months after the injury, and she worked for several employers after 
the November 2016 injury in jobs that required standing for entire shifts.  Dr. Bansal’s 
report is not well-reasoned and not persuasive.   
I find the opinions of Dr. McMains and Dr. Wampler carry greater weight than 
those of Dr. Bansal.  I find that Ms. Botello-Lira sustained zero percent functional 
impairment to her left lower extremity and does not require any permanent restrictions 
as the result of the November 28, 2016 work injury.     
Ms. Botello-Lira is seeking payment of medical expenses as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 12 which she contends are related to the November 28, 2016 work 
injury.  Claimant is seeking payment of physical therapy sessions at Lincoln Orthopedic 
from November 2, 2019 through January 16, 2019.  On January 2 and 4, 2019 she was 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
seen for an injury with Universal Pure, not for her knee.  (JE8, p. 87)  I find these are not 
the responsibility of Sparboe Farms because they are not related to the November 28, 
2016 work injury.  On January 11, 2019, Ms. Botello-Lira was seen for left knee pain, 
but it was following a fall at home.  There is no medical opinion that causally relates the 
need for this treatment to the November 28, 2016 work injury.  I find this expense not 
the responsibility of Sparboe Farms because it is not related to the November 28, 2016 
work injury.  The remainder of the treatment dates do not have corresponding clinical 
notes; therefore, it is impossible for the undersigned to find that these are related to the 
work injury.  Thus, I find defendants are not responsible for any medical expenses from 
Lincoln Orthopedic Physical Therapy.           
Ms. Botello-Lira is also seeking payment of medical expenses incurred at Su 
Clinica Del Valle from August 24, 2019 through September 26, 2019.  However, no 
physician has opined that the November 28, 2016 work injury necessitated this 
treatment.  Thus, I find claimant has failed to demonstrate that defendants should be 
responsible for these medical expenses.           
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Ms. Botello-Lira failed to prove 
that she sustained any permanent disability to her left lower extremity as the result of 
the November 28, 2016 work injury.  As such, she has not demonstrated any 
entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
Ms. Botello-Lira is seeking payment of past medical expenses in connection with 
the work injury.  In Iowa, the employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' 
compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 
injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant failed to carry her 
burden of proof to establish that the medical expenses were necessitated by the 
November 28, 2016 work injury.  Defendants are not responsible for the medical 
expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 12.   
Ms. Botello-Lira has asserted a claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
Ms. Botello-Lira failed to carry her burden of proof to show by a preponderance 
of the evidence that she sustained any permanent disability as the result of the 
November 28, 2016 work injury.  As such, she has failed to demonstrate entitlement to 
any benefits from the Second Injury Fund.  Because she failed to prove that she 
sustained a second qualifying injury, the issue of whether she sustained a first qualifying 
injury is moot.     
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing 
the case.  876 IAC 4.33.  I find that claimant was not successful in her claim.  As such, I 
exercise my discretion and find that an assessment of costs against the defendants is 

BOTELLO-LIRA V. SPARBOE FARMS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
not appropriate in this case.  Every party shall be responsible for their own costs.  All 
remaining issues have been rendered moot. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing further from these proceedings. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this      5th      day of March, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Samuel Aden (via WCES) 
Anne Clark (via WCES) 
Sarah Christine Timko (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
