Case Number: 1664005.03
Case Title:  LLOYD, JAYLON V. PLUNKETT'S PEST CONTROL
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Lloyd Jaylon-1664005.03M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
JAYLON LLOYD, 
File No. 1664005.03 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
PLUNKETT’S PEST CONTROL, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE 
DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ACCIDENT FUND NATIONAL 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
On September 9, 2022, Jaylon Lloyd applied with the agency for alternate care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 and rule 876 IAC 4.48 for alleged work injuries to his 
back, left hip, both knees, jaw, groin, and mental health in the form of anxiety, 
depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The defendants, employer 
Plunkett’s Pest Control, Inc. (Plunkett’s) and insurance carrier Accident Fund National 
Insurance Company (Accident Fund), filed an answer on September 20, 2022, 
accepting liability for the alleged work injuries to Lloyd’s left hip, left knee, and 
depression. Lloyd filed a written reply to the defendants’ answer on September 21, 
2022. 
The undersigned presided over a hearing held by telephone and recorded on 
September 22, 2022. That recording constitutes the official record of the proceeding 
under agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(12). Lloyd participated personally and through attorney 
Greg A. Egbers. The defendants participated through attorney Laura J. Ostrander. The 
record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 3; and 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through C; and 
 Hearing testimony by Lloyd. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Sep-23  07:11:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LLOYD V. PLUNKETT’S PEST CONTROL, INC. 
Page 2 
 
II.  
ISSU E . 
The issue under consideration is whether Lloyd is entitled to alternate care in the 
form of ongoing care with the authorized treating surgeons, ongoing medication 
management with Dianna Smith, ARNP, and continuing care with the mental health 
providers he has seen to date.  
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T. 
On April 25, 2019, Lloyd sustained injuries arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Plunkett’s. The petition alleges multiple injuries. However, the focus of 
the alternate care Lloyd seeks are the injuries to his left knee, left hip, and mental 
health.  
On September 15, 2022, the defendants informed Lloyd they had arranged care 
with Dr. Miller by scheduling an appointment to occur on the afternoon of the date of the 
telephone alternate care hearing, September 22, 2022. (Ex. B) Lloyd objects to the 
defendants’ proposal to change Lloyd’s treatment arrangement so that the lone 
authorized care provider for his knee, hip, and mental injuries moving forward is Dr. 
Miller. Lloyd wishes to continue care with Dr. Bremner, Dr. Sullivan, Smith, and Heather 
Wilson. 
A .  
P e r s o n a l  H e a l t h  C o n d i t i o n s.  
Lloyd has personal health conditions in addition to those identified in the petition 
that require ongoing care. Some of these conditions require medication. Smith manages 
his prescription medications for these personal conditions unrelated to his work. 
(Testimony) 
B . 
K n e e .  
Dr. Bremner performed surgery on Lloyd’s left knee. Lloyd experienced ongoing 
pain after the surgeries. Dr. Bremner has opined Lloyd is not currently a candidate for 
additional surgery. Lloyd may require a total knee replacement down the road, but he is 
too young for such a procedure at present. (Testimony) 
Dr. Bremner directed Lloyd to use Smith, who is Lloyd’s personal care provider, 
to manage his prescription medications relating to the knee injury. Smith has managed 
Lloyd’s prescription medications relating to the knee injury. She has done so in addition 
to managing his ongoing prescriptions for his personal health conditions. (Testimony) 
Because of Lloyd’s ongoing pain, the defendants authorized follow-up care with 
Dr. Bremner, who performed an injection that has provided no initial relief. (Testimony; 
Ex. A) Lloyd’s pain worsened after the injection. (Testimony) The defendants argue 
Lloyd has provided no evidence he spoke with Dr. Bremner’s office regarding a future 
appointment, but he credibly testified under oath (and there is no contrary evidence in 
the record) that he contacted Dr. Bremner’s office and spoke with staff. Consequently, 

LLOYD V. PLUNKETT’S PEST CONTROL, INC. 
Page 3 
 
the weight of the evidence establishes Lloyd talked to a staff person at Dr. Bremner’s 
office about another appointment, but they did not schedule one because they are 
working to verify such care is authorized by Accident Fund before scheduling an 
appointment. (Testimony) In an email dated September 14, 2022, defense counsel 
informed claimant’s counsel follow-up care was authorized but its timing relative to the 
injection would have to be in line with Dr. Bremner’s medical judgment. (Ex. A) 
While Dr. Bremner does not believe Lloyd is a candidate for additional surgery, 
Dr. Bremner has provided nonsurgical follow-up care for Lloyd’s knee pain. The 
injection Dr. Bremner administered did not work and Lloyd’s pain has worsened. It is 
reasonable for Lloyd to receive additional care with Dr. Bremner for his ongoing knee 
pain under these circumstances because Dr. Bremner is most familiar with Lloyd’s 
injury, course of care, and Dr. Bremner recommended the injection that Lloyd’s 
worsening symptoms followed. At this time, it would be unreasonable to stop Dr. 
Bremner’s care and start care with another physician for the work injury to Lloyd’s knee. 
Smith has been the provider who has managed Lloyd’s prescription medication 
for personal health conditions. Smith has also managed Lloyd’s prescription medication 
relating to his knee injury. Given the number of medications for conditions both personal 
and work related and Smith’s status as the current provider overseeing the prescription 
medications for both types of conditions (excluding medications relating to his mental 
health), it would be unreasonable to assign management of Lloyd’s prescription 
medications relating to the knee to another physician. 
C . 
H i p .  
The defendants authorized Dr. Sullivan to care for Lloyd’s hip. Dr. Sullivan has 
performed two surgeries to date on Lloyd’s hip. Dr. Sullivan has opined Lloyd may be a 
candidate for total hip replacement in the future but is not now because of his age. 
(Testimony) 
Dr. Sullivan directed Lloyd to maintain prescriptions for medication relating to his 
hip with Smith. Lloyd has seen Smith for management of prescription medications 
relating to his hip since then. At the time of hearing, Smith continued to manage Lloyd’s 
prescription medications for personal conditions as well as the work injury to his hip. 
(Testimony) 
After the surgeries, Lloyd has continued to experience pain in his hip as well as 
having a cramping sensation with it locking up while performing everyday activities. He 
requested authorization from the defendants to follow-up with Dr. Sullivan. (Testimony) 
The defendants contacted Dr. Sullivan’s office about scheduling a follow-up 
appointment regarding Lloyd’s hip. Dr. Sullivan refused to schedule the appointment. 
(Ex. C) 
Despite the initial confusion about Dr. Sullivan’s willingness to provide additional 
care, Dr. Sullivan ultimately saw Lloyd on September 20, 2022, two days before 

LLOYD V. PLUNKETT’S PEST CONTROL, INC. 
Page 4 
 
hearing. Dr. Sullivan recommended physical therapy. Dr. Sullivan also informed Lloyd 
that the ongoing symptoms in his hip may be related to his knee. (Testimony)  
The defendants plan to de-authorize Dr. Sullivan as a provider. They want to use 
Dr. Miller as the care provider for Lloyd’s hip injury moving forward. Dr. Sullivan saw 
Lloyd two days before the hearing and recommended physical therapy. He also opined 
that Lloyd’s hip pain might be related to his knee. Thus, the evidence shows Dr. Sullivan 
is willing to provide care and has recommended physical therapy. As Lloyd’s treating 
surgeon, Dr. Sullivan is intimately aware of the details regarding Lloyd’s injury and care. 
It would be unreasonable to end his treatment of Lloyd’s hip injury and transition the 
care to another provider. 
Smith manages Lloyd’s prescription medications for all other personal conditions 
as well as the work injuries to his hip and knee. The defendants also want to replace 
Smith as the manager of Lloyd’s prescription medications relating to the work injury to 
his hip with Dr. Miller. Given the number of prescription medications Lloyd is currently 
on for personal and work-related conditions other than those for mental health, it would 
be unreasonable to change the manager from one person (Smith) to two (Smith and Dr. 
Miller).  
D . 
M e n t a l .  
The defendants initially denied Lloyd’s claim of a mental injury. Heather Wilson, a 
care provider whose qualifications were not identified, has prescribed medications for 
Lloyd’s mental health. Wilson manages prescription medication for Lloyd’s mental 
conditions while Smith manages it for all others. (Testimony) 
The defendants arranged for Lloyd to undergo an IME with Dr. Ascheman. After 
the IME, Dr. Ascheman diagnosed Lloyd with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 
PTSD resulting from the motor vehicle crash that caused his work injuries. (Ex. 3) Dr. 
Ascheman also opined Lloyd “will likely require ongoing medication for treatment of 
MDD and PTSD” and “may also benefit from individual therapy, but again, that is less 
clear given that he does not appear to have sought out treatment of that type.” (Ex. 3) 
The defendants want Dr. Miller, an occupational medicine specialist, to take over 
the care for Lloyd’s mental health conditions. This would mean displacing Wilson as 
Lloyd’s care provider for mental health conditions. It would be unreasonable to allow an 
occupational medicine doctor to take over management of Lloyd’s prescription 
medications for mental health conditions under these circumstances. 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 

LLOYD V. PLUNKETT’S PEST CONTROL, INC. 
Page 5 
 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties can’t 
reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and 
reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436; 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on 
the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable. Id. 
As found above, Dr. Bremner recently administered an injection. While Lloyd has 
initially had worse pain after the injection, Dr. Bremner has opined it takes a few weeks 
for such injections to work. As Lloyd’s treating surgeon, Dr. Bremner is most familiar 
with his knee injury and care. Under these circumstances, it would be unreasonable to 
end Lloyd’s care with Dr. Bremner for the knee injury and transfer it to another provider. 
As found above, Dr. Sullivan recently provided care and recommended physical 
therapy. As Lloyd’s treating surgeon, Dr. Sullivan is most familiar with his hip injury and 
care. Under these circumstances, it would be unreasonable to end Lloyd’s care with Dr. 
Sullivan for the hip injury and transfer it to another provider. 
Smith manages Lloyd’s prescription medications for personal conditions. This 
role led Dr. Sullivan and Dr. Bremner to direct Lloyd to see her for prescription 
medications relating to his hip and knee injuries. Given the number of prescriptions 
Lloyd has for personal and work-related conditions, it is reasonable for Smith to 
continue her duties managing all of Lloyd’s prescription medications (excluding those 
relating to his mental health). It would be unreasonable to transition to a different 
provider for medication management. 
Wilson has provided care and prescribed Lloyd medication for his mental health 
conditions. They have an established provider-patient relationship. There is no 
indication Dr. Miller, an occupational medicine specialist, specializes in or has 
experience with treating such conditions or prescribing medications for them. Under the 
circumstances, it would be unreasonable to change Lloyd’s care provider for his mental 
health conditions to Dr. Miller. 

LLOYD V. PLUNKETT’S PEST CONTROL, INC. 
Page 6 
 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Lloyd’s application for alternate care is GRANTED. 
2) The defendants shall: 
a) Continue to authorize Dr. Bremner to treat Lloyd’s knee. 
b) Continue to authorize Dr. Sullivan to treat Lloyd’s knee. 
c) Continue to authorize Smith to manage the prescription medication 
relating to Lloyd’s work injuries, with Smith coordinating with Dr. Miller 
as appropriate. 
d) Authorize Wilson as a provider for Lloyd’s mental injury. 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in a district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 23rd day of September, 2022. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Greg A. Egbers (via WCES) 
Laura J. Ostrander (via WCES) 
 
 
