Case Number: 1641582.01
Case Title:  SMART, GARY V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Smart Gary-1641582.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
GARY SMART, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
           File No. 1641582.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :              ARBITRATION DECISION 
RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INTEGRITY INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
Head Notes:  1402.40, 1803, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Gary Smart, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Rathje Construction 
Company as the employer, and Integrity Insurance as the insurance carrier.  This case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on March 9, 2021.  This case 
was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines. However, due to 
the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner 
ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall.  The hearing proceeded without 
significant difficulties.  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 11, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
and 2, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through D.  All exhibits were received without 
objection. 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Defendants called Robert Rathje to testify. 
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  All parties 
served their post-hearing briefs on March 19, 2021, at which time this case was deemed 
fully submitted to the undersigned. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Dec-07  10:18:54     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. The extent of claimant's entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits;  
 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits; and 
 
3. Costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Gary Smart is a 66-year-old, right hand dominant gentleman who sustained a 
stipulated injury on December 27, 2017.  On the date of injury, Mr. Smart was working 
as a field mechanic for Rathje Construction Company. (Hearing Transcript, page 9)  
More specifically, Mr. Smart was moving a piece of equipment known as a small 
vibrator roller, when the control valve stuck causing the machine to lunge forward 
striking a concrete filled steel pillar.  This caused the hood safety support to fail, and the 
hood shut on Claimant’s right wrist. (Hr. Tr. pp. 11-12)  Claimant experienced immediate 
pain and swelling. (See Hr. Tr., p. 13) 
Claimant was initially seen by Sudha Anand, M.D. at Urgent Care in Cedar 
Rapids, Iowa, where x-rays revealed a lunate dislocation, mild to moderate 
osteoarthritis of the interphalangeal joints, and advanced changes at the second DIP 
joint. (JE1, pp. 1-3; JE3, p. 11)  Claimant was then sent to Mercy Medical Center 
Emergency Room and seen by Dr. Thomas Paynter, M.D.  Due to the lack of available 
hand surgeons on-call, Dr. Paynter transferred claimant’s care to the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics main campus. (JE2, p. 4)  Alexis Lima, M.D. reviewed the outside 
images and obtained additional x-rays.  The imaging revealed volar dislocation of the 
right lunate without migration of capitate. (JE3, p. 13)  Claimant’s care was 
subsequently transferred to Andrei Odobescu, M.D. (JE3, p. 14) 
Dr. Odobescu performed a diamond repair and ligament anchoring on December 
28, 2017. (JE3, pp. 14-15)  Because claimant did not exhibit preoperative carpal tunnel 
symptoms, Dr. Odobescu decided against opening the carpal tunnel. (JE3, p. 15)  An 
orthoplastic splint was placed on January 5, 2018. (JE3, p. 17)  At the January 5, 2018, 
appointment, claimant exhibited edema over the volar surface of the wrist and hand, as 
well as along both volar and palmar aspects of all five digits. (JE3, p. 17)  Claimant’s 
range of motion was “very limited and minimal” in the DIP, PIP, and MCP. (Id.)  The 
same observations were noted at claimant’s January 26, 2018, follow-up appointment. 
(JE3, p. 20) 
Claimant continued to follow-up with Dr. Odobescu throughout January and 
February 2018 (JE3, pp. 16-21), and his surgical hardware was removed on February 
23, 2018. (JE3, pp. 22-23)  After having the pins removed, claimant presented to 
physical therapy.  On examination, claimant exhibited severe inflammation of the right 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 3 
 
hand and digits, as well as the wrist.  The physical therapist documents “very limited” 
range of motion of the finger joints, as well as the joints of the right thumb and wrist. 
(JE4, pp. 34-35) 
While claimant experienced a slight decrease in pain and swelling, he was still 
unable to make a full fist as of March 30, 2018. (See JE3, pp. 24-25) (“Composite fist 
seems to be limited by swelling.”)  Dr. Odobescu recommended “aggressive hand 
therapy” to reduce the edema. (JE3, p. 25)  Claimant ultimately participated in hand 
therapy from February 23, 2018, to July 25, 2018. (JE4, pp. 34-46; J, p. 52)  He first 
presented to UIHC Occupational Therapy and then Marion Physical Therapy. (JE4, pp. 
34-46; JE5, pp. 47-52)   
Claimant returned to light duty work on or about April 14, 2018. (See JE3, p. 25; 
Hr. Tr., p. 26)  Robert Rathje testified Mr. Smart continued doing the same kind of work, 
just in a controlled environment rather than out in the field. (Hr. Tr., pp. 48-49)  
According to Mr. Rathje, claimant transitioned from a field mechanic to a shop 
mechanic. (Hr. Tr., p. 46)  Claimant continued working for the employer in this 
accommodated role until August 5, 2019, when he retired. (Hr. Tr., p. 33)   
As of July 17, 2018, claimant was able to make a moderate composite fist.  
However, he continued to demonstrate minimal strength and limited range of motion. 
(JE3, p. 28)  Dr. Odobescu recommended an additional six to eight weeks of hand 
therapy. (JE3, p. 29) 
Dr. Odobescu discharged claimant on August 24, 2018. (JE3, p. 31)  At the 
August 24, 2018, appointment, claimant continued to demonstrate reduced range of 
motion in his wrist and fingers. (Id.)  Claimant told Dr. Odobescu, “if he could fix one 
thing, it would be range of motion of the thumb.” Claimant also endorsed decreased 
range of motion in digits 2 and 3, along with wrist pain. (Id.)  Dr. Odobescu’s notes 
indicate that claimant’s decreased grip strength stemmed from his reduced range of 
motion. (JE3, p. 31)  Diagnostic imaging, dated August 24, 2018, revealed moderate 
degenerative changes of the interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints, mostly 
involving the thumb, index and ring fingers. (JE3, p. 33) 
At hearing, claimant testified that the current condition of his hand is similar to 
how it was in August, 2018. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  Claimant did not have any problems working 
with his right hand prior to the date of injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 23) 
After being released by Dr. Odobescu, defendants referred claimant to Patrick 
Hartley, M.D., for an assessment of permanent disability.  As part of his evaluation, Dr. 
Hartley referred claimant for a functional capacity evaluation (FCE). (JE6, p. 53) 
On November 6, 2018, Darrin Ausman, O.T. administered a functional capacity 
evaluation of claimant. (JE7, p. 63)  Claimant demonstrated capabilities and functional 
tolerances to function within the medium physical demand level. (Id.)   
Relying on the results of the November 6, 2018 FCE, Dr. Hartley assessed 51 
percent right upper extremity impairment for claimant’s “right wrist and hand injury.” 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 4 
 
(JE6, pp. 56-59)  Individually, he assigned 35 percent impairment to the hand, 21 
percent impairment to the wrist, and 4 percent impairment to the elbow. (JE6, p. 56)   
Defendants subsequently scheduled claimant for an independent medical 
examination (IME) with Robert Broghammer, M.D. (Ex. D, p. 24)  The evaluation 
occurred on March 4, 2019. (Id.)  Dr. Broghammer disagreed with Dr. Hartley’s analysis, 
opining claimant’s impairment rating should be confined to the wrist, because the 
physical injury was only to the wrist. (Ex. D, pp. 29-30)  Dr. Broghammer felt as though 
an impairment rating to the wrist would adequately account for any loss of motion in the 
hand, fingers, or elbow. (Ex. D, p. 30)  While Dr. Broghammer could not explain 
claimant’s inability to fully close the fingers on his right hand, in his medical opinion, he 
believed it may be due to the claimant’s “significant osteoarthritis, including multiple 
Heberden and Bouchard nodes in this right-greater-than-left hands.” (Ex. D, p. 31)  After 
assessing claimant’s range of motion, Dr. Broghammer assigned 13 percent right upper 
extremity impairment. (Ex. D, pp. 30-31) 
Complicating matters is a personal health issue that presented shortly after 
claimant retired from the defendant employer.  Mr. Smart presented to his primary care 
provider on August 20, 2019, for an evaluation of neck pain that “began 1 month ago 
and has been gradually worsening.” (JE8, pp. 73, 78-79)  He reported neck pain, as well 
as aching, burning, throbbing and hand pain which radiated down both arms and into 
his hands. (JE8, pp. 79-80)  He reported his hands felt weak with numbness and 
tingling. (Id.)  Sara Hubbell, A.R.N.P. suspected claimant was experiencing cervical 
radiculopathy and ordered a cervical MRI. (Id.)   
Neurosurgeon Patrick Hitchon, M.D., examined claimant and reviewed his 
imaging on September 5, 2019. (JE9, p. 94)  Claimant complained of bilateral hand 
numbness and clumsiness for the preceding two months. (Id.)  It is noted that claimant 
had previously been diagnosed with prostate cancer, for which he had been receiving 
androgen deprivation therapy for 4-5 years. (Id.; JE10, p. 110)  The cervical MRI 
revealed an intradural extramedullary tumor at C3-4, which was compatible with a 
diagnosis of lymphoma. (See JE9, p. 98)  Dr. Hitchon prescribed Decadron to reduce 
the swelling and alleviate the numbness claimant was experiencing. (Id.)  Surgical 
intervention was recommended; however, claimant had a fishing trip planned, so Dr. 
Hitchon prescribed steroids to tide him over until his return for possible surgery. (See 
JE9, p. 100) 
Later that morning, claimant presented to Mark Smith, M.D., for a radiation 
therapy evaluation. (JE10, p. 107)  The medical records note that claimant had been 
experiencing right arm and hand numbness for many years. (JE10, p. 108) 
Dr. Hitchon referred claimant to Mark Karwal, M.D. of the clinical cancer center.  
Claimant’s initial evaluation with Dr. Karwal occurred on September 18, 2019. (JE11, p. 
111)  Dr. Karwal, when detailing claimant’s medical history, noted, “In July 2019 
[claimant] noted after a long day at work increasing neck pain that was radicular down 
both arms.  He now began to notice paresthesias in he left hand that radiated up his left 
arm.” (JE11, p. 111)  Dr. Karwal assessed claimant’s condition as follows:  “[This] is a 
65-year-old healthy male with a 2-month history of neck and radicular pain to his arms 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 5 
 
thought to be secondary to a [sic] enhancing dural mass at C3/C4.” (JE11, p. 112)  It is 
noted that claimant’s paresthesias improved with steroid therapy, and was now only 
present in the left hand. (Id.)   
An updated MRI, dated October 2, 2019, revealed resolution of the epidural 
mass at C4.  Based on this report, Dr. Hitchon opined there was no longer a need for 
surgical intervention. (JE9, p. 102)  Dr. Hitchon recommended claimant discontinue his 
Decadron prescription. (See JE11, p. 114)  Claimant would later tell Dr. Karwal that he 
experienced a marked increase in paresthesias in both hands and arms the morning 
after he discontinued his Decadron prescription. (JE11, p. 114)  Claimant made the 
decision to continue taking Decadron and it is reported that he noticed improvement in 
his symptoms as a result. (Id.)  Claimant reported that his then current symptoms 
precluded him from driving, as he did not feel his hands were strong enough. (Id.)  Dr. 
Karwal ultimately questioned whether the paresthesias in claimant’s hands were related 
to the mass or degenerative joint disease, noting a mass at C3-4 should not produce 
radicular symptoms in the hands. (JE11, p. 115)   
An EMG, dated November 5, 2019, revealed evidence of a length dependent, 
predominantly axonal, sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. (JE11, p. 124)   
At his return visit to Dr. Karwal on November 13, 2019, claimant reported 
paresthesias in his bilateral hands and feet. (JE11, p. 126)  He did not have any neck 
pain at the time. (Id.)  Claimant’s wife expressed concern over claimant’s general 
weakness.  She described how a recent walk through the mall was difficult for claimant. 
(Id.)  After reviewing claimant’s EMG and nerve conduction studies, Dr. Karwal opined 
that claimant’s symptoms and findings are most consistent with the development of 
peripheral neuropathy with an unknown etiology. (JE11, p. 127)  Dr. Karwal 
recommended further evaluation to see whether an etiology could be ascertained. (Id.) 
After additional testing and analysis, claimant was prescribed gabapentin.  At his 
February 4, 2020, follow-up appointment with Dr. Karwal, claimant reported 
improvement in his neuropathy symptoms.  Claimant did not have any neck pain or 
symptoms of spinal cord compression. (JE11, p. 135)  According to claimant, the 
gabapentin medication reportedly dulled his neuropathy symptoms. (See JE11, pp. 135, 
138)  Dr. Karwal continued claimant’s gabapentin prescription and recommended repeat 
MR imaging of the cervical spine take place in June, 2020. (JE11, p. 136) 
Between February 4, 2020, and June 12, 2020, claimant worked hard to lose the 
weight he put on while taking steroid medications.  In total, he lost approximately 18 
pounds. (See JE11, p. 138)  He reported being happy with his health.  With respect to 
his neuropathy symptoms, claimant reported that the symptoms in his hands come and 
go, and he has good days and bad days. (JE11, p. 138)  It is noted that claimant had 
been back to working in his wood shop and he was scheduled to participate in an 
upcoming bass fishing tournament. (Id.) 
Unfortunately, the June 2020 imaging revealed that the mass on claimant’s 
cervical spine had returned.  Claimant returned to Dr. Hitchon on July 9, 2020, who 
ultimately performed a cervical laminoplasty and biopsy. (JE9, pp. 103-104)  The tissue 
appeared to be benign. (See JE11, p. 140) 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 6 
 
In October 2020, a Dr. Garje diagnosed claimant with castrate resistant 
metastatic prostate carcinoma. (See JE11, p. 143) 
On January 11, 2021, claimant reported to Dr. Karwal that he has good days and 
bad days with regards to his hands. (JE11, p. 142)  The medical record provides, “On 
the good days he barely notices any troubles with his hands.  Other days he notes 
tingling all the way up his arms.” (Id.)   
Given the disparity between the ratings provided by Drs. Broghammer and 
Hartley, defendants conducted a conference call with Dr. Hartley and subsequently 
asked him to revisit his initial rating. (JE6, p. 60)  In a letter, dated June 12, 2020, Dr. 
Hartley amended his initial report. (JE6, pp. 61-62)  More specifically, Dr. Hartley 
revised his assessment of claimant’s upper extremity impairment to only include the 
impairments to the wrist and elbow. (JE6, p. 62)  Citing to the American Medical 
Association Guides to Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Hartley 
disagreed with Dr. Broghammer’s opinion that claimant’s overall impairment rating 
should exclude any impairment to the elbow. (JE6, p. 61)   
I would respectfully disagree with him in this regard, and direct you to 
page 472 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 
(5th edition) which addresses “Pronation and Supination” of the forearm, 
which is limited in range of motion Mr. Smart’s examination.  The pertinent 
paragraph in the second column of this page states: “Impairments of 
pronation and supination are ascribed to the elbow because the major 
muscles for this function are inserted about the elbow.  The applies even if 
the loss of forearm rotation results primarily from wrist involvement in the 
presence of an intact elbow.” 
(Id.)  Dr. Hartley could not state to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that 
claimant’s digital/hand impairment is attributable to the work injury. (JE6, p. 62)  In 
conclusion, Dr. Hartley assessed claimant with 24 percent upper extremity impairment. 
(Id.) 
In response to Dr. Hartley’s updated impairment rating, claimant sought an 
independent medical examination (IME) with Mark Taylor, M.D.  The IME took place on 
June 24, 2020. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Dr. Taylor agreed with Dr. Hartley that claimant’s 
cumulative impairment rating should include ratings for both the forearm and the wrist. 
(Ex. 1, p. 7)  Additionally, Dr. Taylor felt it appropriate to include impairment for the 
hand/digits. (Id.)  Dr. Taylor opined that claimant’s injury represented a substantial 
contributing factor to the loss of motion identified in the digits of the right hand. (Ex. 1, p. 
8)  In total, Dr. Taylor assigned 44 percent right upper extremity impairment and 
recommended permanent restrictions consistent with the November 6, 2018 FCE 
report. (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
In January, 2021, claimant’s counsel produced updated medical records to, and 
requested an updated opinion from, Dr. Taylor. (Ex. 1, p. 12)  Specifically, claimant’s 
counsel provided claimant’s UIHC medical records from September 5, 2019, through 
January 21, 2021, and asked Dr. Taylor to address whether it is appropriate to include 
loss of range of motion of the digits and thumb in Mr. Smart’s overall impairment rating. 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 7 
 
(Ex. 1, p. 13)  In a letter, dated January 22, 2021, Dr. Taylor explained why the 
additional medical records did not alter his initial opinions regarding consideration of 
claimant’s loss of range of motion in his digits and thumb when calculating the overall 
impairment rating. (Ex. 1, p. 17)  The updated report provides, 
     Mr. Smart was diagnosed with a sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. 
He has experienced neuropathy-like symptoms in his hands and feet, but 
only the right hand demonstrated a significant loss of motion, and the loss 
of motion occurred at the time of his work injury. Mr. Smart’s range of 
motion of the digits of the right hand never returned to his baseline, which 
was presumably as good or better than his range of motion in the left 
hand, which has also experienced neuropathy symptoms. Despite 
neuropathy-like symptoms in both hands, Mr. Smart has only experienced 
a significant decrease in range of motion on the right side, where the 
trauma occurred and only after the trauma. Again, an underlying 
neuropathy may have placed Mr. Smart at increased risk for a poor 
outcome, but it is still my opinion that it is more likely than not that the 
work injury represented a substantial contributing factor to the loss of 
motion identified in the digits of the right hand, especially when compared 
to the left side. My opinion would have been different if Mr. Smart’s digit 
range of motion returned to normal after the injury, with the subsequent 
development of decreasing range of motion impacting both hands at some 
point well after the injury. This would have then been more suggestive of 
an underlying condition as a causative factor as opposed to the work 
injury. 
. . .  
      . . . Given this information, it is still my opinion that it is appropriate to 
include a rating related to digit range of motion, but the impairment due to 
a loss of motion of the digits must be compared to the contralateral 
extremity, which was the approach that I used in assigning a rating. 
(Id.) 
 
At hearing, claimant testified he still experiences swelling in his wrist, but no 
longer in his thumb and fingers. (Hr. Tr., p. 24).  He also testified to his grasping, 
pushing, and pulling limitations. (Hr. Tr., pp. 30-31)  Claimant cannot pick up a coffee 
cup with his right hand. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  He can pull, but he cannot push with his right 
hand. (Hr. Tr., p. 31)  Claimant testified the limited range of motion in his fingers and 
thumb started immediately after the injury and never got better. (Id.)    
As previously discussed, Drs. Broghammer, Hartley, and Taylor offered opinions 
about claimant’s permanent functional impairment.  Reviewing the respective expert 
medical opinions, I have a difficult time accepting the opinions of Dr. Broghammer.  First 
and foremost, Dr. Broghammer’s opinions regarding permanent impairment are not 
supported by Dr. Hartley or Dr. Taylor. (See JE6, p. 61)  Dr. Broghammer did not 
provide a convincing argument as to why claimant’s permanent impairment should be 
confined to the wrist.  The statement, “the injury itself is confined to the wrist, and the 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 8 
 
only appropriate impairment rating would be for the wrist” is contrary to Iowa’s workers’ 
compensation laws as disability can, and often does, extend beyond the situs of injury 
into other parts of the body.   
Second, Dr. Broghammer speculates that claimant’s decreased range of motion 
in his right hand could be related to osteoarthritis.  Such a finding, if true, would not 
preclude a finding of causation.  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability 
that is materially aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in 
disability, claimant is entitled to recover.   
Third, claimant testified that Dr. Broghammer’s examination lasted approximately 
15 minutes. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  Defendants attempt to address this assertion in their post-
hearing brief; however, their explanation does little to rebut claimant’s testimony.  
Defendants directed the undersigned’s attention to Dr. Broghammer’s report, which 
provides, “I spent a total of 2 hours 10 minutes reviewing the medical records, 
interviewing and examining the worker, and preparing and dictating this report.” (Ex. D, 
p. 24)  This statement does not discredit claimant’s testimony.  It is not difficult to 
imagine a scenario in which Dr. Broghammer spent nearly two hours reviewing medical 
records and drafting his 15-page report, and then 15 minutes examining claimant.   
Lastly, Dr. Broghammer’s report includes an appeal to authority that is entirely 
unconvincing.  Dr. Broghammer provides, “I did also discuss this case with a colleague 
of mine who has been practicing occupational medicine in the State of Iowa for over 30 
years.  He is in agreement that the workers’ impairment is confined to the wrist[.]”  This 
remarkably unhelpful statement adds nothing to the overall report.  The statement does 
not provide who the colleague is, what was discussed during the conversation, or what 
information the colleague was privy to.  Dr. Broghammer does not provide any 
information to legitimize this individual’s authority.  That the individual is purported to be 
an occupational medicine physician does little to legitimize the expert for a question 
requiring an analysis of the different tissue, bone, ligament, and muscle structures of the 
hand/upper extremity. 
I similarly have a difficult time accepting the updated opinions of Dr. Hartley.  
First, it is unclear what, if any, new or additional medical records were produced to Dr. 
Hartley for review prior to providing his supplemental report.  While the March 13, 2020, 
letter provides defendants sent Dr. Hartley medical records from claimant’s primary care 
provider and UIHC, the June 12, 2020, updated report does not reflect the same.  
According to the June 12, 2020, updated report, Dr. Hartley only reviewed his own initial 
report from November, 2018, the November 6, 2018 FCE report, and Dr. Broghammer’s 
IME report in anticipation of drafting his updated report. (See JE6, p. 61) (“I have 
reviewed the report of the independent medical examination (IME) conducted by Dr. 
Robert Broghammer on 3/4/2019.  I have also reviewed my impairment rating report 
dated 11/29/2018, and the functional capacity evaluation from Athletico on 11/6/2018.”)  
It is entirely possible this was simply an oversight by Dr. Hartley, as the report later 
provides the opinion” “My review of subsequent UIHC medical records indicates that Mr. 
Smart has since been diagnosed with a neuropathy[.]”  Nevertheless, it is still unclear 
what UIHC records he reviewed as the records were not listed or summarized in the 
March 13, 2020 letter to Dr. Hartley, or in his June 12, 2020 report. 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 9 
 
Second, Dr. Hartley’s updated opinion regarding digit/hand impairment is tepid at 
best.  His opinion that claimant’s neuropathy “may explain at least some of his 
hand/digital dexterity and range of motion impairments” does not rule out the work injury 
as being a substantial factor.  The work injury need only to be a “substantial factor” in 
bringing about the result, not the only factor.  Dr. Hartley’s report does not address 
whether the work injury was a substantial factor in bringing about the loss of range of 
motion.  For these reasons, I find Dr. Hartley’s updated report, and the opinions 
contained therein, are not credible or convincing. 
Instead, I find the explanation and medical opinions offered by Dr. Taylor to be 
consistent with the other credible medical evidence in the evidentiary record.  Dr. 
Hartley’s initial report is similar to, and supports, Dr. Taylor’s analysis and opinions.  It is 
well documented that claimant experienced significant swelling of the fingers 
immediately after the work injury.  The swelling continued while his hand and wrist were 
immobilized. Claimant credibly testified the limited range of motion in his fingers and 
thumb started immediately after the injury and never got better. (Hr. Tr., p. 31)  As noted 
by Dr. Taylor, while the unrelated, neuropathy-like symptoms are present in both hands, 
it is only in the injured right hand that there is a loss of motion.  Moreover, medical 
records indicate that the neuropathy-like symptoms in claimant’s hands are worse in the 
right hand due to the work-related injury. (See JE11, p. 132)  Claimant continues to 
have a strong grip and good range of motion of the left hand and fingers. 
Dr. Taylor’s opinions could be critiqued because he did not review medical 
records from UIHC prior to drafting his initial IME report.  That being said, claimant’s 
counsel wisely produced claimant’s UIHC medical records to Dr. Taylor and requested a 
supplemental report.  Dr. Taylor’s supplemental report adequately summarized and 
analyzed the pertinent UIHC medical records.  His analysis of the UIHC records is 
credible and convincing.   
Defendants further attempt to discredit Dr. Taylor’s report by noting Dr. Taylor’s 
conclusion that claimant’s neurologic exam “revealed no subjective loss of sensation, 
and completely normal two-point discrimination.”  Defendants point out that at the time 
of his examination, claimant had been complaining of neuropathy-like symptoms for 
over 10 months.  While it is true claimant began presenting to his primary care providers 
for neuropathy-like symptoms in August, 2019, it is not entirely accurate to say that 
claimant was experiencing significant neuropathy at the time of Dr. Taylor’s 
examination.  By the time Dr. Taylor’s examination occurred in June 2020, claimant’s 
neuropathy was well-controlled by gabapentin. (See JE11, pp. 136, 138, 142) (“Today, 
Gary reports he has improved.  He is taking Gabapentin 300 mg 3 times a day with 
improvement in his neuropathy symptoms.”) (“His neuropathy symptoms in his hands 
come and go yesterday was a bad day today’s a good day.”) (“On the good days he 
barely notices any troubles with his hands.  Other days he notes tingling all the way up 
his arms.”)  Claimant did not exhibit neuropathy symptoms on June 21, 2020, the date 
of Dr. Taylor’s examination.  It is entirely possible claimant was having a good day on 
June 21, 2020, from a neuropathy standpoint.   
Defendants assert claimant’s digit/hand impairment should not be included in the 
determination of permanent impairment given claimant’s personal conditions.  I do not 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 10 
 
find this argument to be convincing.  Defendants imply that the issues within claimant’s 
right hand are related to his documented osteoarthritis and peripheral neuropathy 
diagnosis.  As previously discussed, a permanent aggravation of claimant’s 
osteoarthritis would be compensable under Iowa law.  Moreover, Dr. Taylor explained 
that while the unrelated, neuropathy-like symptoms are present in both hands, it is only 
in the injured right hand that there is a loss of motion.  It is this range of motion that Dr. 
Taylor attributes to the work injury, not the neuropathy-like symptoms in claimant’s 
bilateral hands and upper extremities.   
Ultimately, I accept the medical opinions of Dr. Taylor as most convincing in this 
file.  I find that the injury was a crush injury to the wrist, which had a direct impact on 
claimant’s right hand and forearm, resulting in impairment.  Having accepted the 
opinions of Dr. Taylor as most convincing, I accept Dr. Taylor’s impairment rating and 
find claimant has proven a 44 percent permanent functional impairment of the right 
upper extremity as a result of the December 27, 2017, work injury. 
Prior to hearing, claimant was paid 32.5 weeks of PPD benefits at the rate of 
$866.18 per week. (Ex. A) 
On the hearing report, claimant seeks an award of penalty benefits.  While 
claimant listed the issue on the hearing report, he did not provide an argument 
regarding the same in his post-hearing brief.  I find claimant failed to prove entitlement 
to penalty benefits.   
 
The issue of costs will be addressed in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issue in this case is the extent of claimant's entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits.  The primary dispute revolves around whether the 
loss of range of motion in claimant’s digits, hand, and elbow should be included in the 
determination of permanent impairment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke's Hosp. v. 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 11 
 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc, v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods. Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).   
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v).  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through 
“u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning 
capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by 
the American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall 
not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) 
Having found the 44 percent upper extremity impairment rating offered by Dr. 
Taylor to be most accurate and convincing, I conclude that claimant is entitled to an 
award of permanent partial disability benefits equivalent to 44 percent of the right arm. 
The Iowa legislature has established a 250-week schedule for arm injuries. Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(m). Claimant is entitled to an award of permanent partial disability 
benefits equivalent to the proportional loss of his arm. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w). 
Forty-four percent of 250 weeks equals 110 weeks. Claimant is, therefore, 
entitled to an award of 110 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits against 
defendants. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m), (w). 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled 
to penalty benefits under Iowa Code section 86.13 and, if so, how much.  On the 
hearing report, claimant asserted entitlement to penalty benefits; however, he did not 
provide an argument regarding the same in his post-hearing brief.  To the undersigned’s 
knowledge, claimant offered no evidence demonstrating an unreasonable denial, delay, 
or termination of benefits.  Claimant has failed to prove entitlement to penalty benefits.   

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 12 
 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the 
agency. Iowa Code section 85.40.  Claimant brought a successful claim against 
defendants.  As such, I find it appropriate to assess costs against defendants in some 
amount.   
Claimant seeks assessment of his filing fee ($103.00) and Dr. Taylor’s report 
($725.00).  Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(7) specifically permits the assessment of the filing 
fee. Claimant’s filing fee shall be assessed against defendants. 
Agency rule 4.33(6) permits the assessment of the reasonable costs of “obtaining 
no more than two doctors' or practitioners' reports.”  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
that only the cost of drafting the expert's report is permissible in lieu of testimony. Des 
Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 845-846 (Iowa 
2015).  
Claimant’s Exhibit 2 provides that Dr. Taylor attributed $475.00 to the cost of 
drafting his supplemental report. This is the only portion of the report that is 
reimbursable.  I find the cost of Dr. Taylor’s report is appropriate and assessed pursuant 
to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
ORDER 
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred ten (110.0) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on November 29, 2018, at the stipulated weekly 
rate of eight hundred sixty-six and 18/100 dollars ($866.18). 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity 
published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of 
injury, plus two percent, as required by Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall pay costs of five-hundred seventy-eight and 00/100 dollars 
($578.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___7th __ day of December, 2021. 
 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            MICHAEL J. LUNN  
 
 
 
 
 
                                DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

SMART V. RATHJE CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 13 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas Wolle (via WCES) 
Coreen Sweeney (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
