Case Number: 20008264.02
Case Title:  HIPES, TAMMY L V. ARCONIC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hipes Tammy-20008264.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TAMMY HIPES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 20008264.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
ARCONIC, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
            Head Notes:  1803, 3001 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Tammy Hipes, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers' 
compensation benefits from Arconic, Inc., employer, and Indemnity Insurance Company 
of North America, insurer.  The hearing occurred before the undersigned on February 
22, 2024, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11; Claimant's Exhibits 
1 through 10; and Defendants' Exhibits A through C. Claimant testified on her own 
behalf.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  The 
case was considered fully submitted upon receipt of the parties' briefs on April 8, 2024. 
ISSUES 
1. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
2. 
Claimant’s gross weekly earnings at the time of the March 6, 2020, work 
injury and the corresponding weekly workers’ compensation rate at 
which benefits should be paid;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Sep-19  13:46:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement, direct payment to 
medical providers, or to be held harmless for past medical expenses 
contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 10; and  
4. 
Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Tammy Hipes sustained a work-related injury to her right shoulder on March 6, 
2020.  The two main issues to be addressed in this arbitration decision are the extent of 
Ms. Hipes’ permanent disability and her gross weekly earnings at the time of the March 
6, 2020, work injury. 
 
At the time of the evidentiary hearing, Ms. Hipes was 50 years of age and living 
in Moline, Illinois. (Hearing Transcript, page 11)  She commenced her employment with 
Arconic on March 10, 2014. (Id.)  On the date of injury, Ms. Hipes was working as an 
NC Operator. (Hr. Tr., p. 12)  She worked approximately 40 to 48 hours per week and 
earned $27.563 per hour. (Hr. Tr., p. 14) 
 
On March 6, 2020, while pulling up to remove a pin, Ms. Hipes experienced a 
sudden onset of right shoulder pain. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 3)  After reporting the injury to 
her supervisor, Ms. Hipes presented to the on-site medical department for treatment. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 18, 20)  The medical department examined Ms. Hipes’ shoulder and 
provided her with ice and ibuprofen. (Hr. Tr., p. 20) 
X-rays of the right shoulder revealed no fracture or displacement. (See JE1, p. 8)  
Theodore Koerner, M.D. assessed Ms. Hipes with a work-related mild contusion and 
strain of the right hand and wrist, an aggravation of pre-existing osteoarthritis at the AC 
joint, and an aggravation of pre-existing osteoarthritis of the lower neck with associated 
C-6 and C-7 radiculopathy. (JE1, p. 8) 
Shortly thereafter, Ms. Hipes requested an MRI of her right shoulder, as she did 
not believe the pain she was experiencing was due to arthritis. (JE1, p. 12)  Dr. Koerner 
agreed to order the same on March 18, 2020. (JE1, p. 14)  The MRI revealed a partial 
tear of the supraspinatus tendon and some degenerative changes or tearing of the 
anterior labrum. (JE3, p. 80; see JE1, p. 20)  Given these findings, Dr. Koerner referred 
Ms. Hipes for an orthopedic evaluation. (JE1, p. 20) 
 
Suleman Hussain, M.D. conducted an initial evaluation of Ms. Hipes on April 1, 
2020. (JE4, p. 86)  He assessed right shoulder rotator cuff tendinopathy with partial tear 
and recommended conservative treatment consisting of physical therapy and injections. 
(JE4, p. 87)   

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
When Ms. Hipes’ condition did not improve with physical therapy, Dr. Hussain 
discussed surgery as a potential option to address her complaints. (JE4, p. 89) 
Specifically, Dr. Hussain recommended a right shoulder arthroscopy with debridement 
or repair of the partial tear of the supraspinatus, a decompression, an AC joint 
resection, as well as a possible tenolysis for inflammation if discovered intraoperatively.  
(JE4, p. 91)  Ms. Hipes expressed her desire to pursue surgery.  In the meantime, Dr. 
Hussain prescribed Meloxicam and gabapentin. (JE4, p. 89)   
By June 2, 2020, Ms. Hipes had decided to stop taking the prescribed medication 
as it made her tired. (See JE1, p. 34)  She later reported that she stopped taking the 
medication because she did not want to wait two to three weeks for the Meloxicam to 
build up in her system for pain relief. (JE1, p. 52) 
 
On June 12, 2020, Ms. Hipes called Arconic Medical and reported an illness. 
(JE1, p. 35)  She also reported that her right arm and shoulder had been hurting and felt 
as though it was on fire. (Id.)  Ms. Hipes notified Arconic Medical that she had called 
and left a voicemail with Dr. Hussain’s office, but she had not heard back from them. 
(Id.)  While it is possible Ms. Hipes requested a follow-up appointment when she left a 
message for Dr. Hussain’s office, she did not request care for her right shoulder 
condition when she spoke with Arconic Medical.  Ms. Hipes completed a COVID-19 
screening form and was encouraged to present to a walk-in clinic for her “headache, 
temp, body aches, nasal symptoms, and cough.” (Id.) 
Ms. Hipes presented to the emergency department on June 13, 2020, reporting 
right shoulder pain from a work injury in March. (JE7, p. 148)  She reported being “fed 
up” with her pain, an inability to sleep, and left shoulder pain from overcompensating. 
(Id.)  The medical record provides, “She reports that she is here because she again is 
fed up with the pain and is not sure what else to do.” (Id.) 
 
Ms. Hipes called Arconic Medical and relayed that she presented to the 
emergency room for her right shoulder “because it hurt so bad and her Union Steward, 
Roy Hutt told her to go.” (JE1, p.35)  Ms. Hipes considered her pain level necessitated 
emergency treatment. (Id.)  Ms. Hipes further relayed that the emergency room 
physician put her on two different medications for pain and provided her with a sling for 
her arm. (Id.)  Arconic Medical instructed Ms. Hipes that she was only to present to the 
emergency room for life-threatening emergencies and her most recent visit would not be 
covered under workers’ compensation. (Id.) 
 
Ms. Hipes asserts the June 13, 2020, emergency room visit qualifies as an 
emergency because the right shoulder pain was preventing her from doing her job; 
however, the contemporaneous medical records do not support claimant’s assertion.  
The records reveal that Ms. Hipes was off work because she was exhibiting symptoms 
of COVID-19, not because of her right shoulder injury.  Moreover, it is not apparent to 
the undersigned that the care sought on June 13, 2020, was truly emergent in nature.  
The medical records from Arconic Medical and the emergency room visit support this 
finding, as well as the fact Ms. Hipes was able to contact both Dr. Hussain’s office and 
Arconic Medical before deciding to present to the emergency room.  I find the treatment 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 4 
 
obtained at UnityPoint Health Trinity Emergency Room on June 13, 2020, was not 
emergent in nature. 
 
Dr. Hussain produced a letter to defendants on July 1, 2020. (JE4, pp. 93-94)  
Dr. Hussain causally related the partial tear of the supraspinatus tendon to the March 6, 
2020, work injury. (JE4, p. 93)  He further opined the work injury aggravated her pre-
existing AC joint osteoarthritis. (JE4, p. 94) 
 
Ms. Hipes presented to Dr. Hussain on July 6, 2020. (JE4, p. 95)  She reported 
that she had presented to the emergency room over the weekend for her pain. (Id.)  Ms. 
Hipes demonstrated “really bad” cervical compression signs on examination. (Id.)  Dr. 
Hussain recommended she present to her primary care provider for some non-
orthopedic medical concerns.  The medical record provides, “I have also advise [sic] the 
patient to speak to her primary care doctor about non orthopedic issues that could be 
occurring such as pulmonary thyroid cardiac issues that could be causing for [sic] chest 
pain and decreased range of motion.” (Id.)  He elected to suspend physical therapy and 
any surgical intervention until such work up occurred. (Id.)  Dr. Hussain also ordered an 
MRI of the cervical spine. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Koerner examined Ms. Hipes for her complaints of neck pain on July 7, 2020. 
(JE1, p. 40)  Dr. Koerner opined that the neck pain was due to pre-existing, non-work-
related bilateral osteoarthritic/degenerative changes of the lower cervical spine with 
associated C-6 and C-7 radiculopathy. (Id.)  On July 24, 2020, the defendants notified 
Ms. Hipes that her alleged neck condition was being denied as causally related to the 
March 6, 2020, work injury. (See JE1, p. 49) 
Dr. Hussain administered a second injection on July 22, 2020. (JE4, p. 98)  
Again, Dr. Hussain relayed that claimant would need to work up her cervical spine with 
her primary care physician prior to proceeding with any right shoulder intervention. (Id.)  
Ultimately, Ms. Hipes declined Dr. Hussain’s recommendation to work up her cervical 
spine before moving forward with the right shoulder treatment. (See JE4, p. 101)   
On September 2, 2020, Ms. Hipes returned to Dr. Hussain and reported ongoing 
pain in her right shoulder. (JE4, p. 101)  Ms. Hipes estimated that she received one 
week of relief from the July 22, 2020, injection. (Id.)  Dr. Hussain expressed that his 
findings on examination were at a much higher level than what Ms. Hipes’ MRI 
revealed. (Id.)  Following the examination, Dr. Hussain and Ms. Hipes elected to 
proceed with the previously recommended right shoulder scope with rotator cuff 
debridement versus repair, decompression and biceps tenolysis. (Id.)  The report 
provides, “Tammy is very aware that this intervention may not give her the relief that 
she is looking for, I have advised her multiple times that there is a strong possibility that 
her pain will not be resolved and that most of her pain may be coming from her neck.  
We have offered to refer her to our Spine Specialist for a full work-up and she has 
declined, she wishes to proceed with the right shoulder intervention.” (Id.) 
Dr. Hussain produced a second letter to defendants on October 7, 2020. (JE4, p. 
104)  In the letter, Dr. Hussain reiterated that claimant needed to be evaluated for her 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 5 
 
unrelated cervical spine issues as they could be materially affecting her right shoulder 
function and overall recovery. (Id.)  Dr. Hussain opined that Ms. Hipes’ reluctance to 
address her cervical spine was delaying her care for the right shoulder. (Id.) 
On the morning of October 12, 2020, Ms. Hipes contacted Dr. Hussain’s office 
and requested medication to help with “swelling and pain to her lower neck.” (JE1, p. 
67)  Ms. Hipes subsequently notified Arconic Medical of her request.  She further 
notified Arconic Medical of her intent to present to the emergency room if she did not 
receive the requested medication.  The defendants told Ms. Hipes that such a visit to 
the emergency room would not be authorized under workers’ compensation. (Id.)   
Ms. Hipes’ nurse case manager contacted her at approximately 12:30 p.m. to 
discuss her medication request. (JE1, p. 68)  According to the medical records, Ms. 
Hipes was already at the emergency room for her “back, neck, and right shoulder pain.” 
(Id.)  The nurse case manager informed Ms. Hipes that Dr. Hussain was her authorized 
treating physician for the right shoulder and defendants had not authorized her to treat 
her work-related condition at the emergency room. (Id.)  Ms. Hipes acknowledged this 
information, but relayed that she had not heard back from Dr. Hussain and felt as 
though she had given him enough time to respond. (Id.) 
While it is unclear exactly when Ms. Hipes contacted Dr. Hussain’s office on the 
morning of October 12, 2020, the medical records provide that she contacted Arconic 
Medical at approximately 9:04 a.m., and she was already at the UnityPoint Emergency 
Department when her nurse case manager called her at 12:30 p.m. (JE1, p. 68)  I find 
Ms. Hipes did not provide defendants or Dr. Hussain a reasonable amount of time to 
fulfill her medication request and/or schedule a follow-up appointment. 
Ms. Hipes presented to the emergency department with complaints of right 
shoulder pain with associated back and neck pain. (JE7, p. 155)  Ms. Hipes requested 
“pain control” and a note indicating that a sling was necessary for her. (Id.)  Chad 
Vanderlinden, M.D. diagnosed acute right shoulder pain and prescribed a Medrol 
Dosepak. (JE7, p. 159) 
Again, Ms. Hipes asserts the October 12, 2020, emergency room visit qualifies 
as an emergency because the right shoulder pain was preventing her from being at 
work and performing her job duties. 
Ms. Hipes’ visit to the emergency room on October 12, 2020, was not of an 
emergent nature.  Like the June 13, 2020, visit, Ms. Hipes was able to contact both Dr. 
Hussain’s office and Arconic Medical before deciding to present to the emergency room.  
The treatment rendered at the October 13, 2020, visit was relatively routine, including 
issuance of prescription medication and a recommendation she wear a sling for one 
week.  This type of treatment could have been accomplished through Dr. Hussain and 
did not require a visit to the emergency room.  The treatment on October 12, 2020, did 
not provide a more favorable outcome than what would likely have been achieved 
through Dr. Hussain or another authorized provider selected by the employer.   

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Ms. Hipes underwent a return to work evaluation with Arconic Medical on March 
1, 2021. (JE1, p. 73) The medical record provides that Ms. Hipes had been off work for 
a mass on her throat, severe pain in her neck, and severe anxiety. (Id.)  It was 
determined that Ms. Hipes could not return to work until she produced return to work 
notes from the physicians treating her neck pain and throat mass. (Id.) 
Ms. Hipes did not present to Dr. Hussain again until August of 2021. (See JE4, 
pp. 101-102, 105)  It is unclear what treatment, if any, Ms. Hipes received for her neck 
pain between September 2020 and August 2021. 
An MRI arthrogram dated August 19, 2021, showed interfacial tearing on the long 
head biceps in the groove, and a high-grade near full-thickness tear of the 
supraspinatus. (JE4, p. 105)  Ultimately, Dr. Hussain performed an arthroscopic rotator 
cuff repair, subacromial bursectomy, and biceps tenolysis on September 21, 2021. 
(JE11, pp. 185-186)  After a period of recovery, Dr. Hussain placed Ms. Hipes at 
maximum medical improvement and released her from care on April 4, 2022. (JE4, p. 
127)   
At the April 4, 2022, appointment, Dr. Hussain provided the following: “Active 
elevation is to 170 degrees, external rotation is good and her internal rotation is even.  
She has good strength in Jobes and good pulses bilaterally.  She has a small difference 
in abduction.  She has good external and internal rotation.” (Id.)  Based on his 
examination, and utilizing the American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Hussain assigned four percent upper extremity 
impairment, or two percent whole person impairment for the right shoulder injury. (JE4, 
p. 129) 
In response to Dr. Hussain’s rating, Ms. Hipes sought an independent medical 
evaluation with Richard Kreiter, M.D.  The examination occurred on November 8, 2022, 
and Dr. Kreiter produced his report on November 30, 2022. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1)  
Dr. Kreiter diagnosed Ms. Hipes with adhesive capsulitis, right shoulder, status post 
arthroscopic repair of the rotator cuff involving the supraspinatus and infraspinatus 
tendons, biceps tenolysis, and subacromial bursectomy, and right AC joint inflammation, 
secondary to impingement. (Id.)  Dr. Kreiter opined that the AC joint inflammation was 
Ms. Hipes’ pain generator, as it was never decompressed by Dr. Hussain. (Id.)   
Based on Ms. Hipes’ belief that she had plateaued three months prior to her IME, 
Dr. Kreiter estimated that Ms. Hipes reached maximum medical improvement in August 
2022. (Id.; see Ex. 1, p. 4)  Dr. Kreiter assigned 18 percent upper extremity impairment 
or 11 percent whole person impairment as a result of the right shoulder injury. (Id.)  Like 
Dr. Hussain, Dr. Kreiter utilized the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. (Id.) 
 
Of note, Dr. Kreiter’s cumulative impairment rating includes 10 percent upper 
extremity impairment for an AC joint resection, “which should have been done.” (Id.)  
Defendants correctly point out that a lateral clavicle resection was not performed and 
Dr. Kreiter’s inclusion of an additional 10 percent impairment rating is improper.  
Defendants further note that Dr. Kreiter did not properly calculate the lateral clavicle 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 7 
 
resection impairment, which requires the physician to multiply the 10 percent 
impairment by the 25 percent maximum value found in Table 16-18 of the AMA Guides.  
Dr. Kreiter attempted to justify the additional 10 percent rating in a supplemental report; 
however, I did not find the explanation reasonable or convincing.  I find the inclusion of 
a 10 percent impairment rating for a procedure that did not occur is improper and the 
additional impairment rating will not be considered. 
 
Ms. Hipes’ post-hearing brief raises concerns with the thoroughness of Dr. 
Hussain’s impairment assessment.  She asserts Dr. Hussain did not adequately explain 
the impairment rating he assigned to the right shoulder.  Additionally, Ms. Hipes testified 
at the evidentiary hearing that Dr. Hussain did not perform a physical examination of her 
right shoulder on April 4, 2022. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24)  
 
In response to Ms. Hipes’ allegations, defendants obtained a supplemental report 
from Dr. Hussain on or about January 22, 2024. (Defendants’ Exhibit C, pp. 4-6)  The 
report followed a January 17, 2024, conference call between Dr. Hussain and 
defendants’ attorney. (Ex. C, p. 4)  During the conference call, Dr. Hussain confirmed 
that his July 2, 2022, right shoulder permanent impairment rating was based on his 
physical examination of Ms. Hipes on April 4, 2022. (Id.)  He further explained that he 
assigned 1 percent upper extremity impairment for loss of flexion and 3 percent upper 
extremity impairment for loss of abduction. (Ex. C, p. 5) 
Dr. Hussain clearly documented his physical examination findings from the April 
4, 2022, appointment in his medical records. (See JE4, p. 127)  Admittedly, his findings 
are not particularly detailed.  Nevertheless, I find Dr. Hussain performed a physical 
examination of Ms. Hipes on April 4, 2022.  I further find he based his upper extremity 
impairment rating on his findings from the same.  Conversely, I do not find Ms. Hipes’ 
testimony that Dr. Hussain did not perform a physical examination of her right shoulder 
on April 4, 2022, to be credible.   
 
On the Hearing Report, the parties stipulated that claimant sustained an injury, 
which arose out of and in the course of employment on March 6, 2020. (Hearing Report)  
The parties further stipulated that the injuries were a cause of permanent disability to 
the right shoulder. (Id.)  Accordingly, I must determine the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits.   
 
When comparing the competing impairment assessments, I note that both Dr. 
Hussain and Dr. Kreiter are orthopedic surgeons.  As such, both are well qualified to 
assess Ms. Hipes’ right shoulder injury.  With respect to their familiarity with Ms. Hipes’ 
condition, Dr. Hussain evaluated Ms. Hipes on numerous occasions, including 
intraoperatively.  During these evaluations, Dr. Hussain became familiar with Ms. Hipes’ 
right shoulder condition.  In comparison, Dr. Kreiter only performed a one-time 
examination for the purposes of litigation. 
 
As previously stated, I have concerns with how Dr. Kreiter calculated his 
impairment rating.  I also have concerns over the legitimacy of the range of motion 
measurements he collected.  His measurements of abduction, flexion, and external 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 8 
 
rotations are significantly different from the measurements collected by Ms. Hipes’ 
physical therapist and Dr. Hussain. (See JE4, p. 127; JE6, pp. 141-142; JE8, p. 174)  
For these reasons, I have a difficult time accepting Dr. Kreiter’s impairment assessment 
over the impairment assessment of Dr. Hussain.  Moreover, I find the opinions of Dr. 
Hussain more persuasive than the opinions of Dr. Kreiter.  As such, I accept Dr. 
Hussain’s 4 percent right upper extremity impairment rating as reasonable and 
accurate. 
 
There is a dispute about the rate at which Ms. Hipes’ weekly benefits should be 
paid.  Defendants' rate calculation for Ms. Hipes’ weekly workers' compensation 
benefits results in an average weekly wage of $1,379.00, and a weekly workers' 
compensation benefit rate of $813.18. Ms. Hipes’ rate calculation for weekly workers' 
compensation benefits results in an average weekly wage of $1,424.00, and a weekly 
workers' compensation benefit rate of $836.10.  
 
The primary dispute appears to be whether the pay period reflected in the 
January 17, 2020, check is representative of Ms. Hipes’ customary earnings and should 
be included in the average weekly wage calculation. 
 
According to Claimant’s Exhibit 7, page 26, the pay period was excluded as 
unrepresentative because Ms. Hipes worked an “unusually low amount of work hours 
(32 hours).”  However, it cannot be said that Ms. Hipes worked an unusually low amount 
of hours during this pay period.  Of the 13 weeks included in Ms. Hipes’ rate calculation, 
she worked 32 hours or less 5 times. (Ex. 7, pp. 28-32, 34)  The difference between the 
week in question and the other 5 weeks in which Ms. Hipes worked 32 hours or less is 
the amount of compensation she received for vacation and/or holiday time.  The wage 
records contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 7 demonstrate that Ms. Hipes’ hours fluctuated 
significantly from week to week.  Indeed the amount of hours Ms. Hipes physically 
worked each week ranges from 24 to 64 hours.  For these reasons, I find each of the 13 
weeks immediately preceding the injury fairly represent Ms. Hipes’ typical earnings. 
Moreover, defendants correctly point out that Ms. Hipes’ rate calculation 
inaccurately provides that she received $223.62 in vacation pay and $277.11 in holiday 
pay for pay period “3.” (Ex. 7, p. 26)  In reality, Ms. Hipes received $277.11 in vacation 
pay and no holiday pay for pay period 3. (Ex. 7, p. 29)  
Defendants submitted figures for what they believe Ms. Hipes’ average weekly 
wage and benefit rate to be; however, they did not disclose how they calculated the 
same.  In other words, defendants did not show their work.  Presumably, defendants’ 
rate calculation corrected the vacation/holiday error mentioned above, added the pay 
period reflected in the January 17, 2020, check, and removed the pay period reflected in 
the December 6, 2019, check.  That being said, the undersigned was unable to 
reproduce the average weekly wage submitted by defendants.  The undersigned 
calculated an average weekly wage of $1,371.85, which would result in an applicable 
weekly benefit rate of $809.58.  The undersigned’s calculations result in a lower 
average weekly wage than the calculation submitted by defendants; however, I decline 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 9 
 
the opportunity to reward defendants with an overpayment for failing to submit their 
calculations into evidence. 
Instead, I find defendants' rate calculation is reasonable and fairly reflects 
claimant's earnings immediately prior to the date of injury.  I find Ms. Hipes’ average 
weekly wage to be $1,379.00.  Relying upon the parties' stipulations that claimant is 
single and entitled to one exemption, and using the Iowa Workers' Compensation 
Manual with effective dates of July 1, 2019, through June 30, 2020, I determine the 
applicable weekly rate for benefits in this case is $813.18. 
 
Having adopted defendants’ rate calculation, I find that Ms. Hipes failed to 
establish entitlement to any additional healing period benefits for the alleged 
underpayment.   
 
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be addressed in this decision is the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc., v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v). The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 10 
 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
 Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). 
Ms. Hipes’ shoulder injury constitutes a scheduled injury under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n).  Shoulder injuries are compensated on a 400-week schedule 
and are limited to the functional impairment rating.  
Having found the impairment rating assigned by Dr. Hussain to be most accurate 
and convincing, I found claimant proved a functional loss of 4 percent to the right upper 
extremity.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n), claimant is entitled to a 
proportional award equivalent to 4 percent of 400 weeks.  Therefore, I conclude that 
claimant is entitled to an award of 16 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, 
commencing on April 4, 2022. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
The parties dispute the rate at which claimant's weekly benefits should be paid. It 
appears both parties calculated their respective rates utilizing Iowa Code section 
85.36(6) as the applicable code section.  Ms. Hipes’ rate calculation for weekly workers' 
compensation benefits results in an average weekly wage of $1,424.00, and a weekly 
workers' compensation benefit rate of $836.10.  Defendants' rate calculation for Ms. 
Hipes’ weekly workers' compensation benefits results in an average weekly wage of 
$1,379.00, and a weekly workers' compensation benefit rate of $813.18.  Defendants’ 
rate calculation does not exclude any of the 13 weeks immediately preceding the date 
of injury as unrepresentative. 
Iowa Code section 85.36(6) provides that if an employee was absent from 
employment for reasons personal to the employee during part of the thirteen calendar 
weeks preceding the injury, the employee's weekly earnings shall be the amount the 
employee would have earned had the employee worked when work was available to 
other employees of the employer in a similar occupation. Claimant did not submit 
sufficient evidence to show she was absent from work during the alleged 
unrepresentative week for personal reasons.  Additionally, Ms. Hipes’ hours fluctuated 
significantly. This is evident in claimant's wage records.  Given this record, I cannot 
conclude any of the 13 weeks immediately preceding the date of injury were 
unrepresentative of claimant's customary earnings.  As such, I find defendants' rate 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 11 
 
calculation is reasonable and fairly reflects claimant's earnings immediately prior to the 
date of injury. 
I find Ms. Hipes’ average weekly wage to be $1,379.00.  Relying upon the 
parties' stipulations that claimant is single and entitled to one exemption, and using the 
Iowa Workers' Compensation Manual with effective dates of July 1, 2019, through June 
30, 2020, I determine the applicable weekly rate for benefits in this case is $813.18. 
Having accepted defendants’ rate calculation, I find claimant is not entitled to any 
additional benefits for the alleged underpayment of healing period benefits. 
Ms. Hipes next asserts a claim for payment or reimbursement of the past medical 
expenses provided in Claimant’s Exhibit 10.  More specifically, Ms. Hipes is seeking 
payment of the emergency room charges from June 13, 2020, and October 12, 2020.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27(4), “[i]f the employer chooses the care, the 
employer shall hold the employee harmless for the cost of care until the employer 
notifies the employee that the employer is no longer authorizing any or any part of the 
care and the reason for the change in authorization.” However, section 85.27(4) also 
provides that “[a]n employer is not liable for the cost of care that the employer arranges 
in response to a sudden emergency if the employee's condition, for which care was 
arranged, is not related to the employment.”  
There is little evidence that Ms. Hipes requested care for her right shoulder 
condition prior to presenting to the emergency room on June 13, 2020.  I found 
defendants did not authorize Ms. Hipes’ emergency room visit on June 13, 2020.   
Ms. Hipes asserts the emergency room visit qualifies as emergency treatment 
because the right shoulder pain was preventing her from being at work.  I do not find 
Ms. Hipes’ argument convincing.  First, the medical treatment itself was not truly 
“emergency treatment.” The medical records support this finding, as well as the fact Ms. 
Hipes was able to contact both Dr. Hussain’s office and Arconic Medical before deciding 
to present to the emergency room.  Second, while it is true that Ms. Hipes was off work 
at the time of the June 13, 2020, emergency room visit, she was not missing time due to 
her right shoulder condition.  Rather, Ms. Hipes was off work because she was 
exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19.   The treatment rendered at the emergency room on 
June 13, 2020, was found not to be emergent in nature.  Instead, those charges must 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 12 
 
be evaluated as unauthorized medical care. Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010). 
If the claimant elects to pursue unauthorized  medical care, she can still recover 
the expenses of that unauthorized care if she proves by a preponderance of the 
evidence that such care was reasonable and beneficial. Id. at 206. However, there are 
often times multiple reasonable courses of treatment. Therefore, to recover the cost of 
unauthorized care, claimant must prove that the unauthorized care was beneficial in that 
it “provides a more favorable outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care 
authorized by the employer.” Id.   
Ms. Hipes offered no evidence or argument to establish that the care she sought 
and obtained provided a more favorable outcome than would likely have been achieved 
by care authorized by defendants.  Ms. Hipes did not provide defendants the 
opportunity to exercise their statutory right to select the care to be provided. I conclude 
claimant failed to overcome her burden to establish that the care provided on June 13, 
2020, provided a more favorable medical outcome than would have likely been 
achieved through authorized care that could have been offered by defendants.  
Accordingly, I conclude claimant is precluded from recovery of her medical expenses for 
the treatment provided on June 13, 2020. 
At the time of the October 12, 2020, emergency room visit, Ms. Hipes was aware 
that Dr. Hussain was her authorized treating physician and that she was not authorized 
to present for care at the emergency department.  The treatment rendered at the 
October 12, 2020, emergency room visit was relatively routine and not emergent in 
nature.  Having found this type of treatment could have been accomplished through Dr. 
Hussain and did not require a visit to the emergency room, I also found that the 
treatment on October 12, 2020, did not provide a more favorable outcome than what 
would likely have been achieved through Dr. Hussain or another authorized provider 
selected by the employer.  I conclude that Ms. Hipes failed to establish entitlement to 
payment or reimbursement for the emergency room charges incurred on October 12, 
2020.  Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corporation, 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 2018). 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 10A.328 and rule 876 IAC 4.33. Claimant requests taxation of the cost of 
the filing fee ($125.30). (Ex. 6, p. 24) The cost of the filing fee is an allowable cost and 
assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Claimant also requests taxation of the costs 
associated with Dr. Kreiter’s October 31, 2023, report ($300.00). (Ex. 6, p. 25)  The cost 
of the report is an allowable cost and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant sixteen (16) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on April 4, 2022, at the weekly rate of eight hundred thirteen and 
18/100 dollars ($813.18). 

HIPES V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Defendants shall pay all accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum with applicable 
interest pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for any weekly benefits paid to date. 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33, as set forth in the 
decision. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2), and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __19th ____ day of September, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Matthew Leddin (via WCES) 
Troy Howell (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
