Case Number: 24700469.01
Case Title:  SEAMAN, DANIEL V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Seaman Daniel-2470046901d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
DANIEL SEAMAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 24700469.01 
 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : Head Notes: 1402.20; 1402.30; 1402.40;  
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
       3201; 3202; 3203 
 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Daniel Seaman, filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (“the Fund”).1  Claimant 
has alleged a first qualifying injury to his left upper extremity in the summer of 2004, and 
a second qualifying injury to his right lower extremity on March 4, 2024. The case came 
before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on July 30, 2025. The case proceeded 
to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all participants appearing remotely. The hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and the Fund’s Exhibits AA through KK. The undersigned also takes 
administrative notice of the approved Full Commutation of Benefits between claimant 
and Droessler Construction Services/Acuity Insurance, which was filed on July 30, 
2025. 
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on July 30, 2025. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on September 5, 2025, and the case was considered fully submitted on 
that date. 
 
 
1 Claimant’s petition initially also included Droessler Construction as defendant employer, and Acuity 
Insurance as defendant insurance carrier. However, these parties reached a settlement with claimant, 
and did not participate in the hearing.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Feb-12  09:04:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained a prior qualifying loss to the left upper extremity 
in the summer of 2004; 
2. 
If so, whether the functional loss from that loss was 2 percent of the left 
upper extremity; 
3. 
Whether claimant sustained a compensable loss to the right lower extremity 
on March 4, 2024; 
4. 
If so, whether the functional loss from that loss was 7 percent of the right 
lower extremity; 
5. 
The commencement date for Fund benefits, if awarded; 
6. 
The amount of credit to which the Fund is entitled, if any; and, 
7. 
The proper rate of compensation 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 36-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, 
page 7) He graduated from high school in 2007, after which he took some classes at 
Northeast Iowa Community College for about one year. (Tr., pp. 7-8) His classes 
focused on carpentry, but he did not obtain any kind of degree. (Tr., p. 8) He described 
his computer skills as average, but he has never had an office-type job. Most of his past 
work history has involved construction and carpentry, with some cooking experience 
before that. Claimant testified that all of his jobs have involved manual labor and the use 
of his hands.  
 
Claimant’s first alleged injury, for Fund purposes, involves his left upper 
extremity. In the summer of 2004, when claimant was 15 years old, he fractured his left 
wrist after falling off of a tree swing. (Tr., pp. 14-15; Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) He testified that 
to the best of his recollection, he was taken to the emergency room, and was put under 
anesthesia so they could reset his bones and put a cast around it. (Tr., p. 15) Medical 
records indicate he sustained a Salter fracture, distal left radius, with displacement, on 
May 28, 2004. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) He underwent a closed reduction procedure, and 
application of long arm splints to the left upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2)  
 
On February 28, 2018, claimant reported left arm pain to his primary care 
provider. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 44) He also reported numbness and tingling of his thumb, and 
first and second fingers. It was noted he likely had carpel tunnel near the site of his old 
fracture injury, and he was referred to orthopedics for further workup. He saw Stephen 
Pierotti, M.D., who felt he likely had carpal tunnel syndrome in the left wrist, and 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
recommended he wear a wrist brace. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 53) The records note he did not have 
any symptoms in his right hand. Claimant is right-hand dominant. (Tr., p. 37)  
 
Claimant also saw Dr. Pierotti in 2023, after tripping and falling, and landing on 
his left wrist. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 53-54) Fortunately, he did not have another fracture due to 
that fall, and his symptoms were improving by the time he saw Dr. Pierotti. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
54) Dr. Pierotti noted his 2004 wrist injury, and stated that he “has never had problems 
since the fall.” On physical examination, he noted full extension and flexion actively and 
passively, without any pain. He was released to return as needed, increasing his use as 
tolerated. 
 
Claimant testified at hearing that he continues to have some loss of grip strength 
as a result of the 2004 injury, and has some residual pain when using vibrating tools. 
(Tr., p. 15) He also knows when it is going to rain, due to increased symptoms. He said 
his main complaint was grip strength and vibrating tools, especially the ability to make 
sure they stay in his hands. (Tr., p. 20) He also noted that working in carpentry, he 
works both indoors and outdoors, which makes changes in the weather more 
problematic, as his wrist will ache. (Tr., pp. 20-21) He testified that prior to his knee 
injury at Droessler, he did not have any restrictions, accommodations, or a permanent 
impairment rating for his left wrist. (Tr., p. 37) 
 
In April of 2019, claimant started work with Droessler Construction. (Tr., p. 9) His 
job involved building, remodeling, and renovating in commercial and residential settings. 
He testified they did “anything from framing the buildings to finishing. Drywall, windows, 
siding, roofing, doors, and anything in between, trim.” His boss was the owner of the 
company, Zach Droessler. At the end of his tenure with Droessler he was making 
$27.00 per hour, working an average of 40 hours per week. He testified that he loved 
the job at Droessler.  
 
On March 4, 2024, claimant was working for Droessler at First Congregational 
Church in Dubuque, Iowa. (Tr., p. 15) It was toward the end of the day, and he was 
working alone. He climbed a 6-foot ladder wearing his tool belt, and had a small piece of 
lumber, 2x4, with him as well. (Tr., pp. 15-16) He went to kneel down to the spot where 
the 2x4 was going, and felt, “the pop heard round the world.” (Tr., p. 16) He testified that 
his right knee popped, and the following morning he said it was swollen to the size of a 
grapefruit.  
 
Claimant was seen at Grand River Medical Group on March 5, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
46) He reported kneeling at work and feeling a pop in his right knee. He complained of 
pain around and at the top of his kneecap. The record states the knee was swollen with 
a small faint bruise. He was having difficulty with full extension, and any movement 
increased his pain. Claimant was sent for an x-ray, and given a prescription for 
Ibuprofen and instructions for icing. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 46-47) He was to follow up if his 
symptoms did not improve. 
 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
Claimant saw Jeffrey Westpheling, M.D., at Tri-State Occupational Health, on 
March 11, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 65) Dr. Westpheling noted that the prior x-ray showed 
moderate joint effusion, and possible small intra-articular loose bodies. Claimant had 
been using crutches, which he discontinued, and was using a knee brace. He was also 
taking prescription ibuprofen. Claimant reported he had not returned to work since the 
injury, and he continued to have pain over the quadriceps and patellar tendons. After 
physical examination, Dr. Westpheling ordered an MRI. 
 
The MRI took place on March 14, 2024, and showed a full thickness radial tear of 
the posterior root of the medial meniscus, as well as additional horizontal undersurface 
tearing of the posterior horn. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 68) It also showed large volume joint effusion 
with two loose bodies, mild medial compartmental osteoarthritis, and nonspecific 
anterior soft tissue edema. Claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling on March 18, 2024, to 
review his MRI results. (Jt. Ex. 56 p. 69) He reported concerns about returning to work 
and doing something that might cause further injury. Dr. Westpheling reviewed the MRI 
and diagnosed acute medial meniscal tear and effusion of the right knee. He referred 
claimant to orthopedics. 
 
Claimant saw Kyle Korth, M.D., on April 16, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 72) Dr. Korth’s 
record indicates that based on clinical exam findings, diagnostic studies, and claimant’s 
persistent mechanical symptoms with quality of life and activities of daily living, claimant 
would be a candidate for surgical intervention in the form of right knee arthroscopy with 
partial medial meniscectomy.  
 
Claimant was sent by the employer/insurance carrier for an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) with John Xenos, M.D. (Second Injury Fund Exhibit BB, p. 14) The IME 
took place on April 12, 2024, and Dr. Xenos’s report is dated April 29, 2024. Dr. Xenos 
reviewed claimant’s history, including the March 4, 2024 injury, and noted claimant felt 
and heard a pop in his knee on that date. (Fund Ex. BB, p. 15) He noted claimant 
sought medical attention the following day, as his condition had worsened. He reviewed 
the medical records and claimant’s current symptoms. (Fund Ex. BB, pp. 15-17)  
 
On physical examination, claimant was noted to be wearing a hinged knee brace. 
(Fund Ex. BB, p. 18) Dr. Xenos recorded claimant’s range of motion in the right knee, 
and noted a large effusion, as well as medial joint tenderness. Dr. Xenos concluded that 
claimant had a preexisting condition of right knee degenerative joint disease, which he 
described as a degenerative process involving the articular cartilage of the joint. 
Anatomically, he stated there is loss of articular cartilage, marginal osteophyte 
formation, loose body formation, meniscal tear, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cyst 
formation, and deformity. (Fund Ex. BB, pp. 18-19) He noted that on the date of injury, 
claimant reported no significant activity other than kneeling. (Fund Ex. BB, p. 19) He 
concluded that it was unlikely that claimant’s activities on the alleged date of injury 
resulted in any injury to his knee, but rather that he experienced symptoms most 
consistent with a “mere manifestation underlying pre-existing degenerative condition of 
the knee.” He noted claimant’s examination was consistent with a meniscal injury, and 
his symptoms at the time of his evaluation were related to the meniscal pathology. He 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
opined treatment would include consideration for surgical repair, as well as 
nonoperative treatment with physical therapy and NSAIDs.  
 
Dr. Xenos provided answers to specific questions. His diagnosis was a “mere 
manifestation of underlying pre-existing right knee degenerative joint disease with 
concomitant medial meniscal pathology.” He opined that it was unrelated to any alleged 
work incident where the symptoms are most consistent with a mere manifestation of his 
underlying preexisting condition. He did not believe claimant had reached the end of 
healing. (Fund Ex. BB, p. 20) He opined further treatment would include physical 
therapy and NSAIDs, and potential injections, as well as possible surgical intervention. 
He opined claimant would reach “healing plateau” three to six months after surgical 
intervention, if performed, or within three months of the injury. He did not assign any 
permanent disability as he opined that no work injury occurred.  
 
On April 30, 2024, the insurance carrier’s claim representative sent claimant a 
letter denying compensability of his right knee claim based on Dr. Xenos’s opinions. 
(Fund Ex. CC, p. 32) He was advised to submit further medical bills to his group health 
insurance.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Pierotti at Dubuque Orthopaedic Surgeons on May 14, 2024. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55) 2 Dr. Pierotti notes that workers’ compensation had denied surgery, but 
claimant continued to have pain and swelling in his knee, and at times felt it would 
buckle. He noted that claimant had no other knee injuries, other than a hairline fracture 
of his patella when he was a child, which healed with no issues. After examination, Dr. 
Pierotti opined that claimant’s injury “clearly happened at work.” He stated there were 
no previous problems that would have caused his issues, nor would the hairline fracture 
he had as a child have contributed. He opined that claimant needed surgery “when he 
finds time in his schedule.” The next day, Dr. Pierotti was able to review claimant’s MRI, 
and again recommended surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 56) Claimant was to call to schedule 
surgery when he wanted it done. 
 
Claimant never had surgery on his knee. He testified that he could not afford to 
take time off work and pay for the surgery. (Tr., p. 36) He continued working at 
Droessler Construction until March of 2025, when he quit his job. (Tr., pp. 9-10) He 
testified that he eventually concluded that working full-time hours doing heavy labor had 
become unsustainable for him. Shortly after leaving Droessler, he went to work for The 
Local Handyman Pros. (Tr., p. 10) The job was mainly residential renovation, with 
lighter construction and smaller jobs. He felt the job was considerably easier physically 
than the job at Droessler.  
 
Claimant worked at The Local Handyman Pros for about three months, at which 
time his employment ended. (Tr., p. 12) He testified that he discovered even the lighter 
 
2 The Fund argues this record is not signed by a doctor, however, it is initialed “SEP.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55) 
Based on the preceding records, also initialed “SEP,” it is clear the record was authored by Dr. Stephen 
Pierotti. (See Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 53-54) 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
duty job was difficult for him to maintain throughout the week, as he would begin to 
struggle with the demands of the job by the end of the week. There is an email in 
evidence from his supervisor at The Local Handyman Pros indicating that claimant was 
no longer contracting there due to “repeated intoxication on job sites.” (Fund Ex. II, p. 
129) Claimant denied that he was ever intoxicated on a jobsite, and does not know why 
his supervisor would have said that. (Tr., pp. 12-13; 29-31) 
 
Claimant was also working at All Class Cleaning, starting in November of 2024, 
and continued with that job at the time of hearing. (Tr., p. 13) The job consists of 
nighttime cleaning and maintenance of office buildings. He works about 20 hours per 
week, making $25.00 per hour. He testified that the job is much easier than his prior 
jobs at Droessler and The Local Handyman Pros. (Tr., pp. 13-14) He testified that he 
does not have to do much crouching or kneeling in order to clean toilets. (Tr., p. 14) He 
testified that he generally only works three to four hour shifts, and he knows what tasks 
he has to accomplish in that amount of time, so he is able to pace himself in order to get 
it done without struggling. (Tr., pp. 22-23) He also does not have to carry anything while 
he is walking. (Tr., p. 22) He testified that currently there is not full-time work available 
at All Class Cleaning, but it might become available in the future. (Tr., p. 28) He also 
does not believe he is capable of doing more hours at this time.  
 
Claimant testified that he would love to have the surgery and go back to work in 
construction. (Tr., p. 36) He continues to wear the hinged knee brace, and said it helps. 
(Tr., pp. 17-18) He testified that he continues to struggle with kneeling and crouching, 
as well as walking on uneven surfaces. (Tr., p. 21) He testified that one of the biggest 
problems he had with construction work was the need to have his toolbelt on at all 
times. (Tr., pp. 21-22) While it only weighs 15 to 20 pounds, he testified that having it on 
for four hours was a struggle, and eight hours was almost impossible. (Tr., p. 22) He 
testified that he loved his work in construction, and that he had no intention of stopping 
it until his leg injury.  
 
On February 12, 2025, Dr., Westpheling issued a causation evaluation for 
claimant’s right knee. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 76) He saw claimant on February 11, 2025, and 
noted that while he was initially claimant’s authorized treating provider, he was not 
taking over his care nor seeing him in follow-up, and the evaluation did not constitute a 
traditional patient/physician relationship.  
 
Dr. Westpheling reviewed the medical records and interviewed claimant. (Jt. Ex. 
6, pp. 76-77) At the time of his evaluation, claimant was still working at Droessler 
Construction. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 77) He had ongoing pain in the right knee, with occasional 
swelling and catching. He continued to use his knee brace. He reported no prior similar 
conditions involving the right knee. On physical examination, Dr. Westpheling noted 
trace effusion. There was mild tenderness with palpation of the anterior medial joint line. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 78) The knee was stable to varus and valgus stress. McMurray’s was 
positive for testing of the medial meniscus. Lateral meniscus testing was negative. 
There was a mildly antalgic gait to the right.  
 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
Dr. Westpheling’s diagnoses were right medial meniscus posterior root tear, 
osteoarthritis involving the medial compartment of the right knee, and mild right knee 
effusion. With respect to causation, Dr. Westpheling opined that claimant’s medial 
meniscal posterior root tear was more likely than not related to his underlying 
degenerative condition, and not causally related to the alleged work incident on March 
4, 2024. He noted that medial meniscus posterior root tears represent between 10 and 
21 percent of all medial meniscal tears, and most are degenerative in origin. This is in 
contrast to lateral meniscus root tears, which are typically related to trauma. He further 
stated that while medial meniscal posterior root tears can be seen in the setting of acute 
trauma, they are typically accompanied by multiple other ligamentous injuries when that 
occurs. He assigned a Kellgren Lawrence grade, which is a measure of degenerative 
changes, and that along with other risk factors led him to his conclusion.  
 
 
Dr. Westpheling also noted that claimant’s osteoarthritis and degenerative 
changes preexisted the work injury, and were not causally related to the work injury. He 
stated that the gradual degeneration of the medial compartment of the right knee leads 
to medial extrusion of the medial meniscus due to increased pressure, and then “a 
seemingly minor event can cause the medial meniscus to completely extrude from the 
medial joint surfaces causing a tearing type injury to the meniscal root or attachment. 
 
Claimant had a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) at his attorney’s request on 
June 19, 2025. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p .1) Daryl Short, DPT, performed the testing. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 3) Mr. Short found claimant gave a consistent effort with all test items, and 
concluded that the overall functional performance results were valid. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-2) 
Based on the results of testing, Mr. Short opined that due to the decreased functional 
strength and endurance of his right knee, claimant’s capabilities are in the mid-medium 
category of physical demand. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) Specifically, he noted some limitations 
with crouching; kneeling; stairs; lifting waist to floor up to 40 pounds; lifting waist to 
crown up to 30 pounds; and front carry up to 40 pounds up to 50 feet. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
He noted significant limitations with lifting waist to floor up to 50 pounds; lifting waist to 
crown up to 35 pounds; and front carry up to 50 pounds up to 50 feet. He further 
recommended continued use of his knee sleeve and hinged knee brace for stability, as 
he walks with a slight antalgic limp due to the decreased functional strength and 
endurance of his right knee. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) He noted that the longer claimant walks 
and/or when carrying heavier weight, his antalgic limp is more noticeable.  
 
On physical examination, Mr. Short found claimant’s range of motion and 
strength in his right knee was within normal limits on flexion, although with increased 
pain and “crepitations.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) Extension was within normal limits for motion, 
however strength on extension was 4 of 5 with pain in his right knee. With respect to 
claimant’s left upper extremity, testing showed range of motion and muscle strength for 
claimant’s elbow, forearm, and wrist to be within normal limits. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-6) Gross 
hand motion was also within normal limits. Mr. Short also tested hand/finger strength. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) For right hand grip, force generated was 115, 111, and 113, resulting in 
an average of 113 pounds. The report states the mean for a 36-year-old male is 119.7 
pounds. For left hand grip, claimant’s results showed 98, 100, and 97, for an average of 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
98.3 pounds. The mean for a 36-year-old male is 112.9 pounds. There were no 
limitations noted for hand/finger strength on the report. 
 
The day after the FCE, on June 20, 2025, claimant had an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) with Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 9) Dr. Bansal’s report is dated 
June 26, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 21) Dr. Bansal reviewed relevant medical records related to 
both the left upper extremity and the right knee, including Mr. Short’s FCE report. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, pp. 10-13) On physical examination of the right knee, Dr. Bansal noted positive 
valgus stressing and negative varus stressing. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14) There was diffuse 
swelling, plus 2 crepitus, medial joint line tenderness, positive McMurray’s test, and 
negative anterior drawer test. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 14-15) With respect to range of motion, Dr. 
Bansal found 118 degrees and 5 of 5 strength on flexion, and “no lag” and 4 of 5 
strength on extension. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15) Claimant’s left knee had full range of motion. 
 
Physical examination of claimant’s left wrist revealed mild tenderness to 
palpation of the radial aspect of the wrist. Range of motion testing provided 60 degrees 
of flexion; 60 degrees of extension; 11 degrees of radial deviation; and 30 degrees of 
ulnar deviation. Claimant had full range of motion of his right wrist. Finally, grip strength 
was measured using a dynamometer, and resulted in 47 kg, 45 kg, and 47 kg on the 
right, and 38 kg, 36 kg, and 39 kg on the left. 
 
Dr. Bansal answered questions posed by claimant’s attorney. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 15-
21) His diagnosis for claimant’s right knee injury was full-thickness radial tear of the 
posterior root of the medial meniscus, allowing 3 mm of peripheral extrusion of the 
body, and an additional horizontal tear of the posterior horn. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 16) With 
respect to the 2004 left wrist injury, his diagnosis was status post closed reduction of 
the left distal radius fracture, application of a long-arm splint. With respect to his current 
condition, Dr. Bansal noted that claimant continued to have constant right knee pain and 
swelling. He was not able to kneel or squat without significant discomfort, and had 
difficulty with stairs, particularly descending. He noted claimant was able to stand and 
walk throughout the day, but his pain progressively worsened through the week, with 
increased difficulty by Thursday, and “barely mobile” by Friday. Regarding his prior left 
wrist injury, Dr. Bansal noted claimant’s pain increased with weather changes, and he 
also had a weakened grip strength and stiffness of the wrist.  
 
Dr. Bansal opined there was a direct causal relationship between claimant’s 
March 4, 2024 work injury and the development of his right knee pathology, specifically 
the full-thickness radial tear of the posterior root of the medial meniscus with associated 
joint effusion and intra-articular loose bodies. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) He noted the described 
mechanism of injury was a sudden pop and pain while initiating a kneeling motion under 
a load, which is consistent with an acute meniscal tear as a result of the combined 
forces of axial loading, rotation, and flexion that occur during the transition from 
standing to kneeling.  
 
Dr. Bansal described the mechanics of kneeling in more detail, and noted that Dr. 
Westpheling’s opinion that medial meniscal posterior root tears are predominantly 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
degenerative in nature “represents an overgeneralization that fails to account for the 
specific circumstances of this case.” He noted that while it is true there may be 
degenerative components, the presence of degenerative changes does not preclude an 
acute traumatic causation. He further opined that Dr. Westpheling’s assertion that 
traumatic root tears typically occur with multiple ligamentous injuries is incorrect, and 
not consistent with the understanding of meniscal injury patterns. Dr. Bansal stated that 
isolated traumatic meniscal root tears can and do occur, particularly in the setting of 
axial loading combined with rotation, exactly as occurred with claimant. He further 
opined that the immediate onset of symptoms, including an audible pop and rapid 
effusion, are indicative of an acute tear rather than degenerative failure. 
 
Dr. Bansal also found flaws in Dr. Westpheling’s reliance on the Kellgren-
Lawrence grading system to dismiss causation. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18) He again noted that 
the presence of mild degenerative changes does not negate work-related causation, 
and opined that the work activity clearly precipitated, aggravated, and accelerated 
claimant’s meniscal pathology beyond its natural progression, “transforming 
asymptomatic age-related changes into a disabling condition.”  
 
With respect to Dr. Xenos’s opinions, Dr. Bansal opined that his characterization 
of claimant’s injury as a “mere manifestation” of preexisting degenerative disease 
demonstrated a fundamental misunderstanding of both the mechanism of injury and the 
medical-legal causation standards. He noted that Dr. Xenos’s observation that 
claimant’s initial symptoms included quadriceps area pain actually supported traumatic 
causation, as the eccentric quadriceps loading during the injury would naturally cause a 
strain concurrent with the meniscal injury. He also noted that Dr. Xenos’s conclusion 
that it was unlikely that claimant’s activities on March 4, 2024 resulted in any injury to 
his knee was contradicted by the objective MRI findings of an acute tear pattern, the 
immediate onset of symptoms, and the complete absence of prior right knee complaints. 
Finally, he noted that claimant’s complete absence of right knee symptoms or functional 
limitations prior to the injury, and his ability to perform heavy construction work for six 
continuous years without difficulty, definitively established that any age-related changes 
visible on imaging were asymptomatic and non-limiting. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 18-19) 
 
Dr. Bansal provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19) He opined that 
claimant’s untreated meniscal root tear warranted a 7 percent lower extremity 
impairment rating by analogy to a total medial meniscectomy from Table 17-33. He 
justified this rating by stating that claimant’s untreated tear with peripheral extrusion is 
functionally equivalent to a total meniscectomy, as meniscal root tears destroy the 
circumferential hoop stress resistance of the meniscus, rendering it biomechanically 
incompetent. He further explained that the extrusion documented on the MRI indicates a 
complete loss of meniscal function, as an extruded meniscus cannot provide shock 
absorption, load distribution, or joint stability, identical to the post-total meniscectomy 
state. He noted that after 21 months without treatment, the torn root had likely 
undergone further degeneration, scarring, and retraction, making it functionally absent. 
He also noted the FCE results, which were consistent with a complete loss of meniscal 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
function rather than partial compromise. He stated that the natural history of untreated 
meniscal root tears involves rapid progression to complete functional incompetence with 
accelerated osteoarthritis, which is what has occurred in claimant’s case. As such, he 
opined that the appropriate impairment rating is 7 percent of the lower extremity, which 
is equal to 3 percent of the whole person. 
 
For the left wrist, Dr. Bansal provided a 2 percent upper extremity rating, based 
on claimant’s range of motion deficits. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 20) Specifically, the 11 degrees of 
radial deviation was assigned 2 percent impairment, while the other measurements 
were zero. 
 
Regarding restrictions, Dr. Bansal agreed with the recommended restrictions of 
the valid FCE performed on June 19, 2025. With respect to maximum medical 
improvement (MMI), Dr. Bansal opined that in the absence of further treatment, claimant 
reached MMI on the date of his evaluation, June 20, 2025. Finally, with respect to future 
treatment, he recommended an MR/arthrogram to assess the current status of the 
meniscal root tear and cartilage damage after 21 months without treatment. (Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 21) He also recommended partial meniscectomy if repair was no longer viable, 
removal of the intra-articular loose bodies, and chondroplasty for any unstable cartilage 
lesions. 
 
The Fund takes issue with Dr. Bansal’s opinions, starting with his impairment 
rating for the left upper extremity. The day prior to Dr. Bansal’s examination, claimant 
had an FCE with Mr. Short. As noted above, Mr. Short found claimant’s range of motion 
and strength in his left wrist to be within normal limits. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) Specifically, radial 
deviation in the left wrist was measured as being within normal limits, with normal being 
20 degrees. When Dr. Bansal measured radial deviation the following day, he recorded 
11 degrees in the left wrist. This was the basis for the 2 percent permanent impairment. 
Additionally, the Fund notes the differences in claimant’s grip strength from one day to 
the next, although no impairment was assigned based on grip strength. Nevertheless, 
Mr. Short recorded left hand grip strength at 98 pounds, 100 pounds, and 97 pounds, 
and Dr. Bansal recorded 38 kg (approximately 83.8 pounds), 36 kg (approximately 79.4 
pounds), and 39 kg (approximately 86 pounds). (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8; Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15) There is 
no explanation for these discrepancies. 
 
The Fund also notes that claimant worked in manual labor positions, primarily 
construction, without restriction following the 2004 left wrist injury. He saw Dr. Pierotti in 
2023 for a different left wrist injury, and at that time Dr. Pierotti noted that claimant had 
never had problems with his wrist since the 2004 fall. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 54) At the time of his 
examination, claimant had full extension and flexion of the wrist, actively and passively, 
without any pain. This examination tends to support Mr. Short’s findings with respect to 
claimant’s wrist over those of Dr. Bansal. Based on the evidence as a whole, I find that 
Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating for the left wrist is not credible. The difference between 
the range of motion and grip strength measurements, taken just one day apart, with no 
explanation, cannot be disregarded. Additionally, the records indicate claimant had no 
problems with his left wrist after the 2004 injury. Added to his work history and lack of 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
restrictions or other functional limitations for the left wrist, I find claimant has not proven 
permanent impairment to his left wrist that pre-existed the alleged second injury.  
 
The Fund also takes issue with Dr. Bansal’s opinion regarding causation of the 
right knee injury. However, related to causation of the knee injury, I find Dr. Bansal’s 
opinion most persuasive. The opinions of Dr. Westpheling and Dr. Xenos each fail to 
consider that there is no record of any prior symptoms or functional difficulties with 
claimant’s right knee prior to the work injury. Additionally, claimant experienced 
immediate symptoms upon hearing the pop, and sought medical treatment the next day 
when his condition had worsened. Dr. Bansal provided a thorough explanation 
regarding the mechanism of injury, and how claimant’s actions likely resulted in the 
posterior root tear. The Fund suggests that Dr. Bansal had a misunderstanding of the 
mechanism of the injury, arguing he thought claimant was kneeling onto his left knee 
when the injury occurred. (See Fund Brief, p. 9) However, I do not read Dr. Bansal’s 
report to suggest any misunderstanding, and he specifically stated claimant “went to 
kneel on his right knee” in his description of claimant’s injury. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 13) Dr. 
Bansal also pointed to several other issues with both Dr. Westpheling’s causation 
opinion, and Dr. Xenos’s opinion. When viewing all of the evidence in the record, Dr. 
Bansal’s causation opinion is the most convincing. As such, I find claimant’s right knee 
injury arose out of and in the course of his employment with Droessler Construction.  
 
As noted above, claimant and Droessler Construction reached a settlement 
agreement prior to hearing, and filed a full commutation of benefits, which was 
approved on July 30, 2025. As part of the full commutation, the claimant and Droessler 
stipulated that claimant sustained a right leg injury on March 4, 2024, and the injury 
caused permanent disability equal to 7 percent loss of the right leg.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
 
The claimant alleges entitlement to Fund benefits based upon injuries to his left 
upper extremity in 2004, and due to a compensable loss to his right lower extremity on 
March 4, 2024. The Fund disputes that the Second Injury Compensation Act applies to 
this case for various reasons, including failure to prove a qualifying first injury; failure to 
prove a second qualifying injury, and, in the alternative, failure to establish industrial 
loss if first and second qualifying injuries are proven. 
Iowa Code 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability. Before any liability of the 
Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met. These requirements are: 1) The 
employee must have lost, or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye; 2) The 
employee must sustain a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ 
through a compensable injury; and 3) Permanent disability must exist as to both the 
initial injury and the second injury. 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
 
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual, 
as if the individual had no preexisting disability. See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 
262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). While the Second Injury Fund may be entitled to a 
credit for the compensable value of the previously disabled scheduled member, the 
Second Injury Fund is not entitled to credit for any prior unscheduled injuries. See 
e.g.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Kratzer, 778 N.W.2d 42 (Iowa 2010).   
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Iowa Code 
85.64. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second 
Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970). The second injury may be a bilateral injury. Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa v. George, 737 N.W.2d 141 (Iowa 2007). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable, 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.” Cedar Rapids Community School Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 
(Iowa 2011). The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and 
measure the credibility of witnesses.” (Id.) The trier of fact may accept or reject expert 
testimony, even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part. Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156. When 
considering the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the 
examination occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation 
arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, 
experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and 
value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 
1985). Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. 
Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). Supportive lay 
testimony may be used to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and 
material to the causation question.   
 
The claimant has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that 
he sustained some permanent disability resulting from both the initial injury and the 
second injury. Second Injury Fund v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 547-48 (Iowa 1995). 
For industrial disability to result from two scheduled injuries, the claimant must prove the 
first and second injuries combine to contribute to the industrial loss. Second Injury Fund 
v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994). 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
The first question is whether the claimant sustained a first qualifying loss. The 
Fund disputes whether claimant’s 2004 left upper extremity injury qualifies under Iowa 
Law. The Iowa Supreme court has addressed what constitutes a first qualifying loss.  
The Court stated:  
To qualify as a first loss for purposes of section 85.64, the first loss does 
not need to be work-related. Shank, 516 N.W.2d at 812. Additionally, the 
first loss need not be a total loss or loss of use. Irish v. McCreary Saw Mill, 
175 N.W.2d 364, 368 (Iowa 1970). In 1990 the Fund again asked this 
court to hold that the first loss must be “at minimum, ‘a substantial loss 
that acts as a handicap to one's employability.’ ” Second Injury Fund v. 
Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 469 (Iowa 1990). In Braden we decided not to 
retreat from our prior position and held that a scheduled injury under 
section 85.34(2) affecting a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye is a qualifying first 
loss. (Id.) at 469–70. The reason for allowing a scheduled injury affecting 
a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye to be a qualifying first loss is because a 
scheduled injury evaluates an injured person's permanent partial disability 
by determining the loss of physiological capacity of the affected body part. 
Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d at 547. We see no reason to retreat from our long-
standing law that a scheduled injury under section 85.34(2) affecting a 
hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye is a qualifying loss. 
Second Inj. Fund of Iowa v. George, 737 N.W.2d 141, 146 (Iowa 2007). 
Claimant bears the burden of proving that permanent impairment resulted from 
the first injury. I found that Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating for the left wrist was not 
credible. The measurements taken by Mr. Short the day prior to Dr. Bansal’s IME were 
very different than those recorded by Dr. Bansal. His impairment rating was based on 
the deficit he recorded in radial deviation. However, the day before the IME, Mr. Short 
recorded radial deviation as being within normal limits. There is no explanation for the 
discrepancies. As such, I decline to accept Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating related to the 
left wrist. 
Claimant argues that Iowa law does not require an impairment rating to establish 
a qualifying loss. Expert medical evidence is generally necessary to establish the 
permanency of an injury. Haynes v. Second Injury Fund, 547 N.W.2d 11, 13–14 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 1996) (citing Daniels v. Bloomquist, 138 N.W.2d 868, 873 (Iowa 1965)). It is, 
however, not always essential. In some cases, permanency may be inferred from the 
nature of the injury. (Id.) Likewise, an impairment rating by a physician is not always 
necessary to establish a permanent disability. (Id.)  Bodily impairment is only one factor 
in determining industrial disability. Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 103 
(Iowa 1985). 
 
While a specific impairment rating by a physician may not always be a 
prerequisite to establishing Fund liability, I did not find any of the other factors in this 
case to establish permanent disability. Mr. Short’s FCE was considered valid, and he 
did not recommend any permanent restrictions related to the wrist. Dr. Bansal adopted 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
 
Mr. Short’s recommendations for restrictions. Prior to the right knee injury, claimant 
primarily worked in manual labor jobs, mainly construction and carpentry, with no 
difficulties, accommodations, or limitations. He told Dr. Pierotti in 2023 that he had not 
had any problems with his wrist after the fall in 2004, and at that time he had full range 
of motion with no pain. Viewing the record as a whole, claimant has not demonstrated 
that his left wrist has ever acted as a hinderance to his ability to obtain or retain 
employment. As such, he has not proven a first qualifying loss.  
Because claimant has failed to carry his burden to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he sustained a first qualifying loss, I conclude that 
liability of the Fund has not been triggered. As a result, all remaining issues are 
rendered moot. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this 12th day of February, 2026. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Randall P. Schueller (via WCES) 
 
Sejla Numic (via WCES) 
 
Andrew Duffelmeyer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SEAMAN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
