Case Number: 22011730.01
Case Title:  OKANOVIC, ESAD V. TYSON FOODS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Okanovic Esad-22011730.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ESAD OKANOVIC, 
  : 
 
File No. 22011730.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
     D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :                      
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :  
      Head Note Nos.   1108, 2209                   
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :            
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Esad Okanovic, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Tyson Foods, a self-insured employer.  The claimant was 
represented by Adnan Mahmutagic.  The defendant was represented by Jason Wiltfang. 
The matter came on for hearing on November 12, 2024, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 4; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 13; and defense exhibits A through J.  The claimant 
testified at hearing, as did his daughter, Edina Okanovic.  Karmela Lofthus was 
approved to serve as the Bosnian language interpreter and Kira Stover served as the 
court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on December 16, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on June 15, 2022. 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to a running award of temporary total disability 
since March 31, 2022. 
4. Whether the issue of permanency is ripe for adjudication. 
5. Defendant has asserted the affirmative defense of timely notice under Iowa 
Code Section 85.23.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-10  14:50:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 9. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to an IME under Iowa Code Section 85.39. 
8. Whether defendant is entitled to a credit for sick pay/disability income under 
Iowa Code Section 85.38(2). 
9. Costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. The weekly rate of compensation is $556.56. 
3. Other than timely notice, other affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Esad Okanovic was 63 years old as of the date of hearing.  He was 
born in Bosnia and has an 8th grade education.  His English proficiency is quite limited.  
In approximately 1976, he moved to Slovenia where he received training in 
construction.  He worked construction in Slovenia until approximately 1991 when the 
Bosnian War began.  At that time, he returned to Bosnia and served in the Bosnian 
Army.  Mr. Okanovic testified he was captured and became a prisoner of war.  After he 
was released he rejoined the Bosnian Army for approximately four months before 
becoming a refugee in Croatia.  He moved to the United States (Utica, New York) 
sometime in 1996.  Mr. Okanovic is married and has grown children.  He lives in 
Waterloo, Iowa. 
Mr. Okanovic testified live and under oath during the video hearing through a 
Bosnian interpreter.  I find his testimony to be highly credible.  His testimony is 
consistent with other portions of the record, including contemporaneous medical 
reports, his previous sworn deposition testimony, and the testimony of his daughter, 
Edina Okanovic.  There was nothing about his demeanor which causes me any concern 
for his truthfulness.  In fact, the opposite is true.  He provided short, responsive 
answers.  His testimony was generally calm, straightforward and measured. 
In 1997, Mr. Okanovic became employed by IBP, Inc. (Tyson’s predecessor).  He 
moved to Waterloo, Iowa, in April 1997, passed his preemployment physical and began 
working at the packing plant.  He worked at the packing plant in Waterloo continuously 
until 2022. 
Mr. Okanovic testified in some detail about his job duties with Tyson.  (Transcript, 
pages 21-25)  He testified that since approximately 2004, he performed the position 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
entitled “Strip Tenders.”  His job involved stripping the tendon from meat on a fast- 
moving line.  He used his hand to grab a piece of meat weighing two pounds or so and 
he would use his knife to cut the fatty tendon from the lean meat.  He testified this 
required significant force.  He testified he would tear approximately 300 pieces of meat 
per hour or approximately 2,500 pieces per shift.  He testified that he began to 
experience symptoms in his hands and arms in approximately November 2021.  He 
testified he reported the symptoms to his supervisor and was periodically placed on 
light-duty for a few days at a time, however, he was always returned to the same job.  
(Tr., pp. 25-26)  Mr. Okanovic’s job description is also in evidence and generally 
confirms his job duties.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 43) 
Mr. Okanovic testified that he took four weeks of vacation in February through 
March 2022.  He returned to work at the end of March 2022.  He testified that when he 
returned to work, he was having increased pain in his arms.  (Tr., p. 26-27)  He testified 
that he requested a leave of absence in April 2022, to address blood pressure issues he 
was experiencing.  At this time, he went on short term disability.  (Def. Ex. I)  Medical 
records confirm that his primary care physician, Vinko Bogdanic, M.D., excused him 
from work on April 2, 2022, for hypertension.  (Joint Exhibit 4, pages 233-238)  While he 
was off work, Mr. Okanovic asked Dr. Bogdanic for a referral to have his arms, 
shoulders and neck evaluated because of his significant symptoms which were not 
resolving.  Dr. Bogdanic referred him to Gary Knudson, M.D., an orthopedic specialist. 
On June 2, 2022, Dr. Knudson performed a thorough evaluation of Mr. 
Okanovic’s neck and bilateral upper extremities.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 27)  Dr. Knudson 
documented the following history:     
Esad Okanovic is a 60 y.o. male who presents for BILATERAL 
NUMBNESS AND TINGLING FROM SHOULDERS TO FINGERTIPS.  
Onset was gradual, starting about 1 YEAR AGO.  ago. [sic]  Inciting event:  
none known.  Current symptoms include:  NUMBNESS AND TINGLING.  
He has quite a bit of pain throughout the upper extremities shoulders and 
upper arms down through the elbow and forearm region and then into the 
hand and fingers.  He states it is gradually gotten worse and he does a lot 
of repetitive activities at work and has done so for quite some years. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25)  This is a classic description of a cumulative work injury.  Dr. Knudson 
concluded the following:  “After careful consideration the patient has made the informed 
decision to proceed with evaluation at work for potential work injury overuse type with 
probable carpal tunnel syndrome.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) 
On or about June 15, 2022, Mr. Okanovic filed a report of injury at Tyson.  (Tr., p. 
29)  It is noted that Mr. Okanovic had verbally reported his injury to his supervisor 
previously.  Nevertheless, he filed an official “Team Member Statement of Injury”.  (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 1)  This report is quite detailed and contains a great deal of information.  The 
report describes a classic cumulative trauma injury affecting Mr. Okanovic’s neck and 
bilateral arms.  It lists the date of injury as June 13, 2022, however, states the injury was 
reported on May 27, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Tyson’s doctor, Robert Gordon, M.D., evaluated Mr. Okanovic on June 21, 2022, 
and then saw him a few more times through August 2, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 2-11)  Dr. 
Gordon documented his complaints in his neck, bilateral arms and hands, noting “his 
symptoms have primarily developed during that period of time while he has been off of 
work.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2)  At his final visit on August 2, 2022, Dr. Gordon provided the 
following opinion: 
Report of cervical pain with report of pain, numbness, and tingling of the 
bilateral shoulder girdles and upper extremities circumferentially.  He did 
have an electrodiagnostic study which did reveal bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome, left greater than right- his symptoms and exam are not 
consistent with CTS and certainly do not explain his symptoms.  No 
evidence of radiculopathy with the electrodiagnostic study and 
examination is not consistent with such.  He did have x-rays of the 
bilateral shoulders, which did reveal bilateral AC joint region degenerative 
changes and GH joint degenerative changes.  X-rays of the right elbow did 
reveal osteophyte of the right lateral epicondylar region.  X-rays of the left 
elbow revealed degenerative changes with small osteophytes.  He does 
have arthritic changes of the bilateral hand small joints.  I am not certain if 
arthritis is causing an element of his symptoms but it certainly does not 
explain all of his symptoms.  As we did discuss today again, his symptoms 
primarily began while off work and have been worsening/progressing 
since off of work and he does report pain with or without use of the 
bilateral upper extremities.  A relationship between his reported symptoms 
and work duties has not been established given the chronology of his 
symptoms and the progressive nature of his symptoms since not working.  
Of note, his work duties may have contributed to bilateral CTS that was 
noted with EDX study but his symptoms and exam are not consistent with 
such. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10)  On that date, Dr. Gordon discharged Mr. Okanovic from care with no 
disability and instructed him to follow up with his primary care provider.   
Dr. Gordon was aware that Mr. Okanovic had been having symptoms in his 
bilateral upper extremities since at least the fall of 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 122)  
Nevertheless, Dr. Gordon seemed focused on the fact that Mr. Okanovic had developed 
his symptoms since he was off work starting in April 2022. On August 15, 2022, Tyson 
formally denied the claim based upon Dr. Gordon’s opinion.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 42)  It is 
somewhat unclear why Dr. Gordon’s history is different from the history recorded by the 
other physicians. I interpret Dr. Gordon’s opinion as follows.  Dr. Gordon opined that Mr. 
Okanovic had work-connected carpal tunnel syndrome but that this was not causing the 
majority of his rather severe symptoms at the time.  He did not know the precise 
diagnosis for the remainder of claimant’s symptoms in his arms, shoulders and neck, 
however, he opined that none of those conditions were work-connected because of his 
understanding that claimant’s symptoms worsened after he was off work. 
Mr. Okanovic began treatment on his own thereafter.  He returned to Dr. 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
Bogdanic who recommended a neurologist.  On September 12, 2022, Igo Becavic, 
M.D., examined Mr. Okanovic and documented the following history: 
According to the patient he has worked at Tyson for 26 years and last 18 
years he has been stripping tenders.  According to the patient his job 
description requires him repetitively using his hands for stripping tenders 
as well as his neck is bent eight hours a day.  It was until approximately 
two years ago he started having numbness and tingling involving his 
hands as well as pain involving arms and neck pain shooting distally. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 228)  Dr. Bekavic’s initial impression was bilateral carpal tunnel likely work 
related and intermittent cervical sensory radiculopathy possibly work related.  He 
developed a treatment plan to obtain an MRI of the cervical spine, wrist splints and 
follow up.  The MRI was performed one week later which showed several bulging discs 
in his cervical spine.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 230) 
In October 2022, Dr. Knudson performed a full work up, including numerous 
radiographs and other diagnostic testing.  Following this, on October 27, 2022, Mr. 
Okanovic underwent left carpal tunnel surgery with Dr. Knudson.  On November 15, Dr. 
Knudson performed carpal tunnel surgery on the right side.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 36, 41)  Mr. 
Okanovic spent several months recuperating from these surgeries.  Once his short-term 
disability expired, Mr. Okanovic applied for and received long term disability.  The 
disability carrier required Mr. Okanovic to file for Social Security Disability as well.  (Tr., 
p. 33)  It appears these disability payments were made from an employer-sponsored 
group policy.  (Def. Ex. I)  Following his recuperation from the carpal tunnel surgeries, 
Dr. Knudson began treating Mr. Okanovic’s neck and shoulders.  He underwent a full 
workup for his shoulders, including MRIs which demonstrated tears and degenerative 
changes in both shoulders.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 64-65)  In January 2023, a neurosurgeon 
opined that his cervical condition was not surgical.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 76-78)  In March 
2023, following physical therapy, trigger point injections were attempted.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
85-88)   
On May 2, 2023, Dr. Knudson performed left shoulder surgery described as “left 
shoulder arthroscopy with acromioplasty decompression for impingement, distal clavicle 
resection greater than 1 centimeter and labral debridement.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 95)  In July 
2023, he had an injection in the right shoulder which provided temporary relief.  (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 102)  Further diagnostic studies were performed on the right shoulder as well as 
his neck in August 2023.  Dr. Knudson noted that Mr. Okanovic exhibited symptoms of 
cervical radiculopathy.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 110-112)  He recommended further physical 
therapy for the shoulder.  Mr. Okanovic was evaluated by another neck specialist in 
August 2023 as well, and further diagnostic tests were ordered.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 113-116)  
On September 28, 2023, Dr. Knudson performed a manipulation of the right shoulder 
under anesthesia for adhesive capsulitis.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 129) 
In August 2023, the Social Security Administration awarded Social Security 
Disability benefits to Mr. Okanovic.  (Def. Ex. J)  EMG testing in November 2023 
demonstrated carpal tunnel, but not cervical radiculopathy.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 173-177)  Mr. 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Okanovic continued to follow up with Dr. Knudson, who provided further cortisone 
injections and shoulder exercises.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 178-180)  He has continued to follow 
up with Dr. Knudson through the date of hearing.  Prior to hearing in August 2024, Mr. 
Okanovic established medical care with Lydia Mustafic, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 221-225) 
In addition to the expansive medical reports in evidence, both parties secured 
expert witnesses prior to hearing.  The parties also secured expert vocational reports 
from competing experts. 
The claimant secured an evaluation by Brian Crites, M.D., while the defendant 
secured an expert report from Charles Mooney, M.D.  Dr. Crites performed a thorough 
evaluation and reviewed appropriate records.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  He opined that Mr. Okanovic 
had sustained the following diagnoses: 
A. Left carpal tunnel syndrome 
B. Right carpal tunnel syndrome 
C. Left shoulder impingement with rotator cuff tear 
D. Right shoulder impingement with rotator cuff tear 
E. Cervical spondylosis/chronic cervicalgia with intermittent radicular 
symptoms 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19)  He opined that all of these conditions were the result of a cumulative 
trauma injury at Tyson: 
It is my medical opinion as a board-certified orthopedic surgeon and 
sports medicine specialist that absent a specific injury, it is within a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty that his conditions are the result of 
cumulative overuse activity in his life.  This cumulative activity would 
include the repetitive work duties for Tyson Foods as well as his everyday 
non-work activities.  It is my opinion that the work performed by Esad at 
Tyson was a substantial causal factor in a cumulative fashion to his 
bilateral shoulders, hands, and neck conditions listed above. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19)  Dr. Crites opined that Mr. Okanovic was not at maximum medical 
improvement for all of his conditions.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 20)  He did assign permanent 
impairment and restrictions, in any event.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 20-21) 
Dr. Mooney also reviewed appropriate records and thoroughly examined Mr. 
Okanovic, culminating in an expert report dated September 13, 2024.  (Def. Ex. B)  His 
report provides a lengthy medical summary and specific answers to 24 questions.  Dr. 
Mooney opined that Mr. Okanovic did suffer from bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and 
opined that this condition was work connected, in spite of the AMA Guides, Fifth edition, 
guidance on such matters.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 40)  Regarding the bilateral shoulders and 
neck, Dr. Mooney utilized causation standards in the AMA Guides to suggest that none 
of these conditions were work connected.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 32-39)  He further opined Mr. 
Okanovic was not at MMI for many of his conditions. 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, I find that Mr. Okanovic 
sustained a fairly classic cumulative trauma injury which affected his neck, shoulders 
and wrists.  This is based upon the expert opinion of Dr. Crites, the contemporaneous 
medical records, as well as the highly credible testimony of Mr. Okanovic.  I further find 
that Mr. Okanovic was actively engaged in significant medical treatment for essentially 
all of his conditions at the time of hearing.  He was not at maximum medical 
improvement for his various conditions. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is whether Mr. Okanovic has proven by a 
preponderance of evidence that he sustained a cumulative trauma work injury, and, if 
so, what condition or conditions were caused by the injury. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287-88 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-30 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985). 
In cumulative injury cases, the issue of whether an injury arose out of and in the 
course of employment often overlaps and is otherwise intertwined with the issue of 
medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that Mr. Okanovic has met 
his burden of proof that he sustained a cumulative work injury to his neck, bilateral 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
shoulders and bilateral arms.  As mentioned in the Findings of Fact, this is based 
primarily upon the expert opinion of Dr. Crites, the contemporaneous medical records, 
as well as the highly credible testimony of Mr. Okanovic. 
There is really no doubt, when viewing this record as a whole, that Mr. Okanovic 
suffers from the following conditions: 
A. Left carpal tunnel syndrome 
B. Right carpal tunnel syndrome 
C. Left shoulder impingement with rotator cuff tear 
D. Right shoulder impingement with rotator cuff tear 
E. Cervical spondylosis/chronic cervicalgia with intermittent radicular symptoms 
The question presented is whether Mr. Okanovic’s work activities at Tyson over 
approximately 18 years substantially contributed to his development of these diagnoses. 
In the contemporaneous medical records, his symptoms presented as a classic 
overuse syndrome, gradually coming on over a period of months with the symptoms 
mostly in his arms.  The claimant argues this case is exactly what it looks like:  repetitive 
trauma at a hard meatpacking line job causing significant conditions in this bilateral 
upper extremities and shoulders.  I find that Mr. Okanovic’s work duties, which are well 
documented in the record through his testimony and the employer’s job description, are 
exactly the type of activities which can cause a cumulative trauma injury in his bilateral 
shoulders, arms and neck.  The work requires repetitive heavy force with his head in a 
fixed position for this.  These underlying facts render the opinions of Dr. Crites, and 
other treating physicians, highly believable.  In fact, the defendant’s own physicians 
have opined that, at a minimum, the carpal tunnel is related to the repetitive work 
activities. 
The defendant did not present a specific theory of how Mr. Okanovic developed 
these conditions, but rather simply argue that Mr. Okanovic cannot prove that his 
primarily degenerative conditions are causally connected to his work activities utilizing 
the criteria prescribed by the AMA Guides.  I do not find this argument compelling 
particularly in light of the fact that the defendant’s own physicians have found that the 
claimant’s carpal tunnel is work-connected in spite of the Guides’ position on the 
causation of such issues. 
The remaining issues involve the benefits to which Mr. Okanovic is entitled to as 
a result of this work-related injury. 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are:  (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
I find that Mr. Okanovic is not at maximum medical improvement for all of his 
conditions.  At a minimum, at the time of hearing he required further active treatment for 
his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  I find that Mr. Okanovic has been in an active 
healing period from June 15, 2022, through the date of hearing.  During this period of 
time, the conditions resulting from his work injury have overtaken his life resulting in four 
surgeries, multiple injections and extensive physical therapy.  Just prior to hearing he 
had established treatment with a new provider and further significant treatment was 
recommended.  I conclude Mr. Okanovic is entitled to healing period benefits from the 
date of injury through the date of hearing and continuing until such time as the 
requirements of Iowa Code Section 85.34(1) have been met. 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
I find all of Mr. Okanovic’s medical treatment to date as set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 9, is compensable under Iowa Code Section 85.27. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
I find that Mr. Okanovic is entitled to the IME expenses set forth at Claimant’s 
Exhibit 11, page 89, including mileage. 
Claimant also seeks costs under Iowa Code Section 10A.328 (2023).  I have 
reviewed Claimant’s Exhibit 11.  I award costs in the amount of $1,243.00. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendant shall pay a running award of healing period from June 15, 2022, 
through the date of hearing and continuing until such time that an element of Iowa Code 
Section 85.34(1) has been met at the rate stipulated by the parties. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant is responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
9. 
Defendant is entitled to a credit for group disability payments made. 
Defendant is responsible for the IME expense set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 11, 
page 89 in the amount of four thousand five hundred ninety and no/100 dollars 
($4,590.00) plus one hundred sixty-six and 16/100 dollars ($166.16) for mileage. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of one thousand two hundred forty-
three and no/100 dollars ($1,243.00). 
Signed and filed this ___10th ___ day of June, 2025. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
 
 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jordan Talsma  
(via WCES) 
 
Adnan Mahmutagic  (via WCES) 
 
Jason Wiltfang 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be  
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
