Case Number: 22005063.01
Case Title:  GREEN, JAMES V. VK LOGISTICS LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Green James-22005063.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JAMES GREEN, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
   File No. 22005063.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
VK LOGISTICS, LLC., 
  : 
     
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                      
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
        Head Notes: 1100; 1801; 1802; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
             1803; 1804; 2500; 3000          
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, James Green, filed a petition for workers’ compensation benefits 
against VK Logistics, LLC, employer, and Old Republic Insurance Co., insurer. In 
accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of the 
Commissioner the hearing was held on January 19, 2024, via Zoom. The case was 
considered fully submitted on February 9, 2024, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-9, Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-M along with the testimony of the claimant, Nelson Nwanganga, and Adena 
Habhab. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment;  
 
2. Whether the injury was the cause of some temporary disability;  
 
3. Whether the injury was the case of some permanent disability; 
 
4. Whether the disability, if any is found, has left claimant permanently and 
totally disabled;  
 
5. The commencement date of permanent benefits;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-18  10:11:17     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
6. The appropriate benefit rate;  
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses and an 
85.39 IME. 
STIPULATIONS  
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The parties have stipulated that claimant was an employee at the time of the 
alleged injury of October 28, 2021. They further agree that at all times material hereto, 
claimant was married and entitled to two exemptions.  
Defendants waive all affirmative defenses.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
James Green was a 49--year-old person at the time of the hearing. At all relevant 
times hereto, he was a married person with two exemptions.   
Claimant’s education includes a GED obtained in 2009 or 2010. He has attended 
a few classes at Kirkwood Community College. His work history consists mostly of 
manual labor including driving a forklift, laboring at a warehouse, and working for a 
restaurant and hotel in food management. He was terminated in the past due to his 
race.   
He has limited experience with computers. He struggled with getting Facetime to 
work. He has no experience with MS Word or Excel.  
He began working for defendant employer sometime in November 2020 as a 
delivery truck driver. Defendant employer has a contract with Amazon to deliver 
packages.   
The testimony is unrebutted that claimant was considered a full-time employee; 
however, claimant testified that at times he worked less than 40 hours per week due to 
a lack of work. Nelson Nwanganga testified that claimant was not available for 40 hours. 
He would not show up to work and he called into work because of personal medical 
conditions and so claimant was downgraded to part time. Mr. Nwanganga testified that 
claimant reported back problems even before his alleged injury of October 28, 2021, 
and that claimant would only show up to work two days a week even if he was 
scheduled for 40 hours. Mr. Nwanganga testified that claimant would argue about 
routes, wanting to customize routes to include rural routes which would require him to 
deliver fewer packages.   

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 3 
 
Before his injury, claimant testified he had no history of back or neck problems, 
no work restrictions, and no physical limitations.  He did visit the UIHC on April 28, 
2021, for loss of consciousness after being struck in the back of the head as well as the 
face with a brick or rock. (Joint Exhibit 3:2) He was also struck in the left forearm while 
defending himself. Id. A CT of the head, neck and maxillofacial was obtained which was 
negative for acute abnormalities. (JE 1:6) The CT of the cervical spine showed a 
“concern for congenital spinal canal stenosis complicated by mild degenerative 
changes.” (JE 3:4) An x-ray of the forearm had been ordered, but claimant left before 
the x-ray was performed. Id.  
On October 28, 2021, claimant was delivering packages on his assigned route. 
The route took him down a dirt road. The van slipped off the road and the van became 
stuck. Claimant testified that he attempted to unstick the van by putting the van in 
reverse and shifting back and forth. This did not work.  
He called dispatch to report the need for a tow truck driver. Claimant testified that 
the dispatcher told him to exit the van and take photos of the situation to pass on to the 
tow truck driver. In the deposition, he said that he gave her his ID number, told her his 
name, the vehicle number, and where he was stuck. (Defendants’ Exhibit M:83) He 
testified that she responded that she was “going to get up with Jacob and have Jacob 
and them call the tow truck and whatever, and just for me to sit there and wait.” (DE 
M:83) At the deposition, he did not recall what the dispatcher said. “She was being real 
rude and—you know, like talking like she didn’t really care that I was stuck out there. 
And like I told her, “Don’t worry about it. I will try to contact Nelson if you can’t probably 
do your job.” (DE M:83) He testified at the deposition that the call did not take even a 
minute or two which was consistent with the dispatcher’s testimony about the length of 
the call. (DE M:83) He testified, consistent with his hearing testimony, that the 
dispatcher asked him to take photos. Id.  
He got out of the van, but, per his hearing testimony, it was raining hard. At his 
deposition, he said that it was not raining “real bad.” (DE M:82) He slipped in some 
mud, hit the side of the truck, and fell towards the ground. He got up, walked around the 
side of the vehicle, took the photos, and returned to the vehicle. (Transcript p. 17) In the 
deposition, he testified that he got out, assessed the problem, and took a photo. (DE 
M:83) At hearing, he testified he then sent photos to the dispatcher and then called her. 
Id. He told her that he fell and wanted to know when the tow truck was arriving. (Tr., p. 
18) At the deposition, he testified that he fell while taking a photo. (DE M:84)  
In the initial hearing testimony, claimant was asked, “At that time did you send 
any text messages to the dispatch at all?” Claimant replied “Yes, the pictures. And 
Jacob, I guess he was calling me to let me know when the tow truck driver was coming 
and to let him know, like, when they come to get me and stuff.” (Tr., p. 18)  
He then said that after he was unsuccessful in getting the vehicle unstuck, he 
waited for the tow truck to arrive. (Tr., p. 19) He was texting Jacob back and forth at that 
time. Id. Claimant later testified that he did not send photos to Jacob. The timing of the 
text messages appears to corroborate this. Claimant texted someone a photo of the 

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 4 
 
truck’s tire on a muddy shoulder. Jacob sent out a text “James this is Jacob. I’m going 
to set up a tow truck to head your way.”  At 2:39 pm, claimant texted “K tow truck is here 
thanks.” (CL 1:2) Jacob replied, “Awesome. Let me know when they get you out. 
Thanks.” Claimant responded, “This guy just got stuck 2,” to which Jacob replied “Wow 
alright. Keep me updated. Thanks.” (CE 1:3)  
That same text line “Tow truck is here thanks” is directly under a photo of the rear 
tire of the van resting in mud which seems to indicate that the photo was not sent to 
Jacob who received the “K” before “Tow truck is here thanks”. If Jacob had received the 
photo, the “K” would have appeared below the photo rather than “Tow truck is here 
thanks.”  
Claimant was told by Jacob to finish his route, which he did. He then returned to 
the warehouse, cleaned out the vehicle, handled the empty bags, parked the vehicle, 
came back into the building, and returned the keys. (Tr., p. 24) At this time he did not 
mention being covered in mud from his fall nor taking the time to clean himself off.  
The dispatcher, Adena Habhab, testified that she did ask for photos of the 
situation as a tow truck could not be called without them. Per Ms. Habhab, claimant did 
not want to exit the van and loudly protested this.  
Claimant testified that he slid out of the driver’s seat over to the passenger seat 
and then exited the vehicle. (Tr., p. 74) At hearing, he testified that he placed empty tote 
bags under the tires of the truck and rocked it. (Tr., p. 71) He then attempted to take 
photos. According to claimant, he slipped and fell in the mud and injured his neck and 
back. At his deposition, he testified he did not rock the truck nor use bags. (DE M:86)  
He testified that after the fall he called dispatch and spoke with Ms. Habhab 
again.  
Ms. Habhab maintained there was a single telephone call that lasted 
approximately one minute. After claimant raised his voice, Ms. Habhab stopped 
communicating with claimant and texted “Jacob.” Jacob took over the communication 
with claimant. They only communicated by texts which are in evidence. (See Tr., pp. 72-
73; CE 1:3)    
At no time did the text messages mention a fall or an injury, nor were there any 
photos of the muddy bags used as friction under the tires.  
After the tow truck arrived, claimant got into the van to help steer the van out of 
the mud. While the truck was pulling the van out of the mud, the chain connecting the 
tow truck to the van snapped, allegedly causing a whiplash injury. Claimant testified that 
he called the dispatcher once more to indicate that the van was unstuck.  
Ms. Habhab was at the warehouse when claimant returned at the end of his shift. 
She observed him to have muddy boots but could not recall any other mud on his 

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 5 
 
person. Ms. Habhab did not remember the phone call with much detail. She was not 
sure whether she called Jacob or texted him. She remembered being very upset.  
Claimant testified that when he fell, he struck the left shoulder and left side of his 
body but that his body twisted. (Tr., p. 74) His pants, boots, and shirt became muddy, 
and he remained covered in mud for the rest of his shift. (Tr., p. 75) The vehicle was 
also muddy. He testified similarly at the deposition. (DE M:84)  
On October 29, 2021, claimant had a telephone conversation with Nelson. During 
that call Nelson asked claimant to send the text messages that he had exchanged with 
“Jacob,” which claimant did. Nelson maintains that during this call, claimant did not 
share that he was injured. Claimant testified that he did share his fall with Nelson.  
Claimant was suspended on September 3, 2021, for abandoning his route and 
not following dispatcher’s directions. (DE H:56) He was issued a tier 2 defect on 
October 12, 2021, for failing to follow the customer’s directions as to where the package 
was delivered. (DE H:57) He was issued a second suspension on October 29, 2021, 
due to the actions on October 28, 2021, including being disrespectful to the dispatcher. 
(DE H:59) Claimant requested to be returned to work October 22 and then November 1. 
(DE H:60) Claimant was terminated on November 3, 2021, for insubordination, 
abandoned routes, and a poor reliability ratio. (DE H:61) 
There was some conflicting testimony about his post-termination employment. At 
the deposition, claimant testified that he applied for a box truck driver position with 
Amazon directly. (DE E:25) He testified that he passed a pre-employment physical for 
this position. (DE M:79, DE E:25) At hearing, however, he denied this.  
  
On November 7, 2021, claimant presented to the emergency room with neck and 
back muscle spasms ongoing for two days. (JE 1:2) Claimant told the attending, 
Timothy Witalka, M.D., that he believed this was due to the way he had been sitting in 
his work van. Id. The medical records also notes that he was working out more, 
particularly doing overhead exercises. (JE 1:3) Claimant denied this at hearing. Per the 
medical notes, claimant was neurologically intact with full strength and sensation. Id. 
Claimant was given ketorolac and morphine IM and told to follow up with a regular 
physician if symptoms persisted. (JE 1:4) No imaging was taken as Dr. Witalka 
designated the injury as atraumatic. (JE 1:3) Prescriptions for naproxen and Lortab 
were issued and claimant was advised to seek out physical therapy. There was no 
mention of a fall or whiplash.  
On November 13, 2021, claimant returned to the Mercy One ED with complaints 
of neck pain for four weeks and radicular pain into the right upper extremity for two 
weeks. (JE 1:6) In the notes, it was documented that claimant stated the pain was 
initially intermittent but had become more constant. (JE 1:8)  Joshua Eastvold, M.D., 
performed the examination which showed mild tenderness to palpation to the lower right 
cervical spine, full range of motion in the neck, positive Spurling sign, mild weakness in 
the right wrist extension and elbow flexion. (JE 1:9) Dr. Eastvold prescribed claimant 

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 6 
 
gabapentin and cyclobenzaprine. (CE 1:11) There was no mention of a fall or whiplash 
at this visit.  
The two emergency room notes have some errors. They refer to claimant as a 
“42 year old girl” and “she” at times. (See e.g. JE 1:3 and JE 1:8) There are varying 
dates as to the onset of claimant’s pain documented in the November 13, 2021, visit. 
The ECU course and plan section says that claimant had approximately 4 weeks of 
neck pain with 2 weeks of radiation of pain into the right upper extremity. (JE 1:6) The 
triage section indicates that muscle spasms in the neck started 3 weeks ago and then 
the line below says that that onset of symptoms was about 3 days ago. (JE 1:7)  
Claimant felt that his pain and symptoms were being dismissed because of his 
race.  
On December 1, 2021, claimant presented to Mercy One ED and was seen by 
Bradford Wisnousky, D.O. (JE 1:12) Claimant wanted an x-ray and complained of four 
weeks of pain on the right side of the neck, shoulder, anterior right chest, and anterior 
left chest. (JE 1:13) He did not report any trauma or injury. Id. Claimant became angry 
and after an exchange, Dr. Wisnousky left the examination room and claimant left the 
hospital without examination or treatment. (JE 1:14)  
On December 11, 2021, claimant was seen at the UIHC by Dana King, M.D. (JE 
3:7) He presented with complaints of right shoulder pain of three weeks. (JE 3:7) Dr. 
King documented the onset as “insidious.” Id. It was noted that claimant worked 
delivering packages for Amazon and had frequent overhead lifting activities and that he 
lifts weights. (JE 3:7) Claimant denied working out at hearing (Tr., p. 86), but in his 
deposition said that he lifted weights regularly. (DE M:91-92) Dr. King recommended 
physical therapy with a follow up with sports medicine. (JE 3:0) There was no mention 
of a fall or whiplash at this visit.  
Claimant also sought out chiropractic care with Garry Younts, D.C., on December 
11, 2021. (JE 2:2) The chief complaint was noted as pinched nerve/back pain. (JE 2:2) 
The origin of the pain was written 10/01/2021. Id. This was written by claimant. Id.  Dr. 
Younts performed an adjustment to the spine. Id. 
Claimant testified that as he was returning to the car, he began experiencing new 
symptoms of pain radiating into his low back and sharp pains in the neck that came and 
went. When he arrived home, paralysis of the right leg was setting in. 
The morning of December 12, 2021, he messaged Dr. Younts stating “Hello I 
came into your office on 12/11/2021 to get an Adjustment to my back, that was caused 
by heavy lifting while working with Amazon, well as soon as I got home my Right leg 
went completely dead and still is today on 12/12/2021.” (JE 2:5) Dr. Younts invited 
claimant to return for another adjustment that day. (JE 2:6) Claimant arrived at 11:59 
a.m. and received treatment. Id. Following this, at 1:06 p.m., Dr. Younts texted claimant 
that nothing was owed for the visit. Id.  

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 7 
 
After the adjustment on December 12, 2021, claimant presented himself to UIHC 
on the same date where he was seen by Greg Bell, M.D., at around 1:07 p.m. (JE 3:13, 
18) Claimant shared the symptoms of numbness and paralysis along with difficulty 
urinating following the treatment with Dr. Younts. Id. It was noted that claimant worked 
as a forklift driver. (JE 3:14) An MRI of the cervical spine was obtained which showed 
multilevel degenerative changes with C5-C6 and C6-C7 showing an anterior epidural 
and subdural hematoma that was causing severe spinal canal stenosis. (3:16) Dr. Bell 
transferred claimant to orthopaedics for surgical intervention. (JE 1:18, 21)  
Claimant was first seen by a surgical resident who documented claimant’s history 
as an Amazon delivery driver who presented with approximately 1 month of right upper 
extremity pain and paresthesias as well as neck pain. (JE 3:33) He had been to Mercy 
ER at least twice without any treatment or diagnosis. Id. He sought treatment from a 
chiropractor yesterday (12/11/21) and had a full spine adjustment. Id. He had another 
adjustment today which left claimant with lower extremity weakness. (JE 3:33) There 
was no mention of a fall or whiplash injury.  
Cassim Igram, M.D., examined claimant and advised claimant they would need 
to operate emergently for the evacuation of the hematoma as well as an anterior 
cervical diskectomy and fusion at the C5-C6 and C6-C7 levels. (JE 3:35) Dr. Igram’s 
notes do not have any mention of a fall or a whiplash injury. The history is documented 
as “this is a 47-year-old man with about a month history of right arm pain and also some 
history of neck and back pain. He has been to the emergency room a couple of times at 
an outside facility for his complaints.” (JE 3:35) 
Claimant entered rehabilitation on December 14, 2021. (JE 3:39) At this time he 
was unable to move his legs, had weakness in his hands but reported sensation 
throughout. (JE 3:39, 42) He was noted as being a driver for Amazon. (JE 3:43) There 
was no mention of a fall or whiplash injury.  
Claimant remained hospitalized at UIHC until December 22, 2021. (JE 3:28) He 
was discharged to Mercy Inpatient Rehabilitation Service where he needed assistance 
with transfers, mobility and ADLs. (JE 4) In the intake record there was no mention of an 
injury or whiplash. (See JE 4:14-17)  
On January 5, 2022, claimant was seen by Devon Anderson, PA-C, at the 
orthopaedic clinic for follow up. (JE 3:52) Claimant reported that he was concerned 
about a “broken foot” on the right which had been broken before the “accident” and 
surgery. (JE 3:52) There are no records for this, but Dr. Rondinelli’s medical summary 
indicates that x-rays were taken of the foot on December 28, 2021, which showed a 
focal avulsion fracture adjacent to the anterior aspect of the navicular. (CE 4:6) Dr. 
Rondinelli opined that the radiographs showed that the navicular avulsion happened just 
prior to the surgery and that it was healing and did not require weightbearing 
restrictions. (CE 4:6) 
On January 6, 2022, claimant was discharged from inpatient rehab and returned 
home. (JE 4:20) He had in-home care beginning January 7, 2022. (JE 4:23)  

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 8 
 
On February 2, 2022, claimant was seen for follow up by Dr. Igram. (JE 3:56) 
The plan was for claimant to begin external outpatient therapy. Id. He continued with 
physical therapy up to March 7, 2023. (JE 3:60)  
Defendants acknowledge claimant’s treatment was for a spinal cord injury 
caused by spinal adjustments with a chiropractor. (DE K:68)  
Cassim Igram, M.D., a board-certified orthopaedic surgeon, issued a report at the 
request of the defendants on October 5, 2022. (DE B:5) In the report, Dr. Igram relayed 
he treated claimant for a massive, herniated disc with high-grade cord compression 
causing neurological compromise. Dr. Igram did not attribute this injury and the 
subsequent surgery to claimant’s work, as claimant did not mention any work injury to 
Dr. Igram. Id. Dr. Igram further opined claimant’s cervical condition, neurological 
impairment, and surgery were not related to an alleged October 28, 2021, injury. (DE 
B:6) Claimant reported to Dr. Igram that he had a full spine adjustment with a 
chiropractor on December 11, 2021, and subsequently developed acute right lower 
extremity weakness and pain. Id. Claimant was unable to walk or drive due to the right 
lower extremity weakness. Id. 
Dr. Igram attributed the medical conditions for which he treated claimant to the 
two spinal adjustments in December that precipitated worsening of symptoms and 
neurological compromise. Id. 
Robert D. Rondinelli, M.D., performed an IME on August 1, 2023. (CE 4) In the 
past medical history, claimant maintained he never received chiropractic adjustments or 
formal physician evaluation and treatment for neck or back pain prior to December 
2021. (CE 4:2) 
Claimant told Dr. Rondinelli that he exited his truck to take photos of his stuck 
vehicle but fell to the right side striking his head and shoulder on the truck. Id. The tow 
truck arrived and freed him from the mud, and he was able to finish his route and return 
his truck to the base. Id. After returning his key, he reported his fall injury and discomfort 
to the dispatcher. Id. 
Shortly after this alleged fall, claimant began suffering upper back and neck pains 
with radicular symptoms into the bilateral arms. There was no mention of the whiplash 
injury. 
At the examination with Dr. Rondinelli, claimant reported right hip pain which he 
characterized as sharp, radiating from his right hip into his groin region. Muscle relaxers 
helped to alleviate pain while activity, particularly physical therapy activities, provoked 
pain. (CE 4:6) Claimant also reported pain in the right knee which was tender to 
palpation and had a tendency to buckle. Id. Claimant was confined to a manual 
wheelchair which he could pilot himself but needed assistance with ADLs such as 
bathing. Id. Claimant had some urinary incontinence symptoms and occasional bowel 
urgency and an accident. (CE 4:7) He suffered sleep disturbances and depression. Id. 

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 9 
 
Dr. Rondinelli acknowledged claimant’s pre-injury condition included premorbid 
congenital spinal stenosis and mild multilevel degenerative cervical spondylosis but 
opined that the work-related fall potentially caused a disc herniation and worsening 
stenosis. (CE 4:10) Dr. Rondinelli believed that the fall precipitated the onset of trauma-
related pain and radicular complaints and that miscommunication was a problem at 
multiple levels which resulted in lack of timely and thorough medical evaluation by a 
dedicated Occupational Medicine specialist resulting in claimant’s ensuing acute 
medical care. (CE 4:11) 
Dr. Rondinelli does not provide any explanation as to the lack of a work injury 
mentioned in any of the emergency room records nor at the UIHC. Claimant suggests 
that it is due to race conflicts.  
In a letter dated September 13, 2023, Dr. Igram disagreed with the opinions of 
Dr. Rondinelli. (DE B:7) Dr. Igram maintained that the cause of claimant’s spinal issues 
was attributable to the spinal manipulations and that claimant did not relay any fall, 
striking of his head or neck pain following a fall in October nor were there any medical 
records documenting such history. (DE B:7) 
He last saw claimant on February 2, 2022, and agreed that based on Dr. 
Rondinellis’ documented evaluation of the claimant that claimant continued to be 
impaired and in need of restrictions. (DE B:8) 
On December 13, 2023, Dr. Garry Younts wrote to claimant’s counsel relating 
that he provided treatment for claimant on December 11 and 12, 2021, for neck, back 
and right arm radicular pain that claimant attributed to a work injury in late October 
2021. (CE 3:1) The history claimant relayed to Dr. Younts was that claimant’s vehicle 
was stuck in the mud and in the process of trying to get the vehicle unstuck, claimant 
fell and injured himself. Further, as the vehicle was being towed, the tow cable snapped 
and created a whiplash while claimant was in the vehicle. Id.  
Defendants sought an opinion from Joseph Chen, M.D., a rehab medicine 
specialist. (DE E:23) Dr. Chen affirmed the opinion of Dr. Igram that the spinal cord 
injury was the result of the chiropractic treatment on December 11 and December 12, 
2021. (DE E:32) Dr. Chen also opined that neither the fall nor the whiplash injury was 
the type that would result in a disc herniation which would become symptomatic six 
weeks later. (DE E:33)  
Claimant is currently confined to a wheelchair. He cannot reenter the workforce.  
It is undisputed that claimant’s van got stuck in the mud. He called this situation 
into the dispatcher who told him to take photos and assess the situation. Claimant 
interpreted the latter to mean that he should attempt to dislodge the van from the mud.  
Claimant testified that he fell and injured himself and then, while in the van, 
sustained a whiplash injury. The fall and subsequent whiplash injury were not 
mentioned in any of the medical records from November 2021 through March 7, 2023. 

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 10 
 
The first mention of any fall in the medical reports was in the IME report of Dr. 
Rondinelli, and there was no mention of the whiplash injury until the IME of Dr. Chen.  
Ms. Habhab did not remember claimant reporting a fall. She maintained there 
was only one telephone call with claimant that lasted one minute. He upset her and she 
turned the handling of the situation over to Jacob.  
The defendants argue claimant is not credible as a witness. Claimant’s testimony 
was inconsistent. His testimony regarding when the photos were taken, whether they 
were pre fall or post fall, was confusing. His testimony regarding the use of bags to 
create friction on the tires was not seen in the photograph of the rear tire. There was no 
sign of a body imprint on the ground even though there were several footprints in the 
mud. He stated he had mud all over his clothes and the inside of the van but did not 
mention cleaning himself up. Ms. Habhab recalled that claimant had muddy boots but 
did not remember that he had mud on his person.  
On cross-examination, defendants’ attorney pointed out discrepancies in his 
hearing testimony and deposition testimony from whether he fell before or after taking 
the photos to whether he was working out with weights to how the injury actually 
occurred. Based on the foregoing, it is found that claimant’s testimony is given low 
weight due to his credibility issues.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 11 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant maintained that the lack of mention of the fall or whiplash injury was the 
result of dismissive attitudes by the medical professionals. This explanation would be 
plausible if it were one or two medical providers, particularly at the emergency room, but 
even the chiropractor did not record any traumatic injury nor did the medical team at 
UIHC, the rehab specialists, nor the physical therapy providers. Claimant did not bring 
up the whiplash injury either to Dr. Rondinelli. Claimant included a YouTube link to 
explain why a patient may not be providing clear recollections or good history, but this 
video is not in evidence and not supported by any expert witness at hearing and thus 
this video has not been viewed nor are the contents of the video considered in 
rendering this decision.  
The most consistent complaint by claimant was that he was engaged in lifting for 
defendant employer. He told this to Dr. Younts, the chiropractor, and to Dr. King on 
December 11, 2021. However, this is not the issue that was pled nor is there sufficient 
expert testimony to support this as the cause. Dr. Rondinelli opined that the fall “most 
probably involved forced flexion and forced lateral flexion of the cervical spine in a 
congenitally narrowed space which was then further compromised potentially causing a 
disc herniation and worsening stenosis.” (CE 4:10)  
It may be that claimant did fall, but it was not a significant enough incident that it 
required medical attention or even chiropractic adjustment. Claimant himself filled out 
the chiropractor intake form but did not mention the fall nor the whiplash injury but did 
mention the heavy lifting at Amazon. His omission cannot be blamed on poor medical 
treatment or race-based ignorance on behalf of medical staff. While race can be an 
issue surrounding poor medical treatment, the fact is that claimant did not, himself, 
include the fall or whiplash injury as necessitating chiropractic adjustments. That he, 
himself, did not relay that to the chiropractor supports a factual finding that, more likely 
than not, claimant did not sustain an injury on October 28, 2021, consistent with the 
expert opinion reports of Dr. Igram and Dr. Chen.  

GREEN V. VK LOGISTICS, LLC 
Page 12 
 
Based on the foregoing, the remaining issues are moot.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED:  
The claimant shall take nothing.  
The parties shall bear their own costs and share equally the cost of the hearing 
transcript.  
 
Signed and filed this _18th __ day of June, 2024. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jordan Hutchinson (via WCES) 
 
Stephanie Marett (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
