Case Number: 5062082
Case Title:  HILDRETH, THOMAS (DEC) V. DES MOINES PUBLIC SCHOOL
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Hildreth, Thomas-5062082.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

Page | 1  
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT 
IN AND FOR POLK COUNTY 
DES MOINES PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
(Employer) and EMC RISK SERVICES, 
LLC. TPA,  
Petitioners, 
v. 
THOMAS HILDRETH (deceased) 
by JANE HILDRETH (spouse), 
Respondent. 
Case No.: CVCV058103 
ORDER: 
Ruling on Petition 
for Judicial Review 
On October 11, 2019, this matter came before the Court on Petitioners’ Application 
for Judicial Review.  Petitioners appeared by and through attorney, Valerie Landis.  
Attorney Gerald Jackson appeared and argued on behalf of Respondent.  Having considered 
the arguments and authority from the parties, and after studying the underlying record 
herein, the Court enters the following ruling.  
A. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 
On November 1, 2017, the Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner issued an 
arbitration decision in this matter.  Therein, the Deputy Commissioner made certain 
findings of fact.  Unable to improve upon them, this Court will quote them instead: 
On or about August 26, 2011, decedent slipped and fell on a wet floor 
while at work.  He suffered a right rotator cuff tear, a lumbar disk injury, and 
post-concussion syndrome.  (Joint Exhibit 10)  Following this injury, he 
continued to have pain and discomfort in his shoulder and low back.  He also 
had vision complaints, tinnitus, and headaches.  Those post-concussion 
headaches progressed into migraines.  (JE 8:12)  He received physical therapy 
and medication treatment for the headaches ordered by Donna Bahls, M.D.; 
Marshall Greiman, M.D., of the Mercy Ears, Nose and Throat clinic suggested 
that the tinnitus was the result of the head trauma.  (JE 12:3) 
A psychological evaluation was conducted on April 11, 2012.  He scored 
well and showed no evidence of any cognitive dysfunction.  (JE 9:1) 
In July 2012, decedent reported to Dr. Bahls that his headaches had 
abated.  She found him to be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) on 
July 10, 2012.  (JE 8:4) 
Throughout 2012 and 2013, decedent continued to receive treatments 
for various ailments arising out of his August 26, 2011, injury, including 
injections, steroid bursts, physical therapy, and surgery.  (JE 1:6; 6)  He had 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 2  
surgery on March 8, 2013, but continued to report problems, relating that his 
conditions appeared to be worsening. (JE 7:5, 7:3) 
On or about October 11, 2013, he presented to Mountain Vista Medical 
Center with signs of a stroke.  He had slurred speech and right eyelid droop.  
(JE 5:1)  A CT of the brain showed "possible acute right basal ganglia infarct."  
(JE 5:6; 5:8)  There was also some suggestion that there was an old injury, or 
rather, a sign of a previous stroke in the right parietal and left cerebellar 
region.  (JE 5:8) 
Treatment was provided, but ultimately decedent died as a result of 
this stroke on October 16, 2013.  (Ex. A:1) The death certificate identified the 
immediate cause of death as an "acute basilar artery infarction" with the 
"etiology uncertain."  (Ex. A:1) 
There are four opinion letters regarding the question of whether the 
stroke was related to the concussion.  Francis Miller, M.D., is a national and 
international expert in vascular biology.  (JE 2:2)  For the past twenty-five 
years, he has routinely cared for patients in the coronary care unit, general 
medicine wards, outpatient clinics, and cardiac catheterization lab.  (Ex. JE 
2:2)  He opined that decedent did not have the traditional risk factors for 
stroke: 
Mr. Hildreth did not have the traditional risk factors for 
stroke.  For example, review of records show his documented 
blood pressures ranged from 108-132 mmHG systolic and 78-87 
mmHg diastolic.  These are within a normal range.  
Furthermore, he had no history of tobacco use and no 
hypercholesterolemia.  There was no clinical evidence of 
coronary or peripheral vascular disease.  Moreover, review of the 
electrocardiograms at the time of his stroke shows no evidence 
of atrial fibrillation or other conditions associated with 
cardioembolic events.  (JE2-2) 
He went on to state "[a]s a vascular biologist who investigates the 
vascular response to injury, it is my opinion that traumatic brain injury can 
result in functional and structural damage to the vasculature.  This opinion is 
supported by clinical observations that individuals with traumatic brain 
injury have an increased risk of stroke."  (JE 2:3)  In conclusion, "based on the 
clinical presentation and the medical literature," Dr. Miller wrote, "it is my 
opinion that the traumatic brain injury suffered by Mr. Thomas Hildreth on 
August 26, 2011, was a substantial contributing cause of his stroke on October 
11, 2013."  (JE 2:3) 
The claimant also included medical literature in support of the 
causation argument.  One is from the American Academy of Neurology and 
the other is from the International Journal of Research and Public Health.  
(Hereinafter known as "Taiwanese Study[sic])(Ex. 6 and 7)  Neither article is 
authored by any of the experts in the case, but Dr. Miller does cite to these 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 3  
two research papers as a "high quality stud[y] published in peer-reviewed 
journals" that provide "growing evidence that a prior history of traumatic 
brain injury increases the subsequent risk of stroke."  (JE 2:3) 
Michael Jacoby, M.D., is a stroke specialist.  He is the director of the 
Ruan Neurology Clinical Research Center and Mercy Stroke Center.  (Ex. D)  
He is the director of medical education at Mercy Neuroscience Department.  
(Ex. D)  Dr. Jacoby was not able to identify a direct correlation between any 
injury and the stroke.  "No reasonable evidence exists to support a 
relationship between trauma of any sort and stroke years later," he writes in 
his May 1, 2017, letter to defendant.  (JE 1:8)  "There is significant medical 
literature to support the increased risk of stroke through a natural process of 
aging that increases to its greatest degree after one reaches the age of 55, even 
in an otherwise healthy individual."  (JE 1:8)  Dr. Jacoby continues, "In 
addition, Mr. Hildreth was not as healthy as claimed.  He was obese and the 
MRI done at the time of his demise showed an old stroke, which is also a very 
strong risk factor for subsequent stroke."  (JE 1:8) 
During Dr. Jacoby's examination at hearing, he took issue with the 
aforementioned studies.  He felt that a records review was not as scientifically 
rigorous as following concussion patients and then documenting their deaths 
as opposed to sampling records of already deceased patients.  He also felt that 
the sample pool in the studies failed to contain sufficient information to 
adequately support the hypothesis.  In other words, the sample group's 
medical history was not precise enough to rule out other causes for the 
individual's death.  For instance, the severity of the head trauma was not 
noted. 
The Taiwanese Study concluded that concussion was an independent 
risk factor and recommended diagnostic and clinical treatment protocols be 
implemented to treat the concussion as a risk factor.  (Ex. 7)  The US article's 
conclusion was that TB1 was associated with ischemic stroke and more 
studies needed to be concluded.  Prospective cohort and/or population-
based, cross-sectional studies are needed to confirm the association," the 
article stated.  (Ex. 6:6) 
Dr. Jacoby testified that at this time, he remained unconvinced that the 
research is sound enough to draw a causal line between the traumatic brain 
injury and the stroke. 
Dr. Jacoby pointed to other factors as being contributors to decedent's 
stroke.  Age is a primary risk factor, as is smoking, high cholesterol, 
hypertension, diabetes, prior stroke.  Once individuals reach the age of 55, 
there is a doubling in the risk of stroke because of age, according to Dr. 
Jacoby. 
Decedent was 66 years of age at the time of his stroke.  There was 
evidence of a prior stroke.  His medical records do not contain precise 
tracking of decedent's high blood pressure, cholesterol, or diabetes risk.  
Decedent's weight was 269 pounds in November 2011 and around 250 pounds 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 4  
in September 2013.  (JE 8:20; JE6:5)  His blood pressure was elevated, per Dr. 
Jacoby's review of the records, but not so high decedent needed a prescription 
to manage the blood pressure.  Dr. Jacoby did not recall or remember that 
the decedent was a non smoker or non drinker. 
Jane Hildreth testified that her husband was in generally good health, 
but she acknowledged she did not attend his physicals, nor review the medical 
records. 
In a follow-up letter from Dr. Miller, he agreed with some of the points 
made by Dr. Jacoby in that decedent was at risk for stroke because of his age 
and that individuals with prior strokes have an increased risk of a subsequent 
stroke.  (JE2:1)  However, Dr. Miller maintained the causal connection 
between the stroke and the traumatic brain injury. 
Dr. Miller felt that the prior stroke could have happened after the head 
trauma given the normal results of the CT taken in 2011 shortly after the 
concussion occurred.  Further, Dr. Miller was frustrated that Dr. Jacoby would 
not acknowledge the literature that suggests a connection between traumatic 
brain injury and subsequent stroke.  He mentions this twice in his five 
paragraph letter.  (JE 2:1) 
The other two experts providing opinions were Marc Hines, M.D., a 
neurologist in Waterloo, Iowa, who provided more of a medical literature 
review, and Joe Hawk, M.D., at the Iowa Clinic.  (JE 3 and 4) 
Dr. Hines, after a summary of various medical articles, opined that 
decedent was "at risk of stroke as a result of his mild traumatic brain injury" 
and that according to the studies, a mild traumatic brain injury carries the 
same increased risk for stroke as does hypertension.  "It is, therefore, my 
opinion, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that [the mild traumatic 
brain injury] is a significant risk factor for the subsequent stroke in Mr. 
Hildreth."  (JE 3:4) 
Dr. Hawk agreed that "research into TBI and its long-term medical 
complications is in its infancy."  (JE 4:2)  However, "although Mr. Hildreth would 
be classified as obese, he did not have the other common risk factors for stroke, 
such as hypertension, atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia."  (JE 
4:3)  Dr. Hawk also agreed that decedent's TB1/concussion "likely would have 
played a significant part in contributing to his stroke." (JE 4:3) 
B. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Final decisions rendered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commission are 
reviewed under Iowa Code Chapter 17A, the Iowa Administrative Procedures Act.1 “Under 
the Act, [a court] may only interfere with the commissioner’s decision if it is erroneous 
                                                 
1 Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 768 (Iowa 2016), reh’g denied (May 27, 2016); see 
Iowa Code § 86.26 (2019). 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 5  
under one of the grounds enumerated in the statute, and a party’s substantial rights have 
been prejudiced.”2  The standard of review depends on the type of error alleged by the 
Petitioner.3 
When, as here, the alleged error is one of fact, the standard of review is whether the 
findings are supported by substantial evidence.4  “[A] reviewing court can only disturb 
those factual findings if they are ‘not supported by substantial evidence in the record before 
the court when that record is reviewed as a whole.’”5  Additionally, in workers’ 
compensation cases, factual questions are “delegated by the legislature to the 
[C]ommissioner.”6  Consequently, the Court does not apply a “scrutinizing analysis” to 
factual findings of the Commissioner, but only reverses the Commissioner’s findings if they 
are not supported by substantial evidence.7 
“Evidence is substantial if a reasonable person would find the evidence adequate to 
reach the same conclusion.”8  The Court is “not to determine whether the evidence supports 
a different finding; rather, our task is to determine whether substantial evidence, viewing 
the record as a whole, supports the findings actually made.”9 
C. DISCUSSION 
The issue in this Petition for Judicial Review is not whether the commission correctly 
decided the etiology of Mr. Hildreth’s stroke.  Rather, the issue is whether there is sufficient 
evidence in the record to support the commission’s conclusion that the stroke that claimed 
Mr. Hildreth’s life in October 2013 and was causally related to the concussion he sustained 
                                                 
2 Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006). 
3 Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 196 (Iowa 2010). 
4 Harris, 778 N.W.2d at 196; Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 557 (Iowa 2010). 
5 Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)). 
6 Larson Mfg. Co., v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 850 (Iowa 2009). 
7 Mercy Med. Ctr. v. Healy, 801 N.W.2d 865, 870 (Iowa Ct. App. 2011) (citing Midwest Ambulance Serv. v. Ruud, 
754 N.W.2d 860, 864, 866 (Iowa 2008)).  
8 Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002) (citing Ehteshamfar v. UTA Engineered 
Sys. Div., 555 N.W.2d 450, 452 (Iowa 1996)). 
9 Cedar Rapids Community School District v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (internal citations and 
quotations omitted). 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 6  
in August 2011.  Because the issue is one of medical causation, the sufficient evidence 
standard turns on the weight, quality, and credibility of expert testimony. 
Here, the commission examined the testimony of two experts,10 Dr. Miller and Dr. 
Jacoby, both of whom are highly respected, well-credentialed medical professionals.   
Francis Miller, M.D., is a national and international expert in vascular biology.  For 
the past twenty-five (25) years, Dr. Miller has cared for patients in coronary care units, 
general medicine wards, outpatient clinics, and cardiac catheterization labs.  (Ex. JE 2:2)  
Unlike Dr. Jacoby, and at the risk of oversimplifying his expertise, Dr. Miller is a 
cardiologist. 
The foundation of Dr. Miller’s testimony appears to be two journal articles:  One is 
from the American Academy of Neurology, and the other is from the International Journal 
of Research and Public Health.  Both articles suggest a connection between traumatic brain 
injury and subsequent strokes.  Building on that foundation, Dr. Miller searched for other 
factors that would have made Mr. Hildreth a higher stroke risk.  Having failed to discover 
any documented high blood pressure, history of tobacco use, high cholesterol, atrial 
fibrillation, or other conditions associated with cardioembolic events, Dr. Miller opined that 
the stroke Mr. Hildreth suffered and died from in 2013 was causally related to the 
concussion he sustained in August 2011. 
Michael Jacoby, M.D., is the director of the Ruan Neurology Clinical Research Center 
and Mercy Stroke Center.  He is also the director of medical education at Mercy 
Neuroscience Department.  (Ex. D)  At the risk of oversimplifying his expertise, he is a 
stroke specialist.   
Dr. Jacoby opined that Mr. Hildreth’s concussion and his subsequent stroke in 
October 2013 were not causally related.  (Jt. Ex. 1 p. 7.)  In support of that position, Dr. 
Jacoby posited a number of undisputed explanations.  First, Dr. Jacoby explained that Mr. 
                                                 
10 While four experts provided opinions, the deputy commissioner concluded those of Dr. Jacoby and 
Dr. Miller carried greater weight.  As it related to the other two experts, the deputy commissioner 
concluded, “Dr. Hawk and Dr. Hines did not display the medical knowledge and experience of Dr. 
Jacoby and Dr. Miller.” 
 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 7  
Hildreth’s death was due primarily to occlusion or clots blocking the basilar artery.  He 
explained that with age, more clots form that may occlude a blood vessel, including a 
critical blood vessel, such as the basilar artery. (Jt. Ex. 1 p. 7.)  Second, the records at the 
time of Mr. Hildreth’s stroke in October of 2013 included a CT and an MRI of the brain that 
showed evidence of a previous stroke, suggesting premorbid risk or another risk factor for 
stroke.  (Jt. Ex. 1 p. 8.).  Third, Mr. Hildreth was medically classified as obese; yet another 
factor which increased his risk of stroke.  (Jt. Ex. 1 p. 8.)  Critically, at no point did Dr. Miller 
challenge Dr. Jacoby’s analysis concerning the primary risk factors for a stroke (age, prior 
history of stroke, and obesity).  Instead, Dr. Miller, challenged Dr. Jacoby’s ultimate 
conclusion of no causation.  
 
In rejecting the theory that Mr. Hildreth’s death was causally connected to his fall 
in August 2011, Dr. Jacoby made several observations.  First, Mr. Hildreth lost consciousness 
briefly, suggesting only a mild concussion.  Furthermore, a CT of Mr. Hildreth’s brain at 
that time was negative, which is indicative of a lack of severity of any concussion.  (Jt. Ex. 1 
p. 2.)  Finally, whatever headaches Mr. Hildreth complained of following his August 2011 
concussion abated approximately one year before the October 2013 stroke.   
Dr. Jacoby expressed reservations concerning the two studies Dr. Miller relied upon 
for two reasons.  First, the International Journal of Research and Public Health article was 
“based on research that used objectionable methodology not appropriate for this type of 
scientific study, including retrospective analysis, selection bias, and a lack of definition of 
concussion or traumatic brain injury and of stroke as referred to in these studies.”  (Tr. pp. 
19-20 and 21-28.).  This Court was unable to find anything in Dr. Miller’s testimony that 
rebutted Dr. Jacoby’s criticism regarding methodology.  Second, and as Petitioners 
correctly note, the authors of the American Academy of Neurology article injected 
uncertainty in their own conclusions by acknowledging the need for additional studies 
concerning the connection between traumatic brain injuries and strokes.  (Tr. pp. 29 and 
62-63.)  It is precisely because of this uncertainly that the opinions expressed in the medical 
literature presented to the commission have not been accepted into the main body of 
medical knowledge.  Whether the commission found the studies compelling because they 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

Page | 8  
were “nationwide, population-based” or “involved over a million subjects” is immaterial.  
What is material is whether the scientific and medical communities have accepted the 
studies as scientifically or medically valid.  At best, the studies Dr. Miller relied upon (and 
the commission gave credence to) have simply opened a discussion in the medical 
community concerning the causality between traumatic brain injuries and subsequent 
strokes.  Opening a discussion, however, is not the same as drawing conclusions to 
reasonable degree of scientific certainty.  
Therefore, while the commission may accept or reject any expert opinion in whole 
or in part, the commission’s decision here is based on evidence that, at this stage, is merely 
conjectural.  Without that evidence, there is insufficient evidence in the record to support 
the commission’s conclusion that the stroke that claimed Mr. Hildreth’s life in October 
2013, was causally related to the concussion he sustained in August 2011. 
D. CONCLUSION 
For all of the foregoing reasons, Petitioner’s Application for Judicial Review should 
be and is hereby GRANTED.  
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, Petitioner’s Application for Judicial Review should 
be and is hereby GRANTED. 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED decision of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner should be and is hereby REVERSED.  
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that each party shall pay their own costs in prosecuting 
or defending this action. 
So Ordered. 
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV058103
DES MOINES PUBLIC SCHOOLS ET AL VS JANE HILDRETH
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-04-21 14:34:45     page 9 of 9
E-FILED  2020 APR 21 2:34 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
