Case Number: 22011420.01
Case Title:  FALLON, FELICIA V. WT SIOUX LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Fallon Felicia-22011420.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
FELICIA FALLON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
    File No. 22011420.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                   ARBITRATION DECISION 
WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN 
  : 
WEST WENDY’S, 
  : 
    
 
 
  :                   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                           
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WCF NATIONAL INSURANCE, 
  : 
     Head Note Nos.: 1802; 1803; 2500; 
 
 
  : 
 
                      2501; 4000 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Felicia Fallon, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against WT Sioux, LLC, d/b/a Mountain West Wendy’s, 
employer, and WCF National Insurance, insurance carrier. This case was heard on April 
30, 2024, and considered fully submitted on June 10, 2024, upon the simultaneous filing 
of briefs.   
 
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-2, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-9, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-K, along with the testimony of claimant, James Coombes, Kathy 
Taggart, and Bill Abu-Zahra.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether the claimant is entitled to healing period benefits;  
 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits; and if so,  
 
3. The commencement date of such benefits;  
 
4. The extent of permanent partial disability benefits;  
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care; 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-16  13:10:05     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 2 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses in Exhibit 
9; 
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME pursuant to Iowa 
Code 85.39; 
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to a penalty benefit for unpaid healing period 
benefits; and 
 
9. The assessment of costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The parties stipulate the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in 
the course of her employment on August 20, 2022.  
 
They agree that if an injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the 
disability is a scheduled member disability to the left lower extremity.  
 
At the time of the alleged injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $1,153.85 per 
week. At all relevant times, claimant was single and entitled to one exemption. Based 
on the foregoing, the weekly benefit rate is $706.86.  
 
All affirmative defenses have been waived. No prior benefit payments have been 
made.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant, Felicia Fallon, was a 57-year-old person at the time of hearing. In 
1990, claimant began working in guest relations at a casino. She worked her way up to 
a floor manager. In 1995, she moved to Texas and did a variety of jobs from event 
coordinator for the Chamber of Commerce in El Paso to general manager of Denny’s, a 
restaurant. She also owned her own business making signs, decals for cars, and similar 
graphic-related items. Claimant also ran her own catering business, sold insurance, and 
worked at a customer call center. Her work history showed she often started out in a 
lower level position and was consistently promoted to supervisory or manager positions.  
 
Claimant’s educational history includes graduation from high school.  
 
Claimant moved to Iowa in 2018 and began work in the insurance industry. In 
2021, she worked as a general manager for Burger King and eventually became district 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 3 
 
manager. (Defendants’ Exhibit E:33) She left the Burger King franchise in 2022 and 
began her employment with defendant employer. She served as a store manager at an 
Ames location until February 2023.  
 
Her past medical history is significant for cervical cancer in 2017 which has been 
successfully treated and is currently in remission, and a significant ankle injury suffered 
in January 2022, for which she underwent surgery on January 21, 2022.  
 
On March 29, 2019, claimant presented to St. Anthony Regional Hospital ED with 
complaints of chronic bilateral leg swelling and pain in the left leg. (Joint Exhibit 2:90) 
There was no evidence of injury. (JE 2:91)  On April 1, 2019, claimant was seen at the 
McFarland Clinic Emergency Room for bilateral leg pain and significant fatigue. (JE 
1:108)  She was taking Synthroid for her hypothyroidism. Id. Her TSH was highly 
elevated, and as a result she was given an increased dosage of her Synthroid 
prescription. (JE 1:109) 
 
On January 12, 2022, claimant fell down stairs resulting in a left ankle injury. 
Claimant began seeing John Whitt, D.P.M., for care relating to the ankle.  She 
underwent surgery on the left ankle on January 21, 2022, due to her inability to be 
nonweightbearing along with her morbid obesity. (JE 2:87, 78)   
 
On January 31, 2022, claimant reported to Dr. Whitt that she had fallen getting 
out of bed. (JE 2:83)  She went to Allen ED to have them readjust her splint and was 
concerned that the staff did not wrap her splint correctly. (JE 2:83)  Dr. Whitt discussed 
how important it was for claimant to remain nonweightbearing, and because claimant 
was not able to do so in her current situation, he recommended a short leg cast. (JE 
2:84)  
 
On February 25, 2022, the claimant presented to Dr. Whitt for follow up. (JE 
2:87)  She reported increased pain outside of her incision line and also some increased 
redness. (JE 2:87)  She remained in the Cam boot but had not been able to maintain 
staying nonweightbearing. (JE 2:87) Claimant was concerned about a possible 
infection. (JE 2:87) On examination, Dr. Whitt found the incision site had overlying 
eschar with an underlying partial thickness wound and the lateral incision site 
measuring 1.2 x 0.2 x 0.1 cm. (JE 2:87-88) Dr. Whitt debrided the wound and diagnosed 
her as suffering a nonpressure chronic ulcer of left ankle limited to the breakdown of the 
skin. (JE 2:88) He prescribed doxycycline, recommended the use of collagen and 
encouraged her to be as nonweightbearing as possible. (JE 2:88)  
 
On March 11, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt for follow up. (JE 2:73) 
Claimant had not been wearing her boot at home, was walking barefoot, and had no 
pain. (JE 2:73) Dr. Whitt felt that the ankle had healed, noted no redness or drainage, 
and referred claimant to physical therapy. (JE 2:72) 
 
On March 18, 2022, claimant was seen by Dr. Whitt. (JE 2:71) She felt she was 
ready to return to work although did report pain on the outside of her left thigh. Claimant 
was dispensed a Royce ankle brace at her last visit, which she had not really been 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 4 
 
wearing it, but instead had been ambulating barefoot. (JE 2:71) Dr. Whitt noted the 
biggest complaint was pain to the outside of the lateral left thigh. She felt she pinched a 
nerve or pulled a muscle.  (JE 2:71) 
 
On examination, Dr. Whitt found improved edema throughout the ankle. (JE 2:71) 
He found the lateral ankle incision appeared epithelized, although fragile, but the dermis 
did appear intact. Dr. Whitt recommended a course of physical therapy and 
weightbearing as tolerated. (JE 2:71) At hearing, claimant testified that she felt her 
ankle was fine at this point and returned to work. (Hearing Transcript, p. 18) Defendants 
assert that the testimony that her ankle was fine was self-serving and not credible. 
However, the medical records indicate she returned to work on March 28, 2022, and did 
not seek out additional treatment until August 20, 2022. The contemporaneous 
documentation and behaviors support claimant’s testimony.  
 
On August 20, 2022, claimant slipped on a French toast stick while moving boxes 
in a cooler and dropped a box on her ankle1. She believed that she had injured her back 
and sent a message to her supervisor and district manager, Bill Abu-Zahra. He 
confirmed this in his testimony. (Tr., p. 104)  Later she noticed that her ankle was 
hurting which she also reported to Mr. Abu-Zahra. Mr. Abu-Zahra replied that claimant 
should “keep him posted.” (Tr., p. 13)  Mr. Abu-Zahra testified that he asked if she 
needed to be treated and told her to go to a clinic to be seen. (Tr., p. 104)  He said that 
they had a list of clinics. She said she would go to a clinic at the end of the day. She 
worked her entire shift. Once she was done with work, she went to the emergency 
room.   
 
James Coombs, operations manager for defendant employer, testified that he 
became aware of the incident a couple days following the occurrence. (Tr., p. 64) He 
testified he was sent a photo of a shinned ankle. (Tr., p. 64)  He also testified that they 
asked for a workers’ comp report to be filled out. (Tr., p. 64) He testified that Mr. Abu-
Zahra, the district manager, asked claimant to fill the form out several times but that she 
did not. (Tr., p. 65)  
 
Kathy Taggart also testified she was aware of the incident on or about the 22nd 
of August. (Tr., p. 85) Ms. Taggart was told claimant had tweaked her back and was 
going to go to the chiropractor. (Tr., p. 86)  
 
Mr. Coombs could not give a specific date, but he testified that he went to the 
location where claimant worked and asked about the form. (Tr., p. 66) He and claimant 
discussed medical bills and treatment. According to Mr. Coombs, claimant wanted to 
see her own doctor. (Tr., pp. 66-67) For some reason, he wasn’t sure why, claimant did 
not want to fill out the form. (Tr., p. 68)  
                                                 
1 At her deposition she stated a slightly more elaborate version of this. She said when was able to sit down she felt 
something trickling down her foot. She went to the bathroom and discovered a gash in the ankle where she had 
previously had surgery.  

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 5 
 
 
On August 20, 2022, claimant was seen in the emergency department by Lee 
Carlson, ARNP. (JE 1:91) She reported she had slipped in a cooler at work while 
attempting to pick boxes up that had fallen down. (JE 1:91) It was noted that she had 
some wound dehiscence of the surgical site of the left ankle. (JE 1:91)  Mr. Carlson 
cleansed the wound and used zip line to close the area. He prescribed Augmentin. He 
recommended follow up with her primary care provider in one week. (JE 1:93) Claimant 
testified that she gave a copy of this doctor’s note to Mr. Abu-Zahra. (Tr., p. 15) He 
confirmed this, and told her to fill out an incident report of the injury. (Tr., p. 105)  
 
About three days later, Mr. Abu-Zahra showed her where the incident forms 
were. (Tr., p. 105) She refused to fill one out, wanting to go see her own doctor. (Tr., p. 
105)  
 
On September 11, 2022, claimant presented to the emergency department and 
was seen by Lee Carlson, ARNP. (JE 1:86) Claimant’s chief complaint was left lower 
leg surgical dehiscence of a wound. (JE 1:86) He noted he saw claimant a month 
previous. (JE 1:86) She said she bumped into a cardboard box that fell onto her leg. (JE 
1:86) She continued to work but the wound appeared to have opened up and there was 
foul-smelling drainage coming from it.  (JE 1:86)  Mr. Carlson touched base with Dr. 
Cain in podiatry and confirmed there was no exposed hardware. Wound cultures were 
ordered and claimant was prescribed doxycycline in case she had developed MRSA. 
(JE 1:89)  
 
On September 14, 2022, claimant presented to Dr. Whitt for a checkup of her 
lateral left ankle. (JE 2:67) Claimant related that a month prior she was working in the 
cooler and dropped a box on her ankle which caused a wound. (JE 2:67) Claimant had 
been applying TAO and taking tramadol and doxycycline prescribed by the ER. (JE 
2:67)  Claimant reported a burning sensation across the foot and extending to the shin 
and toes. (JE 2:68) X-rays showed that the left ankle was stable with a soft tissue defect 
noted to the central distal fibula. (JE 2:70) Dr. Whitt advised claimant to use 
compression and elevate her limb regularly to keep the swelling under control. (JE 2:69) 
A handicapped placard prescription was provided as well as a note for work informing 
them of claimant’s need to park in the handicapped spot. (JE 2:69)  
 
On September 19, 2022, the claimant was seen by David Cain, D.P.M. (JE 1:75)  
Dr. Cain documented that claimant was a 56 year old presenting to the clinic for a 
nonhealing ulcer of left lower extremity. (JE 1:75) Claimant had open reduction internal 
fixation with Dr. Whitt, after which claimant’s surgical site had healed. (JE 1:75) 
However, due to a recent incident at work wherein claimant dropped a box on her leg an 
ulceration formed and progressed. (JE 1:75) Dr. Cain documented a wound that was 
2.9 cm x 1.3 cm with a depth of 1.5 cm. (JE 1:76) Claimant reported significant pain 
when her left leg near the wound was manipulated. (JE 1:75) Dr. Cain completed 
debridement and to treat her pain discussed the possibility of increasing her gabapentin 
dose. (JE 1:77)  
 
On September 21, 2022, claimant called urgent care to report increased pain 
following the appointment with Dr. Cain. (JE 1:74)  

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 6 
 
 
On September 27, 2022, claimant was seen by Mary Papin, ARNP, in the wound 
clinic for evaluation and treatment of her nonhealing ulcer on the left lower extremity 
status post left ankle ORIF. (JE 1:60) Ms. Papin documented that claimant reported the 
surgical site had healed, but after she dropped a box on her leg, claimant sustained a 
traumatic wound. (JE 1:60)  An arterial duplex ultrasound was ordered to rule out 
arterial insufficiency. (JE 1:60) On examination, Ms. Papin found the wound 3.3 cm in 
length, by a width of 1.8 cm, by a depth of 0.5 cm. (JE 1:62)  
 
On October 4, 2022, claimant presented for follow up to Dr. Cain with reports of 
ongoing pain that was not controlled by the prescribed gabapentin. (JE 1:51) The pain 
was the result of an ulceration suffered during the August 2022 work injury. (JE 1:51) 
On examination. Dr. Cain found the wound 3.8 x 1.5 cm with a depth of 1 cm.  
Nonviable and necrotic tissue was removed including subcutaneous tissue. (JE 1:52) 
Dr. Cain noted visible hardware in the wound bed and recommended the hardware be 
removed. Claimant was given a work restriction of working from a seated position as 
much as possible until following surgery. (JE 1:59)  
 
Claimant testified that she made both Mr. Abu-Zahra and Mr. Coombs aware of 
the work restrictions. (Tr., pp. 24-25) She was told that the accommodations would be 
made. (Tr., p. 25) Claimant asserts in her brief that it is undisputed she was off work 
from October 4, 2022, to December 20, 2022. In her deposition, she testified that she 
was off work from October 26, 2022, through December 26 or 27 of 2022. (DE J, depo 
p. 84) She had a return to work slip for December 20, 2022. (JE 2:44) Her surgery took 
place on October 27, 2022. Thus, it is found that the claimant was off work from the 
date of her surgery on October 27, 2022, until December 20, 2022.  
 
As the month progressed, claimant’s wound did not heal. Ultimately surgery was 
scheduled to close the wound. (JE 1:38)  
 
Claimant testified that she discussed the surgery with the defendant employer 
and spoke to Mr. Abu-Zahra about payment of her medical expenses. (Tr., p. 28) 
Claimant testified that Mr. Abu-Zahra instructed her to use her health insurance. (Tr., p.  
28) Mr. Abu-Zahra testified that he asked claimant many times to fill out the incident 
report but she refused and that she wanted to seek treatment from her own doctor. (Tr., 
pp. 110-111) Claimant would send him photos of the wound in her ankle and request 
time off. (Tr., p. 111) Claimant testified during her deposition that Mr. Abu-Zahra did not 
give her a form. (DE J, Depo p. 71)  
 
In regards to the incident form, claimant was the general manager. She was 
responsible for reporting customer injuries and other employee injuries. She should 
have known the procedure for reporting injuries in written form. The district manager 
and operations manager should not have needed to inform her of this task. Claimant 
served in supervisory positions at several different locations and to profess to be 
ignorant of reporting policies, particularly in written form, rings hollow.  
 
 Kathy Taggart, the head of HR, reached out to claimant to discuss the claim. Ms. 
Taggart felt that the injury was not work related as claimant initially stated she had a 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 7 
 
back injury that then evolved into an ankle injury. Ms. Taggart asserted that they were 
not responsible for care that claimant obtained on her own, and then informed claimant 
that a workers’ compensation representative would reach out to her. Per Ms. Taggart’s 
testimony, the workers’ compensation form was sent to claimant on October 10. (Tr., p. 
86)  
 
On October 17, 2022, the claims administrator wrote to the claimant asking for 
additional information to process for a Workers’ Compensation claim. (DE F:37) In a 
letter with a headnote date of October 17, 2022, claimant explained the course of 
treatment.  
On August 20th, 2022 I slipped in the cooler and dropped a box on my 
foot.  At first thought I only possibly pulled a muscle or strained my back.  I 
immediately got a hold of my boss and informed him of what had 
happened.  Awhile later when I was able to sit down for a bit I felt 
something trickling down my foot.  I went into the bathroom and 
discovered that I had a gash in my ankle where I previously had surgery 
for a broken foot. I once again told my boss that.  I worked my entire shift 
and once done I went to the ER.  At the ER they asked how this had 
happened and I told them.  I gave them my insurance card and they took 
that and also said they were going to bill my job as well, being that it 
happened at work.  I had to have my ankle zip tied shut.  Over the course 
of next several weeks I continued having to go to the Drs because the 
wound in my ankle wasn’t healing.  I had started seeing a wound 
specialist.  Being I haven’t been able to stay off it as the Dr recommended 
due to the type of work I do, it has gotten worse.  I’m now needing to have 
surgery on it.  Throughout this whole process I have kept my boss 
informed and given him all Drs notes.  3 days ago I was informed by HR 
that they will start a claim for me but if I follow through on the 27th with the 
surgery it will be at my own expense and any wages loss due to this will 
not be paid.  There will first need to be an investigation and I will need to 
see a workman comp Dr and he will determine if I need surgery and will 
make the decision of when and where.  I informed HR that I have to have 
the surgery that it is getting worse by the day and I don’t want to risk an 
infection getting down into my bone.  I feel I have done everything to keep 
my boss informed and that a claim was made the night at the hospital 
when I had to sign papers for them to bill both my job and personal 
insurance.  I have been asked to write a statement saying that I am not 
going forward with a WC claim and that I will be taking care of my surgery 
on my own.  If my foot wasn’t as bad and as painful as it is and I had time 
to wait I would be filing a claim especially after thinking things were taken 
care of already.  I am not in agreement with accommodations for me trying 
to be met after my surgery so I can try to return to work shortly afterwards. 
I will need a knee scooter and will be required not to walk with that foot.  I 
will not be able to wear a boot to work either.  I want to be able to work but 
am being told I can’t.  I am not in agreement with any of this. 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 8 
 
(DE H:41-42) (Errors in original) 
 
Ms. Taggart did not recall receiving this letter. (Tr., p. 89)  
 
Claimant did refuse to submit her bills to workers’ compensation. She refused to 
wait for the care authorized by defendants because she had a doctor and her surgery 
was lined up. (DE J, Depo p. 80)  
 
On October 18, 2022, Kathy Taggart wrote, “you didn’t give me what I asked for, 
so now there WILL be an investigation. You will be hearing from Laura.” (CE 3:1) On 
October 19, 2022, Ms. Taggart requested claimant to sign a document indicating that 
she was injured at work on August 20, 2022, and chose to seek medical treatment on 
her own and did not go to a Workers’ Compensation preferred provider. The statement 
also went on to say “I do not want to submit a WC claim for this injury. I will be using my 
own insurance for this injury. I understand that there will be no WC reimbursement to 
me for medical treatment or lost income at work.” (CE 3:3)  
 
Ms. Taggart testified at hearing that claimant would not fill out the form and that 
she wanted to use her own insurance. (Tr., p. 81)  Claimant refused to sign the 
statement as well and the defendant employer just let it go. (Tr., p. 82)  
 
On October 27, 2022, claimant underwent ankle arthroscopy, hardware removal 
and decompression of the nerve and secondary closure of wound with graft application 
performed by Dr. Cain. (JE 1:14)  
 
On October 31, 2022, claimant presented for follow up after the October 27, 
2022, surgery. (JE 1:2) She still had pain along the leg that was not well controlled. Id. 
Her muscle strength was 4/5 and she had significant pain to manipulation in the area of 
the wound on the left lower leg. (JE 1:3)  
 
On November 8, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt. (JE 2:63) Claimant had 
significant leaking from the wound vac which had not been working for a while. (JE 
2:63)  On examination, Dr. Whitt found a full-thickness ulceration present of the left 
lateral ankle measuring about 2 cm circumferentially with sutures in place. (JE 2:65)  Dr. 
Whitt recommended focusing on limiting activity levels along with elevation of the lower 
extremities to limit the amount of swelling as this would directly impact the stress placed 
on the wound and diminish the healing potential. (JE 2:65)   
 
On November 11, 2022, and November 15, 2022, claimant presented to Dr. Whitt 
for follow up of the wound. (JE 2:60, 57)   
 
On November 17, 2022, the claims administrator wrote to the claimant stating, 
“Per our conversation on 10/14/22, it was discussed that you had not pursued this 
through workers’ compensation, but were instead treating with your own personal 
doctor(s) and using your personal health insurance.” (DE F:39) Claimant was advised 
that medical care that was unauthorized would not be compensated through Workers’ 
Compensation. (DE F:39) 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 9 
 
 
On November 18, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt. (JE 2:54) Claimant 
reported the ankle was feeling better and she was taking her medicine as prescribed. 
(JE 2:55) Dr. Whitt debrided the wound and encouraged the claimant to elevate the 
lower extremities to limit the swelling. (JE 2:56)   
 
On November 22, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt for wound care. (JE 2:51)  
At this visit, he noted that claimant would transition to applying Santyl daily to her wound 
and cleanse the wound daily with Dakin’s. (JE 2:53) 
 
On November 29, 2022, claimant returned for wound care. (JE 2:48) Claimant 
felt her ankle condition was worsening and that at times the pain was unbearable. (JE 
2:49) She had been applying Santyl and cleansing the wound daily as instructed. (JE 
2:48) Dr. Whitt was going to request approval for a SNAP vac to assist in further 
granulation of the tissue. (JE 2:50)  
 
On December 6, 2022, Dr. Whitt saw claimant again and treated the wound. (JE 
2:45) SNAP vac approval was given, but due to the improvement in claimant’s 
condition, he opted to hold off. (JE 2:47)  
 
On December 20, 2022, Dr. Whitt determined that the compression therapy was 
helping the wound heal. (JE 2:44) It was noted claimant was very eager to return to 
work. (JE 2:44) Dr. Whitt advised her to continue with the double layer Tubigrip around 
her ankle with the added ACE wrap over the top along with daily Santyl and cleansing.  
(JE 2:44) He returned her to work. (JE 2:44)  
 
On December 21, 2022, Kathy Taggart wrote a memo with the subject “Felicia 
Fallon return to work plan.” The memo was signed by the claimant. It states as follows: 
    I am in receipt of your doctor’s “Return to Work” notice. We are 
pleased that you have recovered fully and can return to work. After such 
an invasive surgery and extensive time off, it is unknown what your ankle 
will be able to tolerate in the workplace. As such, we are moving you to an 
hourly rate of pay until we know you can confidently work the 50 hours per 
week, on your feet, as required for all GM’s.  Your hourly rate will be 
$20.98. Your first day back on the schedule will be 12/26/22. 
    Please remember you are required to wear company approved slip 
resistant shoes with no medical devices. Once you demonstrate the ability 
to consistently complete solid 50-hour work weeks (at least 30 days), we 
will move you back to a salary. Please sign and date this “return to work 
plan”, confirming that you understand it, and return it to Bill. Welcome 
back! 
(DE J:63)  
 
On January 3, 2023, claimant was issued a warning because the dining room in 
the restaurant was closed both Monday and Tuesday without prior approval. (DE J:69) 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 10 
 
She also received another warning for working too many hours in a row. (DE J:67)  
Claimant testified that she had not received prior warnings. It was unclear whether she 
meant prior to the work injury or prior to her termination. Because the timing is unclear, 
this statement is not considered inconsistent as defendants suggest.  
 
On January 17, 2023, claimant presented for evaluation and treatment for her 
wound. (JE 2:39) Claimant reported that she believed her wound was improving as well 
as the pain. (JE 2:40) Dr. Whitt advised claimant on the need for continued serial visits 
and debridement at his office. (JE 2:41) For home care, Dr. Whitt recommended 
claimant increase their protein and vitamin supplementation and continue with 
offloading modalities. (JE 2:41)  
 
On May 23, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt. (JE 2:36) Dr. Whitt noted that 
the healed wound remained fragile in appearance, but that the claimant felt her biggest 
complaint was chronic pain in the ankle. (JE 2:36) The pain was worse in the inside joint 
and also on the outside of the ankle. (JE 2:36)  Claimant felt her ankle was generally 
weak and the foot could reroll out. (JE 2:36)  On examination, Dr. Whitt found edema on 
the left ankle along with 5/5 muscle strength in the lower extremity muscle 
compartments with the exception of pain with left ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion 
along with peroneal eversion which significantly exacerbated the pain symptoms. (JE 
2:37)  There was tenderness in the medial and lateral ankle gutters and the retrofibular 
groove and significant pain with end range of motion of the ankle joint with dorsiflexion 
and plantarflexion. (JE 2:37) The left foot sat in a plantar flexed/inverted position at rest 
with significant laxity compared to other limb. (JE 2:37)  The tenderness of the left 
anterior talofibular ligament was worse with anterior drawer ankle stressing and 
calcaneofibular ligament which was worse with inversion. (JE 2:37)   X-rays showed 
subluxation of the second and third metatarsophalangeal joints as well as degenerative 
changes throughout the talocrural joint and navicular cuneiform joints. (JE 2:37)  There 
was posterior and anterior calcaneal enthesopathy. (JE 2:37)    
 
Dr. Whitt noted the claimant had clinical symptoms consistent with anterior 
talofibular ligament and calcaneofibular ligament tear along with peroneal tear/tendinitis. 
(JE 2:37)   Dr. Whitt recommended an MRI to evaluate the extent of damage and rule 
out or rule in above-mentioned pathologies. (JE 2:37)     
 
On February 2, 2023, claimant was terminated when a subordinate manager 
called to say that she was ill and would not be able to report to work for her shift. 
Following this, claimant sent a text to her district manager to tell him that claimant was 
not feeling well and would not be able to report to work. In the text, claimant alleged that 
the subordinate manager would be in for her shift with no mention of her being ill. The 
subordinate manager also filled out a letter indicating that she had texted the claimant at 
4:46 to let her know she would not be able to come in because she wasn’t feeling well 
due to her asthma. (DE J:66)  
 
According to the district manager, Mr. Abu-Zahra, the store was scheduled to 
open at 5:30 AM; however because Katherine, the subordinate manager, was ill and 
could not work, and claimant was also ill and could not come to work, the store did not 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 11 
 
open until 3:30 PM, and the first order was taken at 3:41 PM. By then all sales were lost 
for breakfast and lunch causing the company more than $2,200 in lost revenue. (JE 64-
65)  This left the restaurant without a manager and with a crew waiting outside. 
Defendants characterized this behavior as “outright dishonesty.” (DE J:64)  
 
Claimant testified that she felt she was targeted due to her injury and that she 
should not have gotten fired for this incident; however, she did not rebut that the store 
opened late. She stated she did not see the message from the subordinate manager.  
 
Claimant refused to sign any statement admitting to wrongdoing. She then filed 
for unemployment which defendants contested. Claimant was denied and opted not to 
appeal as she had obtained new employment as the general manager of another fast 
food restaurant on March 23, 2023. (Tr., p. 54)   
 
On June 30, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt requesting the MRI results. (JE 
2:33) By this time, claimant was working as a manager for Five Guys, the job she 
started earlier in March. (JE 2:32) The MRI showed a high ankle sprain with chronic 
near full thickness ATFL tear along with evidence of peroneal brevis tendon tear along 
the retrofibular groove. (JE 2:33) Dr. Whitt felt this was clinically confirmed with 
claimant’s significant pain with peroneal eversion and pain throughout the retrofibular 
groove. (JE 2:33)  Dr. Whitt recommended an ankle syndesmotic repair with lateral 
plate and tight ropes and repair of the peroneal brevis tendon. (JE 2:33)  Claimant 
agreed to the surgery which took place on July 20, 2023. She was off work from July 20, 
2023, until November 7, 2023. (Tr., pp. 36-38) 
 
On July 25, 2023, claimant presented to Dr. Whitt mostly full weightbearing in her 
splint and using a walker. (JE 2:28) Claimant reported significant postoperative pain and 
requested refills of pain medications. (JE 2:32) She was given the refills and advised to 
be nonweightbearing. Id.  
 
On August 1, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt’s office reporting severe pain. 
(JE 2:26)  Dr. Whitt continued to advise claimant to be nonweightbearing as much as 
possible. (JE 2:26) Dr. Whitt increased her Percocet prescription to 10 mg along with 
Flexeril and gabapentin three times a day with an increased dosage of 1200 mg at 
night. (JE 2:26) He advised her to remain strictly nonweightbearing on the left and noted 
that she was doing her best to comply. (JE 2:26)   
  
On August 15, 2023, the claimant returned to Dr. Whitt with ongoing significant 
pain. (JE 2:21) Dr. Whitt believed that the posterior muscle group spasms appeared 
worse and scheduled claimant for a gastrocnemius recession to relieve the contracture 
and spasms. (JE 2:21) He encouraged her to remain nonweightbearing as much as 
possible. (JE 2:21)   
  
On September 5, 2023, claimant presented to Dr. Whitt following the left 
gastrocnemius recession performed on August 29, 2023. (JE 2:16) She reported 
worsening cramping and spasm of the left proximal thigh. (JE 2:16) He referred claimant 
to physical therapy along with instructions to return for wound care. (JE 2:16) 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 12 
 
 
On October 15, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Whitt. (JE 2:10) At this time she 
was continuing with physical therapy. (JE 2:10) She had transitioned out of the boot. (JE 
2:10)  Since her previous visit, she walked two miles at a pumpkin patch and her ankle 
hurt quite a bit. (JE 2:10)  Dr. Whitt believed claimant needed more physical therapy to 
rehabilitate her left foot and ankle and that she needed to wear more appropriate 
footwear. (JE 2:10) 
 
On November 3, 2023, claimant presented to Dr. Whitt and reported significant 
improvement over the previous visit. (JE 2:9) New x-rays showed stability in the ankle 
and claimant reported the same. (JE 2:9) Dr. Whitt felt claimant had improved enough to 
allow her to resume working with work restrictions of 8-hour shifts at one time. (JE 2:9) 
Dr. Whitt encouraged claimant to call if she developed significant discomfort upon her 
return to work. (JE 2:9) Claimant was released to ambulate in regular shoes and 
advised to continue with physical therapy. (JE 2:9)  
 
On December 5, 2023, claimant presented to Dr. Whitt with complaints of pain. 
(JE 2:7)  She had returned to work full time and had twisted her ankle three days ago. 
(JE 2:7) The return to work along with the ankle twist resulted in increased pain in the 
ankle. She was still suffering calf spasms and taking baclofen as needed. On 
examination, claimant had pain to palpation of the peroneal tendons and pain at the end 
range of motion of dorsiflexion of the ankle as well as tenderness to deep palpation of 
the anterior talofibular ligament and medial and lateral ankle gutter. (JE 2:7)  A left ankle 
cortisone injection was administered. (JE 2:7) Dr. Whitt recommended restrictions of 
eight-hour shifts with 20-minute breaks every four hours. (JE 2:7) 
 
On February 6, 2024, claimant underwent right knee replacement surgery. (DE J, 
depo p. 54) The need for surgery was unrelated to the alleged work injury.  
 
On March 5, 2024, claimant reported to Dr. Whitt that her ankle was holding up 
well. (JE 2:3) He noted the steroid injection seemed to help and the biggest problem is 
that she had a right knee replacement which she was recovering from. (JE 2:3)  Dr. 
Whitt opined the claimant was overall doing very well. (JE 2:4)  He noted the left ankle 
was finally stabilizing with some mild pain over the peroneal tendons of the left 
retrofibular groove and claimant was feeling back to normal. (JE 2:4) Her range of 
motion was much improved and she was released to ambulate without restrictions. (JE 
2:4) Dr. Whitt recommended follow up as needed and with consideration of another 
ankle steroid injection as needed. (JE 2:4)  
 
On March 25, 2024, R. L. Broghammer, M.D., conducted an independent 
medical examination of the claimant. (DE A:1)  A report regarding the same was issued 
on April 1, 2024. (DE A:1) Dr. Broghammer found claimant to be an excellent historian. 
(DE A:14) At the time of her examination she had minimal complaints but occasional 
pain in the left lateral foot. (DE A:15) Dr. Broghammer’s examination revealed some 
mild swelling consistent with prior open reduction internal fixation and significant ankle 
injury. There was no evidence of sudomotor changes, tropic changes or atrophy of the 
skin, abnormal hair growth, or temperature differences. (DE A:16) The range of motion 
was largely preserved in the left compared to the right, and the worker’s gait, station 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 13 
 
and posture were normal and maintained. (DE A:16) Dr. Broghammer agreed that 
based upon the medical records and the history provided by the claimant that she did 
suffer an injury on August 20, 2022, and that her temporary total disability occurred from 
the time she was off work until January 23, 2023, based upon the medical records of Dr. 
Whitt. (DE A:16-17) 
 
He did not believe the additional surgery from Dr. Whitt for the peroneal tendon 
and syndesmosis was due to the prior injury occurring in January 2022 when claimant 
fell down the stairs fracturing her left ankle. (DE A:17) He also disagreed with any 
opinion that would relate the need for this type of surgery to the August 2022 work injury 
which consisted at most of only a contusion that opened up a lateral ankle incision 
causing a delayed wound healing. (DE A:17)  A box falling was not the type of injury 
that would cause syndesmotic injury or injury to any of the peroneal tendons. (DE A:17)  
 
Based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, the injury that claimant sustained was confined to the skin as a contusion or 
abrasion. (DE A:18) Based on section 8.7 and table 8-2, Dr. Broghammer assigned a 
zero percent impairment of the whole person as claimant required no treatment and had 
no limitations in the performance of activities due to the skin wound. (DE A:18) Further, 
no restrictions were necessary. (DE A:18)  
 
On March 28, 2024, Brian Crites, M.D., a board certified orthopedic surgeon, 
examined claimant and issued a report regarding claimant’s work injury and subsequent 
impairment. (Claimant’s Exhibit 4) During the examination Dr. Crites noted claimant had 
a slightly uneven gait on the right, localized swelling in the retrofibular groove directly 
over the peroneal tendons, tenderness over the peroneal tendons in the groove, 
tenderness over the ATFL and AITFL ligaments, mild tenderness over the posterior 
tibialis tendon posterior to the medial malleolus. Eversion against resistance was 
painful. (CE 4:8) Claimant exhibited decreased sensation to light touch with 
dysesthesias on the lateral border of her foot consistent with the sural nerve distribution. 
(CE 4:8) 
 
Dr. Crites concluded claimant sustained an injury on August 20, 2022, and as a 
result suffered a permanent impairment. Per tables 17-11, 17-12, and 17-13 of the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Crites assigned 7 
percent lower extremity impairment for the loss of extension in the ankle, 2 percent for 
loss of eversion, 12 percent for loss of valgus motion for a total of 21 percent secondary 
to foot or ankle loss of motion. (CE 4:9)  
 
Dr. Crites also assigned a 2 percent lower extremity impairment for sural nerve 
sensory deficit. (CE 4:9)  Together those impairments combined for a total of 23 percent 
impairment of the lower extremity. Dr. Crites also stated that the prolonged but 
appropriate treatment for her ankle wound which was sustained as a result of her injury 
on August 20, 2022, was the significant aggravating factor in the impairments. In the 
future claimant would require future intermittent cortisone injections due to the 
posttraumatic arthritis in the left ankle and may require a rigid ankle-foot orthosis brace 
or ankle fusion in the future. (CE 4:10) He found claimant reached MMI on March 5, 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 14 
 
2024, and recommended restrictions of no prolonged standing or walking and to avoid 
squatting, climbing, running or impact activities. (CE 4:10)  
 
On July 31, 2023, Dr. Whitt signed off on a letter authored by claimant’s counsel. 
(CE 6) Dr. Whitt agreed that the totality of claimant’s situation supported causal 
relationship between her left lower extremity injuries and the August 20, 2022, work 
incident. He agreed that if claimant had suffered peroneal tendon or syndesmotic 
ligament injuries during her initial surgery and subsequent recovery she would have 
been showing symptoms of that during the March 18, 2022, and March 24, 2022, 
evaluations. However, none of these signs were present or documented in the medical 
records. (CE 6:1002) He noted that the stressors that the left lower extremity was 
subjected to following the August 20, 2022, work incident included the impact of the box 
that fell on her lower extremity, the MRSA bacteria propensity to weaken tendons and 
ligaments during an infection, the stress on the same tendons and ligaments during 
debridement and surgery, the continued delay to authorize care, and the rushed 
recovery. (CE 6:1002)  
 
Dr. Whitt agreed that the surgery on July 20, 2023, was reasonable and 
necessary and was in fact the more conservative of the two options available to the 
claimant and that continued delay would subject claimant to the possibility of contracting 
another bacterial infection. (CE 6:1003) 
 
On September 12, 2022, claimant received a letter from the Mary Greeley 
Medical Center business office requesting payment for $3,189.70. (CE 7:3) Claimant’s 
total medical bills were $43,999.59 with a total of $18,261.89 outstanding. (CE 8:001) 
The employee is only allowed to receive treatment from a physician of their choice if the 
company received written notice prior to a work-related injury. (DE J:62) The notice of 
claimant’s desire to receive treatment from her own physician came after the injury, 
either on September 12, 2022, when Mary Greeley sent a billing request (CE 7:3), or on 
October 17, 2022, when claimant sent a letter to her supervisor detailing the course of 
care and her desire to get treatment (DE H:41).  
 
Dr. Crites charged $3,685.00 for his independent medical examination.  (CE 
9:001) 
 
On March 13, 2023, counsel for the claimant wrote to the defendant employer 
informing them of representation, requesting records, and issuing a warning regarding 
the employer contact in regards to the handling of her Workers’ Compensation claim. 
(CE 1:1) 
 
On August 9, 2023, claimant forwarded emails to her counsel that she had 
received from the defendant employer. (CE 3:1)  
 
On March 19, 2024, counsel for claimant emailed counsel for defendants 
regarding a request for an executed waiver as well as ongoing concerns about the 
handling of the claim by the defendants. (CE 2:1) 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 15 
 
 
Claimant is currently employed at Five Guys as a manager. She began working 
there in March 2023. Her current symptoms include swelling and pain in her left ankle 
which exacerbates with use.  
 
The main thrust of defendants’ argument is that claimant was not a credible 
witness and that she refused to fill out the incident report because she wanted to hide 
that she had a prior injury. Claimant’s demeanor at hearing did not give signs of 
avoidance. She answered the questions asked of her and did not appear to be 
materially impeached. Her account of how the incident occurred was consistent with 
what she reported to the defendant employer directly following the incident as well as 
what she reported to medical providers. It is found claimant slipped in a cooler and a 
box fell on her ankle.  
 
For the most part, her testimony was consistent with the testimony of the other 
employees but for the issue regarding the incident form. Claimant testified that no one 
gave her a form to fill out. However, the other employees are more believable on this 
point and it is found that claimant was either given an incident form to fill out early on, 
informed she should fill one out, or she knew that those forms existed and should have 
filled it out on her own. Claimant asserts that the employee handbook requires the 
manager or supervisor to fill out injury forms, but the handbook says that if an injury 
requires medical attention, the employee and the manager has the responsibility to fill 
out the injury form. (DE J:61)  
 
Her refusal to fill out an incident form and submit to workers’ compensation 
appeared to stem from her desire to select her own physician and have surgery as 
scheduled rather than any intent to hide a past injury, particularly when the medical 
notes provided to the defendants contained reference to the prior surgery, the open 
wound, and the possibility of the hardware in her ankle being exposed.  
 
While this factual disagreement is difficult to resolve in claimant’s favor, it is not 
enough to make a finding that claimant lacked credibility overall. Based on all the 
foregoing, it is determined claimant was a credible witness.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 16 
 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
 
Claimant argues that defendants stipulated that the claimant sustained an injury 
on August 20, 2022, to the left ankle. This is accurate; however, there is no stipulation 
as to the extent of the injury nor the type of injury.  
 
Claimant also argues that the unrebutted medical evidence supports the fact that 
claimant’s work-related injury caused an old surgical wound to become infected. Dr. 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 17 
 
Broghammer, defendants’ expert, did opine that based upon the medical records and 
the history provided by the claimant that she did suffer an injury on August 20, 2022, 
when her old wound was re-opened leading to hardware removal. Dr. Whitt, claimant’s 
treating physician, and Dr. Crites, claimant’s expert, also agreed that claimant’s wound 
was reopened from the box falling.  
 
The dispute arises as to what permanent disability claimant sustained as a result 
of the re-opening of the wound. Dr. Broghammer opined that a syndesmotic injury or a 
talar defect or tendon injury could not have been caused by the work incident. Dr. 
Broghammer opined that the syndesmosis is an extremely strong membrane and not 
easily injured by a box falling on claimant’s ankle. Thus, the surgeries in July and 
August of 2023 were not related to a box falling on claimant’s ankle.  
 
Defendants suggest that the injury was caused when claimant moved in May 
2023 from Ames, Iowa to Cedar Falls, Iowa. Dr. Whitt had reminded claimant to be 
nonweightbearing, but claimant was not compliant.  
 
Claimant relies on the opinions of Dr. Whitt who stated that if claimant had 
suffered peroneal tendon or syndesmotic ligament injuries during her initial surgery and 
subsequent recovery she would have been showing symptoms of that during the March 
18 and March 24, 2022, evaluations. He further agreed that the stressors that the left 
lower extremity was subjected to following the August 20, 2022, work incident included 
the impact of the box that fell on her lower extremity, the MRSA bacteria propensity to 
weaken tendons and ligaments during an infection, the stress on the same tendons and 
ligaments during debridement and surgery, the continued delay to authorize care and 
the rushed recovery. (CE 6:1002)  All of those things combined contributed to the 
weakening of the membrane. Defendants argue that Dr. Whitt’s opinion is flawed as 
there was no MRSA bacteria diagnosis; however, even though claimant did not have an 
MRSA infection, she did have an open wound that was infected and needed regular 
treatment including debridement.  
 
Dr. Whitt was aware claimant had been noncompliant in keeping off her ankle, 
including a time in which she walked two miles at a pumpkin patch as well as the fact 
that she had moved from Ames to Cedar Falls. Despite this, he agreed with the opinions 
stated above. His explanation on the mechanism of injury is consistent with the 
claimant’s physical presentation both before and after the injury as well as Dr. Whitt’s 
own course of treatment.  
 
Even though the opinion of Dr. Whitt was drafted by the claimant’s attorney, Dr. 
Whitt could have changed it if he did not agree to the contents. He signed the opinion 
letter and affirmed those opinions were his.  
 
Dr. Crites opined that claimant’s ankle injury of August 20, 2022, was responsible 
for aggravating an underlying condition and led to prolonged but appropriate treatment.  

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 18 
 
 
Based on the opinions of Dr. Whitt, claimant’s treating physician, it is found that 
claimant’s subsequent surgeries of July and August 2023 were related to the August 20, 
2022, work injury.  
 
Dr. Crites opined claimant reached MMI for the ankle injury on or about March 5, 
2024.  
 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
 
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4 
 
Dr. Broghammer’s rating was solely to claimant’s skin, as he did not find a causal 
connection between the syndesmotic injury. His rating does not have applicability based 
on previous findings. Dr. Crites assigned a 23 percent lower extremity impairment rating 
based on loss of motion and the sural nerve sensory deficit. That rating is adopted 
herein.  
 
Claimant requests an order be entered demonstrating that she has fulfilled all her 
duties under the Iowa law. There is no way to evaluate that since not “all duties under 
Iowa Law” are at issue. No such order will be entered.   
 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her medical 
bills. Defendants argue that they stipulated that claimant sustained an ankle injury and 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 19 
 
that because claimant refused to cooperate with any investigation of a potential claim by 
refusing to fill out an incident report, she is not entitled to reimbursement of medical bills 
up through January 23, 2023. Dr. Broghammer, defendants’ expert, opined that 
claimant’s period of temporary total disability related to her August 20, 2022, work injury 
lasted until January 23, 2023. After that, defendants deny compensability.  
 
The right to control medical care emanates entirely from the duty to furnish 
medical care for injuries compensable under the workers' compensation laws. Without 
the duty to furnish care, the employer has no right to control care. Thus, if the employer 
contests the compensability of the injury following notice, the statutory responsibility of 
the employer to furnish reasonable medical care to the employee or pay other employee 
benefits described in the workers' compensation statute is not imposed until the issue of 
compensability is resolved in favor of the employee. Likewise, the employer has no right 
to choose the medical care when compensability is contested. Instead, the employee is 
left to pursue his or her own medical care for the injury at his or her own expense and is 
free to pursue a claim against the employer to recover the reasonable cost of medical 
care upon proof of compensability of the injury. If the employee establishes the 
compensability of the injury at a contested case hearing, then the statutory duty of the 
employer to furnish medical care for compensable injuries emerges to support an award 
of reasonable medical care the employer should have furnished from the inception of 
the injury had compensability been acknowledged. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning 
v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010) (citation omitted)  
 
Defendants denied compensability for claimant’s condition after January 23, 
2023, and therefore do not have the right to an authorization defense for the medical 
bills incurred after January 23, 2023.  
 
For the medical bills incurred from August 20, 2022, to January 23, 2023, the 
question is whether the unauthorized care resulted in a more favorable outcome than 
the care authorized by the employer. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 
779 N.W.2d at 208.   
Although an employee may assert a claim for expenses of the 
unauthorized medical care, the employee must prove the unauthorized 
care was reasonable and beneficial under all the surrounding 
circumstances, including the reasonableness of the employer-provided 
care, and the reasonableness of the decision to abandon the care 
furnished by the employer in the absence of an order from the 
commissioner authorizing alternative care. Consistent with the rationale 
for giving the employer control over medical care, the concept of 
reasonableness in this analysis includes the quality of the alternative care 
and the quality of the employer-provided care. As we have already noted, 
the question of whether the unauthorized care was beneficial focuses on 
whether the care provided a more favorable medical outcome than would 
likely have been achieved by the care authorized by the employer  
Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 208 (Iowa 2010) 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 20 
 
 
Claimant refused to submit her claim to workers’ compensation, wanting to 
proceed with the doctor of her choice and the scheduled surgery. Claimant did not 
provide evidence that going to another doctor and having a different date of surgery 
would have been less beneficial than the care she wanted. Because claimant refused to 
seek treatment from an authorized provider selected by defendants, she inhibited the 
defendants’ ability to assess and litigate the reasonableness of the alternative care for 
which claimant sought reimbursement and defendants’ right to control the medical care 
was undermined. Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of medical bills up through 
January 23, 2023.  
 
There is no award of alternate medical care because alternate medical care is 
only granted when defendants do not contest liability. However, claimant is entitled to 
future medical care for any treatment necessary for her ankle injury of August 20, 2022, 
including but not limited to intermittent cortisone injections due to the posttraumatic 
arthritis in the left ankle, an ankle brace, and any other recommended treatments by Dr. 
Whitt or an authorized treating physician as treatment after January 23, 2023, were 
incurred after defendants’ denial of liability and their subsequent loss of the right to 
control care.  
 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  Iowa Code § 
85.33(2) (2015).  An employee is temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is 
not capable medically of returning to employment substantially similar to the 
employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of the injury but is able to 
perform other work consistent with the employee's disability.  Id.  Temporary partial 
benefits are not payable upon termination of temporary disability, healing period, or 
permanent partial disability simply because the employee is not able to secure work 
paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's weekly earnings at the time of the 
injury.  Id.  
 
Claimant was off work from October 27, 2022, to December 20, 2022, due to her 
work injury. She returned to work on December 20, 2022, but at an hourly rate and not 
her salaried position.  
 
Defendants argue that claimant is not entitled to healing period benefits up to 
January 23, 2023, due to the time off work being the result of unauthorized medical 
treatment. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209. Because 
the care up to January 23, 2023, was unauthorized, claimant is not entitled to healing 
period benefits from October 27, 2022, through December 20, 2022.  
 
She was terminated for failing to show up for work on February 2, 2023, and 
remained off work until March 23, 2023, when she began new employment.  
 
Temporary benefits can be suspended in the event that an employee refuses 
suitable work.  

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 21 
 
3. a. If an employee is temporarily, partially disabled and the employer for 
whom the employee was working at the time of injury offers to the 
employee suitable work consistent with the employee's disability the 
employee shall accept the suitable work, and be compensated with 
temporary partial benefits. If the employer offers the employee suitable 
work and the employee refuses to accept the suitable work offered by the 
employer, the employee shall not be compensated with temporary partial, 
temporary total, or healing period benefits during the period of the refusal. 
Work offered at the employer's principal place of business or established 
place of operation where the employee has previously worked is 
presumed to be geographically suitable for an employee whose duties 
involve travel away from the employer's principal place of business or 
established place of operation more than fifty percent of the time. If 
suitable work is not offered by the employer for whom the employee was 
working at the time of the injury and the employee who is temporarily, 
partially disabled elects to perform work with a different employer, the 
employee shall be compensated with temporary partial benefits. 
b. The employer shall communicate an offer of temporary work to the 
employee in writing, including details of lodging, meals, and transportation, 
and shall communicate to the employee that if the employee refuses the 
offer of temporary work, the employee shall communicate the refusal and 
the reason for the refusal to the employer in writing and that during the 
period of the refusal the employee will not be compensated with temporary 
partial, temporary total, or healing period benefits, unless the work refused 
is not suitable. If the employee refuses the offer of temporary work on the 
grounds that the work is not suitable, the employee shall communicate the 
refusal, along with the reason for the refusal, to the employer in writing at 
the time the offer of work is refused. Failure to communicate the reason 
for the refusal in this manner precludes the employee from raising 
suitability of the work as the reason for the refusal until such time as the 
reason for the refusal is communicated in writing to the employer. 
Iowa Code Ann. § 85.33 (West) The question of whether an employer offered suitable 
work is ordinarily a fact issue. See Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 549, 559; McCormick v. N. 
Star Foods, Inc., 533 N.W.2d 196, 199 (Iowa 1995). 
 
In this case, the claimant was terminated on February 23, 2023.  However, 
longstanding agency precedent is that termination is not refusal of suitable work. Martha 
F. Woods, Claimant, File No. 1303082, 2002 WL 32125776, at *10 (July 2, 2002) 
(overruling any prior agency precedent that would find termination is refusal to accept 
suitable work)  
 
Defendants argue that her misconduct was tantamount to refusal of suitable 
work. Claimant was terminated because she was ill and could not come to work as 
scheduled. Claimant testified, without rebuttal, that she was prepared to work and went 
about finding new work as soon as possible, obtaining new employment a month later. It 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 22 
 
is found that the misconduct was not to the level that it should be considered refusal to 
do suitable work. Claimant missing one day of work, even though it was costly, did not 
mean she intended to refuse suitable work.  
 
Claimant was also off work for her 2023 surgeries from July 20, 2023, until 
November 7, 2023, and because those surgeries were necessitated by the work injury, 
claimant is entitled to healing period benefits for that time period.  
 
Claimant seeks additional healing period benefits from February 6, 2024, to 
March 5, 2024.  
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to 
an injured employee who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the employee 
has returned to work; (2) it is medically indicated that significant improvement from the 
injury is not anticipated; or (3) the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.  The healing period can be 
considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of improvement of 
the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 65 
(Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  Teel v. 
McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405, 406 (Iowa 1986). 
 
At that time, claimant was working eight-hour shifts with 20-minute breaks every 
four hours. There was no testimony that she was not doing substantially similar work 
from February 6, 2024, to March 5, 2024. She testified at hearing that she was paid a 
salary of $70,000, and there was no record of claimant’s pay being reduced due to the 
hourly restrictions.  Claimant is not entitled to healing period benefits from February 6, 
2024, to March 5, 2024, as she had returned to substantially similar employment.  
 
Claimant seeks reimbursement of her IME.  
 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id.  

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 23 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2), as amended, allows an employee with a 
compensable injury to be reimbursed the reasonable cost of an examination. See Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2)(2017); Mid American Construction LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 849 
(Iowa 2024). Under the statute, an examination may include reviewing medical records, 
conducting a physical exam, opining on causation, assessing permanent impairment, 
assigning restrictions, and recommending further care. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 851.  
 
The burden is on the claimant to show the reasonableness of his or her chosen 
physician’s IME fee. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 852; see also Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e) 
(stating “Ordinarily, the burden of proof on an issue is upon the party who would suffer 
loss if the issue were not established.”); Pexa v. Auto Owners Ins. Co., 686 N.W.2d 150, 
156 (Iowa 2004)(stating “the plaintiff has the burden to prove the reasonable value of 
the [medical] service rendered”).  The reasonableness of an IME fee is a question of 
fact to be decided by the commissioner. See Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 
154 (Iowa 1996). The reasonableness of an IME fee must be based upon the typical fee 
charged by a medical provider performing an impairment rating in the local area where 
the IME is conducted. Iowa Code § 85.39 (2); Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 852.   
 
Dr. Broghammer, a physician retained by defendants, issued a report on March 
25, 2024, finding claimant sustained a 0 percent impairment. On March 28, 2024, 
claimant was examined by Dr. Crites. The criteria of 85.39 is met and claimant is 
entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Crites’ examination. Dr. Crites charged $3,685.00 for 
his independent medical examination.  
 
The final issue pertains to claimant’s claim for penalty benefits. Defendants did 
no investigation of the claim until after the petition was filed. Defendants argue that this 
is because claimant refused to participate in the investigation by failing to fill out an 
incident report. Defendants carry a statutory duty of investigation.  However, defendants 
were aware of the ankle injury, claimant’s need for surgery, and pending medical bills. 
They could have requested a patient’s waiver to request medical records. They could 
have taken a statement from claimant.  
 
An employer may not unilaterally decide to deny, delay, or terminate benefits 
without adhering to section 10A.315. Iowa Code § 10A.315 (2023).  Section 
10A.315(4)(c) creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow, to show the 
employer met its burden of a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1)-(3).2   First, the 
employer’s excuse must be preceded by a reasonable investigation and evaluation into 
whether the benefits were owed.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1); Baker v. 
Bridgestone/Firestone & Old Republic Inc., 872 N.W.2d 672, 678 (Iowa 2015).  Second, 
the results of the reasonable investigation were “the actual basis . . . 
contemporaneously” relied on by the employer for the denial, delay or termination of the 
benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(2).   Third, the employer “contemporaneously 
                                                 
 
2 See also unpublished opinion.  Pettegill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 40 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2015).   

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 24 
 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of their denial, delay or termination.”  Iowa Code § 
10A.315(4)(c)(3). An employer cannot unilaterally decide to terminate benefits without 
adhering to section 10A.315.  Iowa Code § 10A.315.  
 
Defendants undertook no investigation. They did file a First Report of Injury on 
October 19, 2022, but because claimant did not fill out an incident report and because 
she refused to go to a doctor of their choosing, they did not investigate the claim until 
after the filing of the petition. Even after Dr. Broghammer opined claimant did sustain an 
injury on August 20, 2022, that resolved in January 2023, defendants did not pay any 
benefits to claimant and did not contemporaneously communicate with claimant the 
reason for non-payment of benefits. Failure to investigate the claim, failure to pay 
benefits, and failure to communicate any denial subjects defendants to a penalty. 
However, claimant is not entitled to any benefits up to January 23, 2023, as the care 
she sought was unauthorized.  
 
Dr. Broghammer’s report did provide defendants with a good faith denial of 
liability. This report was issued on March 25, 2024. It is also true that claimant was 
difficult when it came to submitting to examination by doctors of defendants’ choosing 
which mitigates the amount of penalty to which she is entitled. Based on the foregoing, 
claimant is entitled to 25 percent penalty on the benefits owed from January 23, 2023, 
up to March 5, 2024.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant 52.8 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of seven hundred six and 86/100 dollars ($706.86) per 
week from March 5, 2024. 
That defendants shall pay unto claimant temporary total benefits from February 
2, 2023, until March 23, 2023, and from July 20, 2023, until November 7, 2023, at the 
rate of seven hundred six and 86/100 dollars ($706.86) per week. 
That defendants shall pay 25 percent penalty on the benefits owed from January 
23, 2023, up to March 5, 2024.  
That defendants shall reimburse claimant for medical bills from January 24, 
2023, to the present. 
That defendants shall furnish reasonable and necessary medical care for 
claimant’s left ankle injury.  
That defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Crites’ IME in the amount of 
three thousand six hundred eighty-five and 00/100 dollars ($3,685.00).  
That defendants shall pay accrued benefits in a lump sum. 

FALLON V. WT SIOUX, LLC, d/b/a MOUNTAIN WEST WENDY’S 
Page 25 
 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.   
 
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33 
including the cost of the transcript.  
 
Signed and filed this _16th __ day of December, 2024. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Bryant Engbers (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
