Case Number: 20700102.01
Case Title:  LANGE, BRENT V. CR ENGLAND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lange Brent-20700102.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRENT LANGE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
  File No. 20700102.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
C.R. ENGLAND, 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                         
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
    Headnote:  1100 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Brent Lange seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the defendants, 
employer C.R. England and insurance carrier Indemnity Insurance Company of North 
America (Indemnity), for an alleged injury to the body as a whole. The undersigned 
presided over an arbitration hearing on January 12, 2021. Lange participated personally 
and through attorney Nate Willems. The defendants participated by and through Sara 
Kruser, representative of C.R. England, and attorney Christine Westberg Dorn. 
ISSUES 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding deputy 
commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via an 
order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did Lange sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with C.R. England on July 15, 2019? 
2) Did Lange provide timely notice of the alleged injury? 
3) Is Lange entitled to temporary partial disability (TPD) benefits from 
September 22, 2019, through January 11, 2020? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-01  13:47:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 2 
 
4) Is Lange entitled to healing period (HP) benefits for the following time 
periods: 
a) July 26, 2019, through September 21, 2019; and 
b) January 12, 2020, through October 15, 2020? 
5) Is Lange entitled to permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits for an 
industrial disability caused by the alleged injury? 
6) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) 
benefits, if any are awarded? 
7) What were Lange’s gross earnings at the time in question? 
8) Is Lange entitled to alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27? 
9) Must the defendants reimburse Lange for the medical expenses itemized in 
Claimant’s Exhibits 6 and 7? 
10) Is Lange entitled to a penalty under Iowa Code section 86.13? 
11) Are costs taxed against the defendants under Iowa Code section 86.40? 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Lange and C.R. England 
at the time of the alleged work injury. 
2) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Lange was single. 
b) Lange was entitled to one exemption. 
3) Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed expenses 
and the defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity. 
FINDINGS OF FACTS 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 3 
 
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 5; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits (Cl. Ex.) 1 through 10;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits (Def. Ex.) A through G; and 
 Hearing testimony by Lange and Kruser.  
 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, 
the undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Lange was 27 years old at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 12–13) He was born 
with a congenital heart defect called truncus arteriosus, which means he has one artery 
going to his heart. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13–14) Lange has also had scoliosis for his whole life. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 14) These conditions have made him eligible since birth for disability 
benefits from the federal Social Security Administration (SSA). (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) 
Mark Zittergruen, M.D., has been Lange’s treating cardiologist since 1998. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 16) Dr. Zittergruen advised him to avoid playing tackle football. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) 
Lange has undergone three heart catheterizations (2002, 2013, and 2015), a conduit 
placement in 1994, and conduit revisions in 1996 and 2003. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 7; Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
2) Lange’s most recent procedure was in 2015, when he required surgery to install a 
transcatheter pulmonary valve, which went well. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 1–2, 50) No doctor 
prescribed Lange work restrictions or medication due to his heart condition before he 
started work with C.R. England. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17)  
Dr. Zittergruen saw Lange for his annual exam on March 8, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 
3–4) Dr. Zittergruen noted Lange “appear[ed] to have had a very nice outcome from his 
Melody valve placement. The right side of his heart appears as good as I have ever 
seen it. We will continue to monitor this yearly.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4)  
However, Dr. Zittergruen also noted Lange had a dilated left ventricle and 
ascending aorta. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4) While asymptomatic, Dr. Zittergruen advised Lange to 
“continue to self limit his activity as needed with no specific restrictions.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4) 
They agreed Lange would return in one year for his annual check-up to monitor his 
progress. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4) 
Lange graduated from high school and went to college where he earned his 
Bachelor of Science degree in equestrian general studies with a minor in music. (Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 14–15; Jt. Ex. 3, p. 2; Def. Ex. G, p. 3) However, Lange did not obtain full-time 
employment in his fields of study. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15–16) After graduating from college, 
Lange worked in the kitchen at Hy-Vee. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15)  
In 2019, Lange set out to obtain his commercial driver’s license (CDL). (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 16) First, Lange obtained his permit. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) The CDL process is regulated by 
the state and federal departments of transportation. See 49 CFR pts. 383, 384; see also  
761 IAC 607. It includes a requirement that a would-be CDL driver pass a physical. 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 4 
 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 18; Jt. Ex. 2) Because Lange passed his physical, he obtained his CDL in 
March. (Hrg. Tr. p. 1820) 
Lange applied for a job at C.R. England on January 7, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) He 
worked for the company with his CDL learner’s permit beginning in February. After 
Lange obtained his CDL in March, he began to work for the company as an over-the-
road truck driver. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20)  
C.R. England closely monitors its drivers’ activities in accordance with safety 
requirements for interstate trucking under federal law. The parties submitted C.R. 
England’s logs of Lange’s activities while driving for the company in Joint Exhibit 1. 
Lange gave credible testimony on the meaning of some of the terms used in the logs: 
 “Off duty” refers to the time a driver is out of the truck (e.g., to get a meal, 
while at home, in a hotel, or during a repair to the vehicle); and 
 “Sleeper, on duty” refers to driving time while the driver is in the cab of the 
truck, but not driving. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) 
Thus, Lange’s time as a truck driver for C.R. England can be accurately broken 
down into two larger classifications: in-truck time and off-duty time, when he was not in 
the truck. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19; Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 4–45; Cl. Ex. 8) The weight of the evidence 
establishes that, as one part of a two-driver tandem, Lange often spent extended 
periods of time in the cab of the truck he was helping to drive in tandem with another 
driver. 
There is some question of when and where Lange noticed his onset of swelling. 
(Def. Ex. G, p. 12; Hrg. Tr. pp. 62–63) However, it is undisputed Lange began to 
experience swelling in July of 2019. Lange experienced the onset of swelling in his feet, 
ankles, and legs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) Ultimately, the swelling spread to his torso, arms, and 
face. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) Lange also experienced shortness of breath. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) He 
felt something was different with his heart. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) Lange had never experienced 
these symptoms before. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) He felt he needed to see a doctor because he 
felt something serious might be wrong. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 24–25) 
On July 10, 2019, Lange submitted two weeks’ notice of his resignation to C.R. 
England on the company’s messaging platform because of another employee’s attitude 
and “needing a break from [over-the-road trucking] for a while to get health tak[en] care 
of.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) Lange clarified at hearing the primary reason was his health. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 66) He also stated he “need[ed] a break to catch up on [his] health and everything 
else.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) Lange informed C.R. England he intended to continue driving 
commercially and hoped to do so in a more regional capacity. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) 
Lange sent another message on July 14, 2019, in which he stated he needed to 
get back to Iowa because his home time was scheduled to start that day and he had to 
see Dr. Zittergruen “for a yearly check-up on [his] congenital heart defect.” (Def. Ex. A. 
p. 2) Later that same day, Lange and his driving partner reiterated they needed to go 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 5 
 
home. (Def. Ex. A, p. 3) On July 15, 2019, Lange sent a message stating he needed to 
get home that day or the next morning because of his “health check-up.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 
4) Lange did not indicate in the messages that he needed to see a doctor because of a 
health condition or injury he believed was related to his work at C.R. England. (Def. Ex. 
A, pp. 1–4) 
Lange asserted in his interrogatory answers he informed a C.R. England 
employee named Derek Rompi that he “had a heart issue” and “needed [to go] home for 
a heart appointment.” (Def. Ex. G, p. 8) However, Lange did not assert that he informed 
Rompi he felt working for C.R. England caused an injury relating to his heart and the 
need for the appointment. At hearing, Lange testified both that he informed and did not 
inform Rompi of the swelling in his legs. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 42, 77) Regardless, Kruser 
credibly testified nobody named Derek Rompi worked for the company at the time in 
question. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 87–88) There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which 
to conclude Lange told a manager at C.R. England he believed the swelling he 
experienced in July was caused by his work. 
Lange’s last day working for C.R. England was July 24, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 47) 
There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude a doctor assigned 
him any work restrictions before he gave his resignation. (Def. Ex. D, p. 2; Hrg. Tr. pp. 
54–55) There is no indication in the record Lange requested any accommodations from 
C.R. England before his resignation took effect. 
Manager Troy Dessert completed a termination evaluation regarding the end of 
Lange’s employment with C.R. England. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 47) Dessert rated Lange a 
satisfactory worker who was dependable and hardworking. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 47) Based on 
the form, Lange was eligible for rehire with C.R. England. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 47)  Dessert 
identified Lange’s reason for resigning as he “had to be home more.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 47) 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Lange notified 
Dessert that he believed he sustained a work injury. 
On August 1, 2019, Lange saw Dr. Zittergruen, who noted his symptoms as 
follows: 
[Lange] returns to pediatric cardiology clinic for urgent evaluation. He 
reports that over the past several weeks he has had increasing swelling of 
his legs and discomfort of his knees. He notes that for the past 6 months 
he has been driving commercial trucks across the United States. He 
reports that he often drives for 8 to 10 hours at a time with only minimal 
breaks to use the restroom. He notes that due to his work and schedule 
he has not been eating very healthy. He notes that most of his meals over 
the past 6 months have come from fast food restaurants or truck stops. He 
has also been drinking quite a bit of Coke Zero or lemonade. He notes 
that the swelling has gotten to the point where his socks leave a significant 
impression around his ankles. His knee has been swollen and 
difficult/painful to bend. He reports no dyspnea. He has had some 
occasional sharp chest discomfort which is random and often occurs when 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 6 
 
he is sitting. He reports no palpitations or inappropriate tachycardia. He 
has had no dizziness or syncope. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 5)  
Based on Dr. Zittergruen’s examination and an echocardiogram, he diagnosed 
Lange with decreased cardiac function with lower extremity edema. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 8) He 
noted: 
I do think his LV function has been at the low end of normal for quite some 
time. It does appear worse on today’s echocardiogram than it has in the 
past. Fortunately, he is hemodynamically stable with no tachycardia or 
tachypnea. His edema appears to be limited to his lower extremities. I do 
think [Lange]’s symptoms and decreasing cardiac function are likely 
related to his recent occupation of truck driving. This was discussed at 
length with [Lange]. In addition to long periods of inactivity with his legs 
being dependent, his nutritional status appears to be problematic. He has 
gained significant weight since I last saw him. According to our scale he 
has gained 26 pounds over the past year. I do think some of this weight 
gain is fluid, but I also think he appears heavier overall. [Lange] is aware 
that this increase in weight is problematic for his heart. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 8) 
Dr. Zittergruen prescribed Lasix to address the swelling. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 8) He 
encouraged Lange to improve his diet and remain as physically active as possible. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, pp. 8–9)  
Lange testified during his deposition in this case that he mailed a certified letter, 
return receipt requested, to C.R. England’s human resources department to notify them 
of his work injury following his appointment with Dr. Zittergruen. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 8) 
However, Lange conceded he did not keep a copy of the letter for his records or the 
receipt. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 9, Depo pp. 29–30; Hrg. Tr. pp. 64–65)  
At hearing, Kruser credibly testified any such letter from Lange would have been 
routed to her as the senior workers’ compensation supervisor at C.R. England, but she 
never received any such letter. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 82–83) Kruser further testified the first letter 
she received regarding Lange’s alleged work injury was the letter of representation from 
Lange’s counsel in February of 2020. (Hrg. Tr. p. 82) There is an insufficient basis in the 
evidence from which to conclude C.R. England received a certified letter from Lange 
regarding his alleged work injury.  
The weight of the evidence establishes Lange did not personally inform C.R. 
England he believed the swelling he experienced on the job was an injury caused by his 
employment. Lange informed C.R. England he had a heart condition and had to attend 
a doctor’s appointment relating to his heart. He also told them he was quitting for 
personal reasons but did not expressly inform the company he was quitting due to a 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 7 
 
condition that was causing swelling and he believed was related to his work. The letter 
of representation Lange’s attorney sent C.R. England in February of 2020 is the first 
notice he provided of his belief that he sustained an injury arising out of and in the 
course of his employment with the company. 
Lange followed up with Dr. Zittergruen on August 5, 2019, reporting that he felt 
better, and his swelling had improved. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11) Dr. Zittergruen noted he lost six 
pounds since his last appointment. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 13) On August 23, 2019, Lange 
returned for another follow-up appointment. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 15) His swelling continued to 
go down. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) Dr. Zittergruen noted, “His echocardiogram demonstrates 
minimal improvement in his overall function.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) He also discussed with 
Lange that “truck driving was perhaps not the best vocation for him. I do not think that 
sitting for long periods of time are in his best interest.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) In accordance 
with Dr. Zittergruen’s opinion, Lange informed him he will try to find a truck-driving job 
with shorter routes. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) 
Lange got another job as a truck driver with Stutsman in Hills, Iowa. (Def. Ex. D, 
p. 5; Hrg. Tr. p. 28) Stutsman allowed Lange to pick what distance he would drive when 
making a delivery. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) This allowed Lange to drive a truck within the time 
constraints Dr. Zittergruen placed on sitting. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) 
Lange saw Dr. Zittergruen again on October 15, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) Dr. 
Zittergruen opined, “his heart failure symptomatology has improved significantly on his 
current medical regimen. His BNP has decreased and he remains metabolically stable. 
His echocardiographic images also look more like his baseline with mildly decreased LV 
systolic function.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 22) With respect to Lange’s truck-driving work, Dr. 
Zittergruen noted: 
[Lange] has returned to driving a truck with some modifications of his 
schedule and time spent behind the wheel without taking a break. I do 
think he can continue to do this from a cardiac standpoint. We will monitor 
him closely as he undertakes this to make sure that his heart failure 
symptomatology does not worsen. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 22) Dr. Zittergruen opined, “I do think [Lange] can continue to drive a 
truck as long as he is able to modify his schedule and take breaks from driving 
every 2–3 hours.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23) 
On December 19, 2019, Lange had another follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Zittergruen. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 24) He reported no leg swelling. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 24) Lange 
weighed 209 pounds. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 26) Dr. Zittergruen noted: 
He returned to work as a truck driver with a different company than 
previously. He reports that he is not required to drive long distances 
without stopping for break. He assures me that he takes a break every 2–
3 hours to walk around and use the restroom. He has been eating [a] 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 8 
 
healthier diet with less junk food and fried food. He has also cut back on 
his salt intake. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 24) Dr. Zittergruen repeated his opinion that Lange could physically 
continue to drive a truck so long as he does not sit longer than two to three hours 
without taking time to move. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 24, 27–28) 
In order to maintain a CDL, a driver must undergo periodic physicals. (Cl. Ex. 3, 
p. 3, Depo. Tr. pp. 7–8) Because of Lange’s congenital heart defect, he had to undergo 
an annual physical as opposed to a biannual physical. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 3, Depo. Tr. pp. 7–
8) Lange also had to provide medical history as part of the recertification process. (Cl. 
Ex. 3, p. 3, Depo. Tr. p. 10)  
Records from a DOT physical are not in evidence. At hearing, Lange testified, 
“when I went to go get a DOT physical, they wouldn’t pass me due to too much dilation 
and . . . my percentage of blood flow going in and out of the heart.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) 
During his deposition testimony, Lange explained that his heart was pumping blood 
below the 40 percent threshold required for DOT certification. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 3, Depo. Tr. 
p. 10) Lange tried a second time, according to his hearing testimony, but he was again 
denied because his dilation was over that allowed by DOT regulations. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) 
On January 9, 2020, the State of Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT) 
downgraded Lange’s CDL because he did not self-certify to the type of driving he was 
doing or did not submit a current Medical Examiner’s Certificate to IDOT. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 2) 
Stutsman discharged Lange because of his CDL downgrade. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) 
On February 18, 2020, Lange saw Dr. Zittergruen due to gastrointestinal bloating 
and shortness of breath. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 29) Dr. Zittergruen found him stable on 
examination, noting his diagnostic tests had not changed much. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 34) Lange 
returned on March 23, 2020, and Dr. Zittergruen observed a heart murmur and 
discussed Lange’s forthcoming cardiac catheterization, which would be helpful to look at 
his intracardiac hemodynamics and pulmonary valve. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 40) The procedure 
revealed no significant concerns. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 47) From September 30, 2020, through 
October 8, 2020, Lange was hospitalized with a bacterial infection unrelated to the injury 
at the center of this case. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33, Jt. Ex. 3, p. 49)  
Paul Conte, M.D., performed a review of Lange’s medical records from March 
2018 through May 2020. (Def. Ex. B) Dr. Conte answered questions posed by defense 
counsel after completing his records review. (Def. Ex. B) In response to a question on 
whether Lange’s truck-driving at C.R. England for six months caused the swelling and 
decreased heart function observed on August 1, 2019, Dr. Conte opined: 
I do not agree with Dr. Zittergruen that Mr. Lange’s symptoms and 
decreased cardiac function are related to his brief period of time as an 
over-the-road truck driver for C.R. England. Mr. Lange has a complicated 
pediatric congenital heart condition that has been treated by multiple 
surgical procedures and repeat operations and interventions. He had the 
initial surgery, then he had the revision of the pulmonary artery outflow 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 9 
 
tract, then he had a replacement of the pulmonary valve within the conduit 
as well as stenting of the conduit. He still remains with significant dilatation 
of his truncal aorta and truncal insufficiency to some degree as well as 
probable pulmonary outflow tract valve insufficiency. This is manifested in 
the dilatation of his left ventricle to the point of being consistent with 
congestive heart failure when he was first seen on 3/8/2019, prior to truck 
driving. Despite multiple medications, he still remains with a dilated left 
ventricle and has symptoms of compensated congestive heart failure. This 
is not uncommon for pediatric congenital cardiac defect survivors who 
progress on to adulthood, as a repair of this congenital heart defect is 
essentially not returning him to normal function but palliating and repairing 
it as best able. Many of these patients go on to need cardiac 
transplantation later in life due to congestive heart failure symptoms. 
Complicating this matter is the coexisting, significant health problems that 
Mr. Lange has. Even with improvement of his lower extremity edema he 
still, by body mass index, meets criteria for morbid obesity as well as he 
has a poor diet and hypercholesterolemia. A brief period of time operating 
a truck would not be enough to worsen his congestive heart failure, and is 
more likely due to the natural history of the disease. Furthermore his 
treatment with drugs for high blood pressure were actually to treat his 
heart failure as they help lower the pumping work of a dysfunctional heart 
and is standard treatment for congestive heart failure. 
(Def. Ex. B, pp. 3–4) 
On December 11, 2020, Lange’s attorney sent Dr. Zittergruen a check-box letter 
with a series of questions, spaces by which to indicate “Yes” or “No” in response to the 
questions, and space for additional information. (Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 1–2) Question 1 states, 
“From August 1, 2019 when you diagnosed increased symptoms and decreased cardiac 
function, has [Lange] recovered to his pre-truck driving (prior to February 2019) baseline 
symptomology and cardiac function?” (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 2) In response, Dr. Zittergruen 
indicates “Yes,” while “on medication.” (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 2) 
Dr. Zittergruen indicated the work restriction he assigned of taking breaks from 
driving every two to three hours were permanent. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 2) Because of Lange’s 
2019 increase in symptoms and decreasing cardiac function, Dr. Zittergruen assigned 
additional permanent work restrictions of no heavy lifting. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 2) He stated 
Lange needed to frequently follow up for monitoring of his condition, adjustment of 
medications as needed, and because of the possibility for future surgery. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 
2) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 10 
 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must “provide, 
secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability for 
recovery of damages or other compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). “A claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that an alleged 
injury for which the claimant is seeking workers’ compensation benefits arose out of and 
in the course of employment.” St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 
2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996)). Establishing 
a mere possibility is not enough to satisfy this burden; a claimant must show it is more 
likely than not the alleged injury is related to the claimant’s employment. See id. 
“An injury ‘arises out of’ employment if there is a causal connection between the 
employment and the injury.” Id. at 652 (citing Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 N.W.2d 334, 338 
(Iowa 1998)). The Iowa Supreme Court has articulated a two-prong analysis for gauging 
causation under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act: (1) factual or medical causation; 
and (2) legal causation. City of Cedar Rapids v. Bd. of Trustees of Mun. Fire & Police 
Retirement Sys. of Iowa, 572 N.W.2d 919, 922 (Iowa 1998). Here, the parties’ dispute 
factual or medical causation. 
“‘Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” IBP, Inc. v. 
Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The weight given an expert’s opinion “may be affected 
by the completeness of the premise given the expert and other surrounding 
circumstances.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. The agency must weigh the evidence in 
a case and accept or reject an expert opinion based on the entire record. Id. For 
example, “When an expert’s opinion is based upon an incomplete history, the opinion is 
not necessarily binding upon the [agency].” Id. The agency may accept or reject an 
expert opinion in whole or in part. 
Dr. Zittergruen stated that extended periods sitting down while in the cab of the 
truck caused Lange’s decreased heart function and swelling. But he did not explain why 
or how with specificity. Further, in response to the check-box letter sent by Lange’s 
attorney, Dr. Zittergruen indicated Lange had returned to his March 2018 baseline heart 
function with medication. But if this is true, Lange could have passed his DOT physical 
and continued driving a truck. The evidence shows Lange could not pass his DOT 
physical because of reduced heart function. Thus, despite Dr. Zittergruen’s extensive 
knowledge of Lange’s health due to decades as his treating cardiologist, his opinion is 
given less weight. 
In contrast to Dr. Zittergruen’s opinion, Dr. Conte broke down in detail the basis 
for his conclusion Lange’s work as a truck driver with C.R. England was not the most 
likely cause of his symptoms in the summer of 2019. Dr. Conte credibly explains why he 

LANGE V. C.R. ENGLAND 
Page 11 
 
believes the most likely cause is the combination of Lange’s complicated pediatric heart 
condition, ongoing congestive heart failure, and weight. The reasoning on which Dr. 
Conte’s opinion is based is more persuasive than that of Dr. Zittergruen’s opinion. This 
decision therefore adopts Dr. Conte’s opinion on causation.  
Lange has failed to meet his burden of proof on the issue of causation. There is 
an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Lange’s employment with 
C.R. England caused the symptoms and decreased heart function he experienced on 
the job. Because Lange did not meet his burden of proof on causation, this decision 
does not address the other disputed issues. 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The claimant shall take nothing from this case. 
2) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this ____1st ____ day of February, 2022. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nate Willems (via WCES) 
 
Tami Fleek (via WCES) 
 
Christine Westberg Dorn (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
