Case Number: 5065781.02
Case Title:  AULWES, BRIAN V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Aulwes Brian-5065781.02R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRIAN AULWES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
  File No. 5065781.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :            REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION        
JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
         Head Note: 2905, 1804 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Brian Aulwes, filed a petition for review-reopening on July 19, 
2021.  He seeks workers’ compensation benefits from John Deere Dubuque Works, a 
self-insured employer.  The claimant was represented by Mark Sullivan.  The defendant 
was represented by Dirk Hammel. 
The matter came on for hearing on October 13, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case is voluminous.  The medical records 
alone include well over 500 pages.  It consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 19; Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 19; and Defense Exhibits A through I.  The claimant testified at 
hearing, in addition to his wife, Christine Aulwes.  Janice Doud served as the court 
reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on November 14, 2022, after helpful briefing 
by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the elements of Section 86.14 have been met for claimant to prove 
entitlement to an increase in benefits. 
2. If so, the extent of disability. 
3. Whether the claimant has proven the following conditions are causally 
connected to his work injury: 
a. Left Hip; 
b. Right Elbow; 
c. Bilateral Arms (including diagnosis of CRPS) 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Apr-17  07:12:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 2 
 
d. Left Shoulder (sequela); 
e. Sleep Apnea. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on March 26, 2015. 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
4. The parties stipulate that the following conditions were causally connected to 
claimant’s work injury: low back, left foot/leg (including CRPS diagnosis), left 
buttock, mental health, right hip. 
5. The weekly rate of compensation is $747.23. 
6. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT & PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
Claimant Brian Aulwes sustained a catastrophic work injury on March 26, 2015.  
He filed a petition and proceeded to an arbitration hearing on June 28, 2019.  An 
arbitration decision dated November 15, 2019, awarded Mr. Aulwes a 70 percent 
industrial disability.  The findings in that arbitration decision represent a preclusive 
snapshot of claimant’s condition as of June 28, 2019. 
Claimant’s Condition on June 28, 2019 
Mr. Aulwes was a long-term employee of Deere.  He had a strong work ethic.  In 
2004, he began working on knuckle boom loaders (KBL) in the forestry department.  On 
March 26, 2015, Mr. Aulwes was climbing down from a KBL and fell.  He sustained an 
injury to his low back on the left side, his right elbow and hip.  (Arbitration Decision, 
page 2)  The low back symptoms were severe and included bladder dysfunction.  Initial 
treatment focused on his low back, and claimant underwent surgery on September 25, 
2015.  (Arb. Dec. p. 2)  While the surgery corrected some of his symptoms, including 
the bladder dysfunction, it was ultimately not successful; in particular he continued to 
have severe SI pain and left thigh and calf pain.  Mr. Aulwes underwent additional 
treatment and was eventually referred to the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
(UIHC).  (Arb. Dec. p. 3)  He participated in a two week comprehensive Spine 
Rehabilitation Program.  The program was helpful.  In August 2016, his physician 
released him with significant restrictions, and he attempted to return to his job on the 
KBL machines.  He was unable to perform this work and was referred back to UIHC to 
the pain clinic.  He received injections and a referral to a pain psychologist.  (Arb. Dec. 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 3 
 
p. 4) 
He continued undergoing pain management treatment throughout 2017 and 
2018.  In June 2018, a spinal cord stimulator was implanted.  (Arb. Dec. p. 5)  Mr. 
Aulwes testified this provided some relief.  In September 2018, one of his treating 
physicians placed restrictions on him which precluded him from performing his job in 
KBL.  In January 2019, he transferred to a position in the small crawler department 
doing engine subassembly.  He testified that he was provided accommodations which 
enabled him to work in this area with significant difficulties.  (Arb. Dec. p. 6) 
At the time of the June 2019 arbitration hearing, Mr. Aulwes had both temporary 
and permanent restrictions.  His permanent restrictions at that time included the 
following:  No lifting, carrying, pushing or pulling over 40 pounds for one-third of work 
day or 20 pounds for two-thirds.  Must be allowed a short stretch break every hour.  No 
working more than 10 hours per day.  No kneeling or climbing.  No lifting of either arm 
or shoulder higher than 65 degrees, three times per day.  (Arb. Dec. p. 7)  He also had 
the following temporary restrictions:  Needs to rest for one-half hour every two hours.  
(Arb. Dec. p. 7)  Within the parameters of these temporary and permanent restrictions, 
Deere was able to accommodate him in the small crawler department performing 
subassembly work.  His earnings had been reduced by about a third because of the job 
change.  (Arb. Dec. p. 6)  And there is no question that he was still struggling, even with 
the significant accommodations. 
As a result of his physical conditions, Mr. Aulwes developed a mental health 
condition.  He received authorized treatment from Valerie Keffala, Ph.D., a psychologist 
at UIHC.  “Dr. Keffala has diagnosed claimant with adjustment disorder with mixed 
anxiety and depressed mood.”  (Arb. Dec. p. 5) 
The following is the agency’s analysis of claimant’s industrial disability as of 
August 22, 2019: 
John Deere was making accommodations for claimant’s impairments, 
even before his most recent temporary restrictions of 2019 were imposed.  
There was no evidence that the accommodations John Deere provides 
are available in the general labor market.  The limited lifting above 
shoulder, no kneeling and crawling as well as the lifting limitations are very 
significant limitations.  
In considering claimant’s industrial disability, I consider the claimant’s 
permanent restrictions.  While claimant had temporary restrictions at the 
time of the arbitration hearing they were not considered for the extent of 
industrial disability evaluation.   
I find the restrictions on lifting that Dr. Taylor made in his November 
26, 2018 IME to be claimant’s lifting restrictions.  They are supported by 
the FCE.  These restrictions more accurately reflect claimant’s lifting ability 
than those provided by Dr. Hunt and Dr. Chen.  The record showed that 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 4 
 
when using the upper limit of Dr. Chen’s restrictions claimant would 
aggravate his conditions.  I find the restrictions in Exhibit C, page 5, as to 
no work over 10 hours, no kneeling or climbing and no lifting his 
arm/shoulder higher than 65 degrees three times a day to be his 
restrictions. 
Claimant has a high school diploma.  He is not able to perform his past 
work that required him to be on his feet all day or work that exceeds his 
work restrictions.  Claimant has shown extremely strong motivation to 
keep working for John Deere.  And John Deere tried to keep claimant 
employed.  However, no job that claimant is capable of performing full 
time without accommodations has been identified.  
Claimant works in significant pain.  He is on medication, uses the SCS 
all the time, uses a TENS unit and does home physical therapy, receives 
counseling, participated in a two-week program at the Spine Rehabilitation 
Program, and had nerve ablations, injections, and acupuncture. 
Considering all of the factors of industrial disability I find claimant has a 
70 percent loss of earning capacity.  Claimant has a 70 percent industrial 
disability, entitling him to 350 weeks of PPD.  If claimant were not still 
employed at John Deere the extent of PPD would be greater. 
(Arb. Dec. pp. 9-10)   
 
On August 11, 2020, the arbitration decision was affirmed by the Commissioner 
in its entirety.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  These decisions are preclusive of Mr. Aulwes’ condition at 
that time. 
The permanent conditions that were found to be work-related included the low 
back condition, the left lower extremity and foot condition, as well as the sequela mental 
health condition.  (Arb. Dec. p. 8) 
On July 19, 2021, Mr. Aulwes filed a petition for review-reopening seeking an 
increase in the award.  The matter proceeded to hearing on October 13, 2022. 
Claimant’s Condition on October 13, 2022 
At the time of the review-reopening (RRO) hearing, Mr. Aulwes was 50 years old.  
He has continued to undergo substantial medical treatment for his work-related 
conditions.  There is a 20-page summary in evidence of all claimant’s treatment from 
the time of his last hearing in August 2019, up through the date of the RRO hearing.  
(Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 24-45)  Calling this treatment “substantial” is, in fact, an understatement.  
His various conditions have nearly taken over his life.  In any given month since July 
2019, he has 8 to 12 medical appointments. 
He has continued to treat for his low back pain and left leg and foot symptoms. 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 5 
 
In July 2019, Mr. Aulwes was evaluated by Saul Wilson, M.D., in Neurosurgery at 
the UIHC.  The records document that he was having new problems including the 
sensation that his left leg was “dead,” in addition to discoloration, hypersensitivity and 
cold to the touch.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 230)  These symptoms were new and severe.  A full 
work-up was performed replete with additional diagnostic testing.  He consulted with the 
UIHC Pain Clinic, Justin Wikle, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 239)  Dr. Wikle ordered 
desensitization therapy, which is ordinarily utilized for a diagnosis of complex regional 
pain syndrome (CRPS).  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 245)  He prescribed the desensitization therapy 
through Kepros Physical Therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 5)  Since this timeframe, multiple physicians 
have diagnosed CRPS, and Deere has accepted responsibility for this condition at least 
as it relates to his left leg.  (Hearing Report paragraph 10)  Over time, however, his 
symptoms have become more severe and include hair loss and uncontrolled shaking or 
quivering.  The hypersensitivity has become so severe it has caused difficulty wearing 
shoes or socks, or using his AFO boot prescribed for his drop foot.  At the time of 
hearing, he is now using a walker.  His treatment regimen now also includes regular 
acupuncture.  (Jt. Ex. 9) 
In September 2019 he was also examined by Cassandra Lange, M.D., for right 
hip symptoms.  Dr. Lange diagnosed end-stage degenerative joint disease.  Mr. Aulwes 
underwent right total hip arthroplasty in October 2019.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 393)  Deere 
accepted responsibility for this condition at hearing.  (Hearing Report paragraph 10)  He 
followed up with Dr. Lange for this condition.  In 2022, he sought evaluation for 
symptoms in his left hip.  In September 2022, Mr. Aulwes underwent left hip surgery by 
Dr. Lange at St. Luke’s Hospital.  (Jt. Ex. 15, p. 528)  Mr. Aulwes contends this surgery 
is a sequela of his initial injury; Deere denies this.  Dr. Lange prepared an opinion 
generally supporting medical causation.  “While it is my opinion that his back injury did 
not ‘cause’ his hip arthritis, it made him less mobile . . .  then that can aggravate his 
underlying condition.”  (Jt. Ex. 15, p. 525)  He has incurred significant medical expenses 
resulting from this surgery.  (Cl. Ex. 12, pp. 137-139) 
Jonathan Citow, M.D., of the American Center for Spine and Neurosurgery, 
examined Mr. Aulwes in April 2021.  The following is documented: 
      He presents with a complicated history beginning with a fall at work 6 
years ago at John Deere.  He developed severe left-sided sciatica treated 
initially with microdiscectomy in 2015 followed by spinal cord stimulator in 
2018 for reflex sympathetic dystrophy.  He believes the spinal cord 
stimulator is still offering him benefit but he is having progressively 
worsening symptoms.  At this point his midline lower back pain is 9/10 in 
severity.  He has pain extending through the entire left lower extremity 
towards his toes 10/10 in severity with numbness and weakness without 
right-sided symptoms.  He is having frequent falling episodes.  He had a 
right hip replacement in 2019 due to the change in his ambulation pattern 
after his injury.  He remains at work at a sedentary job but is having 
difficulty functioning.  He is on gabapentin 2400 mg a day.  Lyrica did not 
help.  He also is on tizanidine and Lidoderm patch.  He takes Tylenol and 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 6 
 
ibuprofen daily. 
(Jt. Ex. 12, p. 493)   
 
Dr. Citow did not recommend any type of surgery and ultimately agreed with the 
CRPS diagnosis.  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 495)  He attempted to modify the restrictions to allow 
Mr. Aulwes to continue to work, but this ultimately did not work.  Mr. Aulwes has not 
worked at Deere since May 27, 2021.  (Def. Ex. D)  Based upon the record before the 
agency, it is clear that Deere has no gainful work within claimant’s physical capabilities.  
It should be acknowledged that Deere made significant and valiant efforts to keep Mr. 
Aulwes gainfully employed.  Mr. Aulwes applied for and secured Social Security 
disability benefits.  (Tr., p. 94) 
Robin Sassman, M.D., performed an IME in August 2022.  She reviewed 
numerous medical records and examined Mr. Aulwes.  She documented his current 
symptoms as follows: 
     He notes pain in his low back to his tailbone.  The nerve stimulator 
helps with the radiation of the pain.  He notes pain in the inside of his left 
leg.  He does not like anything touching the left leg.  He notes shaking in 
the left leg.  He notes a change in the hair growth and sweating of the left 
lower extremity.  He states that [his] toenails look different on that side.  
He notes atrophy of the left lower extremity.  He does not put weight on 
that leg.  His left foot is always numb.  His middle toe and Great toe feel 
like they are being hit by a hammer.  He uses a walker or walking stick in 
the house as well and when he is out.  He uses furniture to assist in 
ambulation in the house.  His wife tries to walk on his left side all the time.  
He tried an AFO brace but this made it worse.  He has stairs in his house.  
He states he recently fell getting in and out of the house.  His left leg “flops 
around” at night.  He notes cramping in his left calf and thigh. 
(Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 91-92)  She noted his other conditions, including left upper extremity pain, 
mental, right hip, right elbow, erectile dysfunction and left shoulder, in addition to 
sleeping difficulties. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 92) 
At the time of his arbitration hearing, Mr. Aulwes had some sexual dysfunction, 
however, he was sexually active.  Since the arbitration decision this condition worsened.  
He was able to get treatment in August 2021, after addressing the issue with Dr. 
Keffala.  She referred him to Amy Pearlman, M.D., in the Urology Department at UIHC 
who provided appropriate treatment.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 269-280)  It appears that this 
condition is a direct sequela of his work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 269, 278) 
Dr. Sassman then opined that claimant’s condition had changed since his first 
arbitration decision: 
 
1. Has Mr. Aulwes sustained any change in his physical condition 
causally related to the original 3/26/2015 work injury, since the 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 7 
 
Arbitration Hearing? 
 
     Yes, Mr. Aulwes has sustained a change in his physical condition 
related to the original 3/26/2015 injury since the arbitration hearing of 
11/15/2019.  Since the arbitration decision he has been diagnosed with 
CRPS Type 1 in the left lower extremity.  He has also started to develop 
CRPS symptoms in the left upper extremity.  Additionally, he has 
sustained an injury to the left shoulder due to a recent fall that occurred 
after the left lower extremity gave out.  Mr. Aulwes has also undergone a 
right hip arthroplasty that was necessitated by the gait change brought 
about by the left lower extremity CRPS symptoms. 
     At the time of the arbitration decision from a symptom standpoint, Mr. 
Aulwes states he was not using a walker.  He states he could walk much 
better at that time.  After the arbitration decision he began to notice his 
foot turning blue.  This has worsened over time.  He states he had some 
sensitivity at that time, but it has significantly worsened since that time. He 
also notes that he had some erectile dysfunction symptoms at that time, 
but these have worsened as well.  He states at that time he would fall a 
couple of times a month.  Now he is falling more frequently 5-6 times a 
week.  He is also much more sensitive to weather changes now.  He also 
states that he is anxious now about people seeing him.  The above 
changes in his description of his symptoms represent a worsening of his 
symptoms since the arbitration decision of 11/15/2019. 
     In addition to the change in his symptoms, Mr. Aulwes has had an 
increase in his need for medications since the arbitration decision of 
11/15/2019.  Specifically, at that time Mr. Aulwes states his medications 
were Gabapentin 2400 mg and Zolpidem.  Currently, his dose of 
Gabapentin [is] up to 3600 mg.  He is also now using Lidocaine patch 5% 
and a 200 mg testosterone injection weekly. 
     Mr. Aulwes has also had a change in his impairment rating since the 
arbitration decision of 11/15/2019 (please see #2).  I am also 
recommending a change in his restrictions as a result of his change in 
status (please see #3). 
(Cl. Ex. 7, p. 96)   
 
She assigned an additional 19 percent whole person rating for the CRPS 
diagnosis.  She assigned a 15 percent whole body rating for the right hip replacement.  
She also assigned an 8 percent whole person rating for erectile dysfunction.  In 
addition, she provided a massive rating for the CRPS symptoms in claimant’s left upper 
extremity and his alleged shoulder sequela.  She recommended prohibitive sedentary 
restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 99) 
Mr. Aulwes also underwent a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) with Daryl 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 8 
 
Short, DPT, at Short Physical Therapy in June 2022.  His various functional deficits 
were documented in painstaking detail in this report.  (Cl. Ex. 4)  Mr. Short opined that 
because of his functional deficits in his low back and left leg, “Mr. Aulwes does not meet 
the capabilities of the sedentary category of physical demand.”  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 47)  He 
recommended a 4-wheeled walker and considered Mr. Aulwes a moderate fall risk. 
Mark Mittauer, M.D., performed a psychiatric evaluation in August 2022, and 
prepared a report in September 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 520)  He diagnosed major 
depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder secondary to pain, 
and obstructive sleep apnea.  Dr. Mittauer recommended medication adjustments, 
continuation of psychotherapy with Valerie Keffala, Ph.D., and avoidance of alcohol.  
(Cl. Ex. 6, p. 69; Jt. Ex. 14, p. 521)  He assigned significant impairment rating for these 
diagnoses.  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 70-71)  Overall, his mental condition has worsened 
significantly since the arbitration hearing.  He has developed suicidal ideation and panic 
attacks among other severely disabling symptoms.  He has continued to treat with Dr. 
Keffala up through the date of hearing. 
 
Based upon the snapshot of Mr. Aulwes’ condition in October 2022, there is no 
question that he is no longer capable of gainful employment as he was in June 2019.  
There has undoubtedly been a change in his physical and economic condition which 
warrants an increase in his award of disability. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first and primary question is whether the legal elements for review-reopening 
have been met in light of the findings of fact set forth above.  Mr. Aulwes alleges he has 
proven that his overall condition has deteriorated since his first hearing, and he has now 
proven permanent total disability.  He argues that some of his conditions have 
worsened, and he has developed new conditions which were not present at the time of 
the first hearing.  He further alleges an economic change of condition in that he is no 
longer working at all at the time of hearing.  The defendant argues that his condition has 
not changed significantly and that his activity is limited now because of other non-work-
related chronic conditions. 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 86.14, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon.  Iowa Code section 86.14(2) (2017).  In order to demonstrate 
eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 86.14(2), the claimant must 
demonstrate what his physical or economic condition was at the time of the original 
award or settlement.  At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant has the 
burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which warrants 
an increase in compensation.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009).  
The difference can be economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  
Essentially, two snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each hearing or 
settlement.  The claimant must prove that there is something substantially different 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 9 
 
between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits.  Gosek v. 
Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at 392.  Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to re-litigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.”  The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot.  Id.   
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  When a work-related injury causes another injury to the 
worker, this new injury (sequela) may also be considered as a work-related injury under 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws. 
When an employee suffers from a compensable injury and another condition or 
injury arises that is the consequence or result of the previous injury, the sequelae rule 
applies.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and later suffers further disability, 
which is the proximate result of the original injury, such further disability is 
compensable.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and thereafter returns to 
work and, as a result, the first injury is aggravated and accelerated so that the employee 
is more greatly disabled than they were before returning to work, the entire disability 
may be compensable.  The employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and 
proximately flow from the accident.   Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-
68, 266 N.W. 480 (1936).  
In order to apply the facts to the law, the two snapshots must be compared. The 
first part of this analysis includes questions of medical causation.  The claimant alleges 
that several conditions developed as a result of the original injury.  For example, the 
defendant has admitted that the claimant’s right hip condition was materially aggravated 
by his original work injury and ultimately resulted in a total hip replacement.  This, by 
itself, is a significant change in claimant’s condition since June 2019.  The defendant 
also admits that the diagnosis of CRPS in the left leg and low back is a new condition 
diagnosed after the June 2019 hearing.  This is also a basis for a finding that his 
condition warrants an increase in benefits.  The defendant, however, has denied the 
following conditions: 
1. Left Hip sequela; 
2. Right Elbow; 
3. Erectile Dysfunction; 
4. Bilateral arms and hands CRPS;  
5. Sequela Left Shoulder; 
6. Sleep Apnea. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 10 
 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based upon the expert medical evidence submitted, I find that the claimant’s left 
hip sequela and erectile dysfunction are both causally connected to his original work 
injury.  I find that claimant has failed to meet his burden of proof that the other 
conditions in his arms are causally connected in any way.  While it is possible that the 
condition of CRPS has developed into his bilateral arms as a result of his work injury, in 
this record, I find it is not probable.  As it relates to his left shoulder, I find he has failed 
to prove any permanent condition.  Also, while the claimant has work-connected sleep 
dysfunction as documented convincingly by Dr. Mittauer, I cannot find that the specific 
condition of sleep apnea was substantially caused or aggravated by his work injury.  
Simply stated, there is little medical support for this in the record. 
Therefore, I specifically find that the claimant has met his burden of proof on 
causation for the following conditions: 
Low back (including erectile dysfunction) 
Radicular condition from low back, buttocks through his foot 
Bilateral hips 
CRPS in his low back and lower extremities 
Mental health 
I find that the claimant has failed to carry his burden as related to the following 
conditions: 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 11 
 
Bilateral arms (CRPS) 
Left shoulder 
Sleep apnea 
The next issue is whether Mr. Aulwes is permanently and totally disabled. 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
When comparing the snapshot taken in June 2019, with the snapshot taken in 
October 2022, there is an obvious difference in the snapshots such that an increase in 
benefits is warranted.  At the outset, it is noted that Deere went to great lengths to keep 
Mr. Aulwes employed and he was, in fact, employed in June 2019.  While his position in 
June 2019 was highly accommodated, he was able to perform sedentary work at that 
time.  By May 2021, it was obvious to everyone involved that the efforts to keep him 
employed were futile and potentially harmful.  His restrictions had become more 
stringent, and he was becoming a greater safety risk as he continued to try.  Thus, the 
primary difference in the two snapshots is that in 2019, he was able to perform 
accommodated sedentary work and in 2022, he was no longer suited even for 
sedentary employment. 
This was because of a combination of factors, including the worsening of his low 
back symptoms causing radicular symptoms into his leg, the diagnosis of CRPS, the 
damage to his bilateral hips caused by his altered gait and his worsening psychological 
condition.  I find that his functional inabilities from these conditions are convincingly 
documented in his functional capacity evaluation.  The FCE accurately assessed his 
functional abilities and lead to the inevitable conclusion that he is not suited for even 
sedentary work.  Therefore, I find that Mr. Aulwes is permanently and totally disabled 
from July 19, 2021, forward. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendant shall pay the claimant permanent total disability benefits from the date 

AULWES V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS 
Page 12 
 
of the filing of the review-reopening petition forward. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid as stipulated by the 
parties. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendant. 
Signed and filed this _17th _ day of April, 2023.  
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Mark Sullivan (via WCES) 
 
Dirk Hamel (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
