Case Number: 20014597.01
Case Title:  LAMB, CHRISTOPHER V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lamb Christopher-20014597.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CHRISTOPHER LAMB, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
   File No. 20014597.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :         
MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION  
LLC,  
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EMC INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
    Head Notes: 1108.50, 1402.40, 1700, 
 
 
  : 
 
 
    1803, 2502, 2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Christopher Lamb, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Mac Concrete Construction, LLC, employer and EMC 
Insurance Companies, as defendants.  Hearing was held via Zoom videoconference on 
July 10, 2023.     
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
 
Christopher Lamb, Lana Sellner, and Christopher McNamara all testified live at 
trial.  The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-9, 
and Defendants’ Exhibits A-K.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, it was decided that post-hearing briefs would be 
due no later than August 25, 2023.  On August 24, 2023, via email claimant’s counsel 
requested the briefs be due on September 1, 2023; defendants did not object and the 
extension was granted.  On August 29, 2023, claimant’s counsel filed a motion to 
withdraw as counsel for claimant.  Claimant consented to the withdrawal and the motion 
was granted.  The deadline for post-hearing briefs was moved to October 30, 2023.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Feb-28  10:07:02     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 2 
 
Claimant was ordered to cause substitute counsel to enter an appearance on his behalf 
or if he elected to proceed unrepresented, to register in the Workers’ Compensation e-
Filing System (WCES).  Claimant failed to comply with that order and consequently he 
was not allowed to submit a post-hearing brief.  Defendants timely submitted their post-
hearing brief on October 30, 2023, at which time the case was fully submitted to the 
undersigned.       
STIPULATIONS 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury. 
 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment on October 20, 2020. 
 
3. The work injury resulted in temporary and permanent disability.   
 
4. The permanent disability in this case is industrial and permanent partial 
disability benefits should commence on July 14, 2022. 
 
5. Claimant is single and entitled to one exemption. 
 
6. Prior to hearing claimant was paid benefits at the weekly rate of $485.26.  
Claimant was paid 90 weeks of healing period benefits.  Claimant was paid 
50 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits which were ongoing at the 
time of hearing.  The parties stipulated that defendants are entitled to a credit 
for benefits paid. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. The extent of industrial disability claimant sustained as the result of the 
stipulated October 20, 2020 work injury. 
 
2. Claimant’s average weekly wages at the time of the injury. 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
4. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
 Claimant, Christopher Lamb, was 40 years old at the time of the hearing.  Lamb 
was hired in February 2020 by Mac Concrete (“Mac”).  (Hearing Transcript, page 23, 
Defendants’ Exhibit E, page 31) It was his understanding that the hours he would work 
would depend on what the weather would permit.  He was hired to perform concrete 
flatwork which was described as light commercial residential work such as driveways, 
sidewalks, parking lots, and patios.  Lamb’s job involved tearing out, removing, and 
replacing concrete.  He helped set up forms, pour new concrete, shovel, prep, and 
grade concrete.  Lamb described this as physical work that involved lifting over fifty 
pounds.  His work involved standing up, kneeling down, and shoveling.  Lamb testified 
that prior to October 20, 2020 he did not have any difficulty performing his job.  (Tr. pp. 
13, 24-27, 108)   
 
On October 20, 2020, Lamb was packing up at the end of the workday and 
putting a concrete tamper into the back of the truck when he felt pain in his back.  A 
concrete tamper is a machine that vibrates the ground.  Lamb estimates the machine 
weighed over one hundred pounds.  He returned to work the next day but was only able 
to work until approximately lunchtime due to pain.  That was the last time he worked at 
Mac Concrete.  He was later notified by Mac Concrete that they did not have work for 
him within his restrictions and the business closed.  (Tr. pp. 27-28, 33-34) 
 
Lamb sought chiropractic care at Hawkeye Chiropractic on October 22, 2020.  
Lamb reported that he had sciatic nerve pain, lower back pain, and left leg pain that 
started 2 days ago.  He wrote that he was not sure why the pain started.  Lamb returned 
to Hawkeye Chiropractic on October 24, 29 and November 5, 2020.  Lamb testified that 
the chiropractor advised him to go to the hospital for a lumbar MRI.  Lamb was 
eventually referred to Steindler Orthopedics.  (Def. Ex. K, pp. 58-60; Tr. pp. 28-29) 
 
On October 30, 2020, Lamb went to the emergency room at Mercy Hospital.  He 
presented with low back pain with an onset of 45 days ago with no precipitating injury.  
The pain was constant, in his low back just left of midline and radiated throughout his 
left leg.  The doctor noted that Lamb had chronic numbness of his anterior lower leg due 
to prior surgeries on his knee and he reported no acute change.  Lamb reported a 
history of similar symptoms with a disc herniation and had prior surgeries with Steindler 
Orthopedics.  The assessment at the emergency room on October 30, 2020 was lumbar 
radiculopathy.  Lamb was prescribed hydrocodone and told to follow-up with his primary 
care physician. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 2) 
 
On December 16, 2020, Lamb saw Benjamin D. MacLennan, M.D. at Steindler 
Orthopedic Clinic.  He reported stabbing pain over the left side of his low back.  He had 
stabbing, aching pain with numbness that radiated over the posterior aspect of his left 
leg to the upper-mid calf.  He reported that his pain started after he was pulling on a 
heavy tamper on October 22, 2020.  He had no left-sided low back pain or left leg pain 
before this incident.  Dr. MacLennan’s impression was lumbar degenerative disc 
disease L4-S1, left-sided low back pain, left leg radiculitis severe.  An MRI of the lumbar 
spine showed disc protrusion on the left pinching the nerve.  An epidural steroid 
injection (ESI) was recommended and scheduled.  Dr. MacLennan recommended over-

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 4 
 
the-counter pain medications as needed and Flexeril and a Medrol Dosepak.  Lamb was 
to remain off work.  (Joint Exhibit 1, pages 1-5; JE4, pp. 82-83) 
 
Lamb saw Daniel Goldish, M.D. at Steindler Clinic on January 18, 2021. Dr. 
Goldish performed a left transforaminal ESI.  (JE1, pp. 7-8)  On February 8, 2021, Lamb 
reported to Dr. MacLennan that the ESI was not beneficial.  He continued to have pain 
over the low back with radiation of pain down the posterior aspect of the left leg into the 
toes of the left foot.  Dr. MacLennan noted he performed left L4-5 and left L5-S1 
discectomies on February 24, 2011.  Dr. MacLennan and Lamb discussed treatment 
options.  There was no emergent need for surgery, and it was agreed that nonoperative 
treatment would be pursued before any surgery.  Lamb opted to start a course of 
physical therapy and try a second ESI.  He was instructed to avoid lifting greater than 5-
10 pounds and remain off work.  A second injection was performed on February 15, 
2021. (JE1, pp. 9-13) 
 
On March 10, 2021, Lamb reported that his pain was not improving.  He had 
been attending physical therapy and he thought that might be helping a little bit.  He 
called the clinic on February 26, 2021 and got a prescription for oxycodone.  He 
reported that he had been using it very sparingly, but said his pain was severe.  Dr. 
MacLennan recommended Lamb continue nonoperative therapies and another ESI.  He 
was given another prescription for oxycodone to use sparingly.  (JE1, pp. 14-18) 
 
Lamb returned to Dr. MacLennan on April 7, 2021.  He reported that the injection 
he received on March 30, 2021 provided a little bit of relief but overall his symptoms 
were about the same as his last appointment.  Dr. MacLennan recommended continued 
nonoperative treatment.  (JE1, pp. 19-22) 
 
On May 5, 2021, Lamb reported to Dr. MacLennan that his symptoms had not 
improved.  Lamb was ready to get his problems fixed and opted for surgery.  He was to 
remain off work.  (JE1, pp. 23-26) 
 
On May 20, 2021, Dr. MacLennan performed lumbar spine surgery which 
included a L4-L5-S1 fusion.  On June 4, 2021, Lamb reported that he had slight pain in 
his upper buttocks once in a while.  His left leg pain was gone.  He had no other 
complaints.  Dr. MacLennan noted that Lamb was doing well and his preoperative 
symptoms had greatly improved.  He instructed Lamb to wean off his Dilaudid over the 
next few weeks.  He was to remain off work.  (JE1, pp. 42-43; JE5, pp. 84-87) 
 
On July 16, 2021, Lamb reported to Dr. MacLennan that his back was still sore, 
but his legs were feeling better.  He reported getting pain over the top of the left buttock 
over the previous 2-3 weeks.  He was using Dilaudid but only 1 or 2 per day.  Dr. 
MacLennan noted Lamb was 8 weeks out L4-S1 instrumented posterolateral fusion, L5-
S1 TLIF, L4-S1 laminectomies, stable.  Lamb’s pre-operative leg pain was basically 
gone, and his back pain had really settled down.  He was to start a course of physical 
therapy.  (JE1, pp. 46-48) 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 5 
 
 
Lamb returned to Dr. MacLennan on September 1, 2021.  He had pain over his 
low back and into his left buttock.  His pain was worse with physical therapy.  Dr. 
MacLennan noted that Lamb had not been going to physical therapy as much because 
he had family things.  He explained to Lamb that he needed to be more consistent 
attending therapy. (JE1, pp. 49-51)   
 
Lamb continued to follow-up with Dr. MacLennan.  By March 9, 2022 he was 9-
1/2 months out from lumbar surgery.  He reported that his back “still lets him know it’s 
there when he puts his shoes on or pulls on his pants.”  His back is worse if he twists 
wrong.  He reported no radiating pain down his left leg but did have some pain in his left 
buttock once in a while.  He is still attending physical therapy, but he had missed a few 
times.  Dr. MacLennan noted it was normal to have some aches and pains in the low 
back.  Lamb was instructed to continue physical therapy.  He was to return to see Dr. 
MacLennan in 3 months.  (JE1, pp. 60-62)   
 
On June 29, 2022, Dr. MacLennan noted that Lamb did not attend his 
appointment that day.  This was the third straight appointment that Lamb missed.  The 
case manager was present that day and was also present the previous Friday.  Case 
manager reported to Dr. MacLennan that Lamb had not been attending physical therapy 
and was “giving us the run around.”  (JE1, p. 63) 
 
Lamb returned to Dr. MacLennan on July 13, 2022.  Lamb reported his back felt 
about the same as when he last saw Dr. MacLennan.  The severity of his pain varied.  
Dr. MacLennan noted the x-rays were stable and that Lamb had healed well.  His 
preoperative radicular symptoms had resolved.  Lamb wanted to pursue permanent 
restrictions for his back.  An FCE with validity was ordered. (JE1, pp. 64-66) 
 
Lamb underwent an FCE at E3 Work Therapy Services on July 28, 2022.  In his 
report Aaron Timm, D.P.T. stated the overall classification of Lamb’s effort was invalid 
due to inconsistent performance.  Timm placed Lamb in the heavy demand for material 
handling demands. (Def. Ex. G) 
 
On August 3, 2022, Dr. MacLennan called Lamb to discuss the FCE results. 
Lamb was surprised to learn that the results came back as invalid.  Dr. MacLennan 
explained that because the results were invalid he could not write any permanent 
restrictions.  Dr. MacLennan placed Lamb at MMI for the surgery.  No further follow-up 
was needed.  (JE6, p. 88) 
 
At the request of his attorney, Lamb underwent an FCE on October 18, 2022 at 
Short Physical Therapy.  In his report Daryl Short, D.P.T. discussed the differences in 
the approach his FCE took versus that taken by E3 Work Therapy Services.  Short 
assigned permanent restrictions based on the FCE he conducted.  His restrictions were 
for 8 hours per day and 40 hours per week.  Short placed Lamb’s capabilities in the mid 
medium category of physical demand.  He recommended lifting 35 pounds on an 
occasional basis.  He should be allowed to change positions between sitting, standing, 
and walking as needed.  Lamb should also use correct lifting techniques by keeping 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 6 
 
loads close to his body, bending through his hips/knees and not low back, and no 
bending and twisting.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 18-20) 
 
On November 10, 2022 Dr. MacLennan signed a letter authored by Lamb’s 
attorney.  The letter provided a copy of the Short Physical Therapy FCE and asked Dr. 
McLennan to review the report.  By signing the letter, the doctor indicated that he 
agreed that Lamb should follow the findings of the Short FCE as permanent restrictions 
related to his work-related injury.  (JE6, p. 89) 
 
Dr. MacLennan issued his opinion regarding permanent impairment on April 28, 
2023.  He cited table 15-3 on page 384 of the AMA Guides, placed Lamb in a DRE 
lumbar category IV and assigned 23 percent impairment of the whole person.  (JE6, p. 
90) 
 
At the request of his attorney Lamb saw Sunil Bansal, M.D. on March 3, 2023 for 
an IME regarding the October 20, 2020 work injury.  As the result of the examination 
and review of records Dr. Bansal issued a report on May 14, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-17) 
Dr. Bansal noted that Lamb had undergone a surgery on his lumbar spine in 2011 as 
the result of an injury that occurred when he was moving a couch.  Following a 
microdiscectomy Lamb recovered with no residual symptoms.  Lamb reported he had 
been able to continue working in physically demanding jobs without any difficulty until 
the October 20, 2020 work injury. Dr. Bansal noted that since the October 20, 2020 
work injury Lamb has had low back pain, extending to the upper left buttock and hip 
region.  The pain remained significant but no longer radiated down his left leg into his 
foot.  He had no numbness or tingling.  Lamb reported he was not able to sit or stand 
comfortably for very long.  He does okay with traversing stairs.  Dr. Bansal cited to 
Table 15-3 of the AMA Guides and placed Lamb in DRE lumbar category IV.  He 
assigned 22 percent impairment of the body as a whole.  Dr. Bansal agreed with the 
restrictions recommended by the Short FCE.  He recommended lifting 35 pounds on an 
occasional basis.  He should be allowed to change positions between sitting, standing, 
and walking as needed.  Lamb should also use correct lifting techniques by keeping 
loads close to his body, bending through his hips/knees and not low back, and no 
bending and twisting.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p.16)      
 
Lamb testified that he attempted to return to see Dr. MacLennan, but he was not 
approved to return; the timeframe of this attempt is not clear.  He testified that he then 
sought treatment on his own.  He had an appointment scheduled approximately one 
month after the hearing.  He was also going to see his primary care physician a few 
weeks after the hearing.  (Tr. pp. 41-42) 
 
The defendants hired Lana Sellner, a vocational case manager, to provide a 
vocational assessment and vocational assistance for Lamb.  She met in-person with 
Lamb and his attorney on August 26, 2022.  As the result of that meeting, she issued an 
initial vocational analysis on October 14, 2022.  Her report contained information 
including Lamb’s personal/socioeconomic background, educational and work 
background, self-directed job search, and pertinent medical information.  Based on 
Lamb’s work history, Sellner identified his transferable skills that could be utilized in 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 7 
 
other positions. Sellner agreed to prepare a draft resume for Lamb and then begin job 
development or evaluate for retraining. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 18-20) 
 
On November 15, 2022, Sellner issued a vocational progress report.  She had 
reviewed the October 2022 Short FCE which indicated Lamb was capable of working in 
the medium work category.  She had prepared a resume for Lamb and sent it to his 
attorney and she was waiting for a telephone meeting to finalize the resume.  In the 
meantime, she continued exploring job leads for Lamb.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 21)     
 
Sellner provided Lamb with 8 job leads on November 28, 2022 and 14 job leads 
on January 4, 2023.  When she attempted to call him on January 11, 2023 Lamb either 
hung up or the line was disconnected.  Sellner continued to provide job leads for Lamb.  
(Def. Ex. D, pp. 22-26) 
 
On May 22, 2023 Sellner issued a vocational progress report.  By April 2023 
Sellner had provided 48 job leads to Lamb.  In May Lamb advised that he had not 
explored any jobs in 2023.  Lamb told Sellner that his IME doctor told him he should not 
work at all due to his failed back fusion.  Lamb stated that his restrictions from the 
treating physicians were not valid any longer due to his increased symptoms and the 
IME doctor’s opinion.  Per Lamb’s request, Sellner made slight changes to his resume 
and provided a copy to him.  By May 22, 2023 Sellner had provided 65 job development 
leads to Lamb.  The leads were for full-time positions with wages ranging from $10 to 
$21.07 per hour.  (Def. Ex. D, pp. 27-30; Def. Ex. E)   
 
Sellner testified live at the hearing and provided her qualifications as a vocational 
case manager.  Her opinions are unrebutted.  Regarding Lamb, she was tasked to 
provide a vocational assessment and to find job leads for Lamb that were consistent 
with his restrictions as set forth in the Short FCE.  She looked for job leads based on the 
restrictions set forth by the medical providers, not the self-reported limitations that Lamb 
testified about.  Sellner mentioned that in her experience there are employers who are 
willing to accommodate qualified workers if they believe the worker is motivated and 
competent.  Sellner opined that the 65 job leads she provided to Lamb were for open 
jobs in his geographical area that he was both physically qualified for and work history 
qualified to perform.  (Def. Ex. A, pp. 29-30)  Sellner believes Lamb not applying for any 
of the job leads that she provided demonstrates a lack of motivation on his part.  During 
cross-examination, Sellner was asked about Lamb’s need to lay down five times per 
day, as he testified at hearing.  Sellner confirmed that his need to lay down five times 
per day is not a medical restriction and was not conveyed to her by Lamb or his 
attorney.  She noted that the hearing had been going on for approximately 2-1/2 hours 
and she had not observed Lamb lay down at all.  (Tr. pp. 76-106)   
 
Lamb did have some injuries prior to October 10, 2020.  He had three surgeries 
on his left knee in 2015, 2016, and 2017.  He did have permanent impairment as the 
result of those surgeries, but not permanent restrictions.  He had a low back surgery 
performed by Dr. MacLennan in 2011.  He did not have any permanent restrictions after 
that procedure.  (Tr. pp. 15-16)    

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 8 
 
 
At hearing Lamb testified that he has constant back pain which he rates at a 5 or 
6 and gets as high as 9 out of 10.  His left buttock is still hurting and symptoms in the 
upper part of his leg are also coming back and are constant.  He continues to do some 
home exercises.  He takes over-the-counter Tylenol and ibuprofen.  His pain wakes him 
up 3 to 5 times per night.  He estimates he only gets 4 or 5 hours of sleep per night.  He 
testified it is uncomfortable for him to sit or stand for long periods of time.  When he is at 
home, he will sit for about 20 minutes and then gets up to walk around.  When his pain 
is unbearable, he lays down on his back and crosses his leg over his other leg for 20 to 
30 minutes.  He estimates he lays down at least five times per day.  (Tr. pp. 30, 34-38)   
 
Lamb is aware that both Dr. McLennan and Dr. Bansal adopted permanent 
restrictions pursuant to the Short FCE.  Lamb believes he could not go back to any of 
his past jobs with his lifting restrictions because they all required either heavy lifting or 
repetitive lifting.  He also testified that none of his prior jobs would allow him to lay down 
4 or 5 times per day.  (Tr. pp. 39-40) 
 
Lamb did not graduate from high school; he believes that the 10th grade was the 
last grade that he completed.  He received Cs and Ds while he was in school.  He left 
school due to transportation issues.  He did not receive any additional education or 
vocational training.  He does not have a GED.  After leaving school he began working 
full-time to help his mother with bills.  (Tr. pp. 14-15)   
 
Lamb does not have any computer skills and has never worked at a job that 
requires use of a computer.  He does know how to use email on his phone.  Lamb 
testified he did look into the proposed jobs that Ms. Sellner provided to him and he does 
not believe he is capable of performing any of those jobs.  He does not believe he is 
capable of working any full-time job due to his pain.  (Tr. pp. 40-41) 
 
We now turn to Lamb’s work history.  In his answers to interrogatories claimant 
provided scant information regarding his past employment.  He stated he had worked 
for IBP and drove a fork truck, but no further details such as time or place were 
provided.  He noted he did finish carpentry in Iowa City for 3 years; he did not provide a 
timeframe or name of employer.  He indicated he performed line work with plastic parts 
at PPC in West Branch from 2010-2012 through a temp agency.  He also worked in a 
supervisory role from 2012-2014 at Cedar Poly in Tipton.  He stated he performed 
concrete construction at ValuCon in Iowa City from 2014-2017.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 5)  When 
Lamb met with Sellner he provided additional employment information.  For example, 
Lamb completed forklift training while he was at IBP in Columbus Junction.  Lamb had a 
gap in employment between 2017 and 2020.  (Def. Ex. D)  Sellner compiled his work 
experience in a resume which Lamb was able to review and request changes.  (Def. Ex. 
E)   
 
During his February 2023 deposition Lamb remembered that he did perform 
some concrete work in 2019.  (JE 7, depo pp. 17-18)  At hearing Lamb provided 
additional information concerning his employment history.  During a summer in high 
school, he performed concrete precast for Raiders Precast in Burlington.  He returned to 
this work after he left high school and stayed there for about 1 year.  Next, he worked 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 9 
 
for Wilson Concrete Construction where they built foundations for hog pits and did 
residential work.  Then Lamb went to work at Foundations Unlimited in Kalona, Iowa.  
He performed concrete residential work and worked foundations.  At some point, 
perhaps shortly before Mac Concrete, he also worked for Hawkeye Concrete in 
Davenport.  (Tr. pp. 16-23) 
 
I find Lamb has restrictions as set forth in the Short FCE and adopted by Dr. 
MacLennan and Dr. Bansal.  I find Lamb does not have any type of restrictions placed 
on him regarding laying down 4 to 5 times per day.  Given Lamb’s questionable 
creditability, I place greater weight on the objective evidence than on claimant’s 
testimony.    
 
At the time of the injury Lamb was paid $18.00 per hour.  Although he cannot 
return to his prior job, no medical provider has opined that he cannot work.  Sellner has 
identified several potential categories of work and numerous open job positions that she 
believes he could perform based on his permanent restrictions.  The hourly pay for 
those jobs ranged from $10.00 to $21.07.  I find Lamb’s restrictions preclude him from a 
significant number of jobs in the general labor market.  I find the evidence demonstrates 
that he has a work history with varied employment and skills that would enable him to 
pursue alternate employment if he were so motivated.  Unfortunately, he has 
demonstrated no motivation to find alternate work or retraining.  Defendants hired a 
vocational counselor who provided Lamb with 65 job leads.  Lamb has not applied for a 
single job since his employment with Mac Concrete.  
 
Defendants question Lamb’s credibility.  Defendants point out that his discovery 
responses failed to provide pertinent information.  For example, the interrogatories 
asked him to identify persons with knowledge of his claim.  At hearing Lamb testified 
that he was engaged to a person named Rochelle; she was never identified in 
discovery.  Additionally, at hearing it was revealed that he had a new address and was 
currently living in an RV with his fiancé.  (JE 7, Tr. pp. 43-45) The employment history 
he provided in his answers to interrogatories is incomplete when compared to the 
history he provided at hearing. (Def. Ex. A, p. 5; Tr. pp. 16-24)  Lamb told Sellner that 
Dr. Bansal stated he should not return to work because he had a failed fusion.  (Def. Ex. 
D, p. 28)  This is contrary to Dr. Bansal’s records.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-17)  At hearing Lamb 
testified that he attempted to return to Dr. MacLennan, but his office refused to see him.  
(Tr. pp. 74-75) There is no documentation of this from the Steindler Orthopedic Clinic, 
even though that office did document other phone calls.  (JE1, pp. 34-45)  Additionally, 
Lamb testified that he went to the emergency room approximately one month before the 
hearing and had scheduled appointments for after the hearing; this information was also 
not disclosed to the defendants.  (Tr. pp. 65, 74).  I find that Lamb has been less than 
forthcoming with the defendants in this case.  I find that Lamb’s credibility is 
questionable.   
 
In light of Lamb’s questionable credibility, I place greater weight on the objective, 
documented evidence than I do on his testimony.  I find that because of the October 20, 
2020 work injury Lamb has permanent restrictions as set forth in the Short FCE and 
adopted by Dr. MacLennan and Dr. Bansal.           

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 10 
 
 
Considering his age, educational background, employment history, ability to 
retrain, lack of motivation to return to the workforce, length of healing period, permanent 
impairment, permanent restrictions as assigned by the physicians, and the other 
industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that he has 
sustained a 35 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of his work injury with 
the defendant employer.   
 
We now turn to the issue of claimant’s weekly workers’ compensation rate.  The 
dispute centers around which weeks should be included in the calculation of Lamb’s 
average weekly wages.       
 
Christopher McNamara testified at hearing.  He was the owner of Mac 
Construction in 2020.  Mac Construction went out of business in December 2022.  It 
was a small business with 3 to 4 employees.  McNamara was the owner but also 
performed hands-on work.  The weather affected their work schedule.  Work cannot be 
performed in the winter due to frost from basically Christmas to mid-March.  Also, the 
spring is usually rainy and flat concrete work cannot be performed then either.  Also, 
during the summer, if it is really hot, they will also tone down their work.  Their hours 
would vary week to week in part due to the weather.  McNamara testified that it was 
customary for a laborer to have hours that varied anywhere from 20 to 48 hours per 
week.  With regard to Defendants’ Exhibit I, McNamara testified that weeks, such as 
September 13, when there were only 20 hours of work, were due to weather.  Likewise, 
weeks with higher hours, such as 47.75 hours, were because the weather would have 
been favorable to their work.  Other than weather he was not aware of any reasons why 
Lamb would not have shown up for work.  (Tr. pp. 106-113)  I find the testimony of 
McNamara to be credible.  Both Lamb and McNamara testified that the number of hours 
worked each week was affected by the weather.  I find the number of hours claimant 
worked each week for Mac Concrete varied based on the weather.   
 
Each party has submitted their rate calculations.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 55; Def. Ex. I) 
Lamb asserts that his average weekly wage (AWW) is $748.38.  To arrive at this AWW 
he omits the three weeks with the lowest hour totals.  He asserts that 20, 25.50, and 
27.75 hours per week are not representative and should be excluded.  Lamb does not 
assert that the highest three weeks (47.75, 46.75, and 43.50 hours) should be excluded.  
(Cl. Ex. 9, p. 55)  A review of Lamb’s pay stubs reveal that the number of hours worked 
per week varied anywhere from 20 hours per week to as high as 46.75 hours per week.  
(Def. Ex. H)  I find that the week ending September 13, 2020 wherein Lamb worked a 
total of 20 hours is atypical and should be excluded and replaced with the closest 
previous week with earnings that fairly represent Lamb’s customary earnings.  Thus, in 
calculating claimant’s AWW I exclude the week with the end date of pay period 
September 13, 2020 and replace it with the July 19, 2020 week as set forth in 
defendants’ rate calculation option B.  (Def. Ex. I)  Thus, I find Lamb’s AWW is $700.96.  
 
Next, Lamb is seeking reimbursement for the IME he had with Dr. Bansal.  Dr. 
Bansal examined Lamb on March 3, 2023.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal did not issue his 
report until May 14, 2023.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) The only other physician to render an 
impairment rating in this case was Dr. MacLennan, the treating physician.  Dr. 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 11 
 
MacLennan issued his opinion regarding impairment on April 28, 2023.  (JE6, p. 90)  I 
find that the IME with Dr. Bansal occurred prior to any other impairment ratings in this 
case.     
 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in his Exhibit 6.   
On September 18, 2023, claimant’s attorney of record was granted leave to 
withdraw.  Claimant was given 28 days to cause substitute counsel to enter an 
appearance on his behalf or if he elected to proceed unrepresented, to register in the 
Workers’ Compensation e-Filing System (WCES) and file a notice of association to 
indicate his desire to proceed without counsel.  The order stated that failure to comply 
with the order could result in sanctions under rule 876 IAC 4.36.  Claimant failed to 
comply with that order within 28 days.  On October 23, 2023, the undersigned issued an 
order stating claimant had failed to comply.  As a result of claimant’s failure to comply 
with the September 18, 2023 order, the undersigned found that appropriate sanctions 
would be to not allow claimant to submit a post-hearing brief and to not allow an 
assessment of costs against the defendants in the underlying arbitration proceeding.  
As such, no costs are assessed against the defendants.  Each party shall bear their 
own costs.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 12 
 
 
The parties have stipulated that claimant is entitled to be compensated on an 
industrial disability basis. (Hearing Report).  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich 
v. Tri-City R. Co.of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore 
plain that the legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or 
loss of earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the 
terms of percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant has demonstrated 
entitlement to 175 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits (35 percent x 500 
weeks).  The parties have stipulated that any permanent partial disability benefits 
should commence on July 14, 2022.   
 
We now turn to the issue of claimant’s appropriate weekly workers’ 
compensation rate.  Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly 
earnings of the employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings 
as the gross salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled 
had the employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the 
employee was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment.  
The various subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly 
earnings depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury.  Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, however.  Section 85.36(6). 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I concluded that while the number of hours 
claimant worked each week varied due to the weather, the 20 hours he worked for the 
week of September 13, 2020 did not fairly reflect his earnings and should be excluded.  
Thus, I concluded Lamb’s AWW is $700.96.  The parties have stipulated that Lamb is 
single and entitled to one exemption.  Applying the average weekly wage to the benefits 
schedule results in a weekly workers’ compensation rate of $447.09.  Thus, I conclude 
claimant’s weekly workers’ compensation rate for the injury of October 20, 2020 is 
$447.09. 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 13 
 
 
As noted above, the parties stipulated that prior to hearing claimant was paid 
weekly benefits at the higher rate of $485.26.  Defendants are entitled to a credit for the 
weekly overpayment.   
 
We now turn to the issue of the IME.  Claimant seeks reimbursement pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39 for the expenses he incurred in connection with Dr. Bansal’s 
IME.  Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination 
by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has 
previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial 
evaluation is too low.   
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant failed to 
demonstrate entitlement to reimbursement for the expenses associated with the IME 
conducted by Dr. Bansal.  Claimant’s IME with Dr. Bansal occurred before a physician 
of the employer’s choice, Dr. MacLennan, had evaluated permanent disability.  Because 
the claimant sought his IME before Dr. MacLennan rendered his opinion on permanent 
impairment the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 were not met.  Thus, claimant 
has failed to demonstrate entitlement to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME.     
 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in his Exhibit 6, 
page 49.   For the reason set forth above, no costs are awarded.  Each party shall bear 
their own costs.       
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of four hundred forty-seven 
and 09/100 dollars ($447.09).   
Defendants shall pay one hundred seventy-five (175) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on the stipulated commencement date of July 14, 2022.  
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.    
  
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 

LAMB V. MAC CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 14 
 
 
Signed and filed this __28th ___ day of February, 2024. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Christopher Lamb (via WCES) 
Matthew Novak (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
