Case Number: 22003777.01
Case Title:  JACOBS, DANNY V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Jacobs Danny-22003777.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DANNY JACOBS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                  File No. 22003777.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured Defendant. 
  :  
Head Note Nos: 1108.50; 1803; 2206 
 
 
  : 
 
 
      2907 
 
 
       
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Danny Jacobs, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Archer Daniels Midland Co., employer and self-insured 
defendant.  The hearing was held on May 31, 2024. Pursuant to an order from the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case was heard via videoconference using 
Zoom with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  Those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Danny Jacobs and Jessica Krob testified live at the trial.  The evidentiary record 
also includes joint exhibits 1-8, claimant’s exhibits 1-11, and defendant’s exhibits A-K.  
All exhibits were received into the record without objection.   
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs by July 12, 2024, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.  
ISSUES 
The parties identified the following disputed issues on the hearing report: 
1. Whether the alleged injury on February 18, 2022 resulted in any permanent 
disability; and if so,  
 
2. The nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits.  
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits.  
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-20  14:18:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of the medical expenses listed in 
claimant’s exhibit 11. 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
 
6. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds as follows: 
At the time of the hearing the claimant, Danny Jacobs (hereinafter “Jacobs”) was 
64 years old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 13). Jacobs resides in Marion, Iowa. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 9, p. 115).  He graduated from Fairfield High School in 1980. (Id. at 116).  While 
in high school, Jacobs held part-time jobs at a grocery store, stocking and carrying 
groceries out to customer’s cars, and at a flower shop making deliveries and taking care 
of plants. (Id. at 117; Cl Ex. 4, p. 84).  He also worked at Dexter Foundry during summer 
break. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 84).   
After graduating from high school, Jacobs worked for JI Case, assembling tractor 
cabs, as well as crawlers and bulldozers. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 84).  He did that job for 
approximately one year before taking a position as a correctional officer at the Iowa 
State Penitentiary.  (Id.).  Jacobs worked for the Penitentiary for approximately four 
years. (Id.).  From 1985 to 1986, he worked as an electroplating operator at Thomas & 
Betts Electronics. (Id.).  In 1988, Jacobs took a job with Ralston Purina Company on the 
assembly line making cat and dog food.  (Id.).  He worked for Ralston Purina for 
approximately seven years, leaving in 1995. (Id.).   
Jacobs briefly worked for a temp agency, before securing a job with Cargill in 
1996. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 83).  From 1996 to 2000, he worked at two different Cargill locations 
shoveling soybeans, loading railcars, and sample testing products. (Id.).  From 2000 to 
2001, Jacobs worked for Pella Windows, assembling windows. (Id.).  He did not work 
from 2001 through 2013, spending some of that time incarcerated and some taking care 
of his ailing parents. (Id.).  From 2013 to 2017, Jacobs worked at McBeth Auto & 
Wrecker, taking parts off old cars, as well as changing tires and oil. (Id.).  In 2017, 
Jacobs also worked for Advance Services, a temp agency, and for Church & Dwight 
Co., making cattle feed and loading semis. (Id.).  
In November 2017, ADM hired Jacobs to work as a mill utility operator. (Cl Ex. 4, 
p. 84).  ADM is a milling corn processing plant. (Cl Ex. 9, p. 120).  They make ethanol, 
corn starch, corn oil, and gluten. (Id.; see also Tr., p. 89).  In the mill utility position, 
Jacobs disassembled and cleaned Merkle bowls, which are large three-ton vessels 
used to separate products. (Tr., p. 23).  At the hearing, Jacobs testified that he cleaned 
three to five bowls a day and the process took around three and a half hours. (Id. at 24).  
He also assisted operators, hosed streams, and worked on sump pumps. (Id. at 23-25).  
Jacobs worked as a utility mill operator for two years. (Id. at 25).  In 2019, Jacobs bid 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 3 
 
into a utility position in the dry starch department. (Id.).  This job required him to load 
bags of cereal using a forklift and then cut open the bags to dump their contents in 
repackaging. (Id. at 25-26).  He also swept and cleaned. (Id. at 26).  Jacobs also 
worked for a time in the feed house at ADM, physically loading and unloading railcars 
and semi-trucks. (Id.).  At the hearing, Jacobs testified that the feed house position 
involved a lot of walking, kneeling and squatting, as well as going up and down stairs 
and it bothered his right knee. (Id. at 26-29).  Jacobs requested a transfer back to the 
utility mill operator position. (Id. at 28-29).  
Jacobs alleges he suffered a work-related injury to his right knee while working at 
ADM on February 18, 2022. (See Petition).  He also alleges sequela injuries to his low 
back, and bilateral wrists. (Id.).  On the date of the alleged injury Jacobs was working as 
a utility mill operator. (Tr., p. 30).  At the hearing, Jacobs testified that several other 
employees had been playing practical jokes on him at work. (Id. at 31).  Jacobs stated 
that on the alleged injury date, they took the wheels off his chair in the mill utility control 
room and tied his chair to a table with zip ties. (Id.).  Jacobs indicated he noticed the zip 
ties and cut them off the chair but did not notice the missing wheels. (Id.).  He tried to sit 
down in the chair, but it tipped over and he fell out onto the ground. (Id. at 31-32).  
Jacobs testified he landed on the concrete floor, striking his right knee and head. (Id. at 
33). There were no witnesses to Jacobs’ fall. (Id. at 96).  
After the incident Jacobs went back to work. (Tr., p. 33).  He did not report it to 
his supervisor. (Id.).  Jacobs testified that after his shift was over, he noticed that his 
knee was starting to swell.  (Id.).  The alleged incident took place on a Friday. (Id.).  
Jacobs was not scheduled to work on Saturday, Sunday or Monday. (Id.).  Jacobs 
returned back to work on Tuesday, February 22, 2022. (Id. at 34).  Jacobs testified that 
he did not report the work injury on that date because he was afraid of getting in trouble. 
(Id.).  Jacobs testified that his right knee was still hurting, so he called Steindler 
Orthopedic and made an appointment. (Id. at 35).  
According to the medical records, Jacobs was evaluated by Ashley Reed, PA-C, 
at the Steindler Clinic on February 25, 2022. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 14).  Jacobs complained 
of pain in the anterior medial and lateral joint line of his right knee that began several 
weeks prior. (Id.).  Ms. Reed noted that Jacobs had seen David Steinbronn, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon at Steindler Clinic previously for right knee pain and that he had an 
existing diagnosis of medial osteoarthritis, as well as a medial meniscus tear in that 
knee. (Id.).  The medical records show that Jacobs received treatment at Steindler 
Clinic for right knee complaints in 2019. (Id. at 1-13).  Jacobs started treating with Dr. 
Steinbronn for right knee pain on July 12, 2019. (Id. at 1).  Dr. Steinbronn’s treatment 
note indicates Jacobs was experiencing knee pain, swelling, and intermittent weakness, 
feeling like his knee could give out, as well as loss of feeling in his bilateral feet. (Id.). 
Jacobs told Dr. Steinbronn that he had a significant stroke in 2016, “which affected his 
right lower extremity and he has since ambulated with a limp.” (Id.).  Dr. Steinbronn 
diagnosed him with right knee pain with mild arthritis and an effusion, as well as residual 
weakness after a stroke in 2016. (Id. at 2).  He aspirated Jacobs’ knee and gave him a 
cortisone injection. (Id.).  Dr. Steinbronn returned him to work without restrictions, but 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 4 
 
noted Jacobs planned to bid into a new job at work because of his knee pain.1 (Id. at 3).  
Jacobs continued to experience knee pain after the injection. (Id. at 6).  Dr. Steinbronn 
ordered an MRI. (Id. at 8).  It showed a mixed partial and full-thickness horizontal tear of 
the medial meniscus body and posterior horn, a severe partial-thickness horizontal tear 
of the lateral meniscus body and small portion of the posterior horn, and severe medial 
compartment chondromalacia.  (Id. at 9).  Dr. Steinbronn recommended that Jacobs 
continue with conservative treatment until the knee became too painful, at which point 
they would proceed with a partial knee replacement. (Id. at 10).  Dr. Steinbronn felt 
Jacobs was not a candidate for a knee arthroscopy because of his advanced 
osteoarthritis. (Id. at 11).  Jacobs’ last appointment with Dr. Steinbronn took place on 
November 4, 2019.  (Id.).  Dr. Steinbronn’s notes indicate Jacobs still had pain over the 
medial aspect of his right knee, as well as occasional popping, and feeling like the knee 
was going to give out. (Id.).  Dr. Steinbronn offered to proceed with a medial 
unicompartmental arthroplasty, but Jacobs indicated he wanted to take some time and 
consider his options. (Id. at 13).  During the February 25, 2022 appointment, Ms. Reed 
obtained new x-rays.  (JE 1, p. 15).  They showed moderate medial compartment DJD 
with associated subchondral sclerosis. (Id.).  Reed administered a cortisone injection to 
Jacobs’ right knee and gave him a hinged knee brace. (Id.).   
On February 25, 2022, Jacobs reported the alleged zip-tie incident and his work 
injury to his supervisor, Jessica Krob. (Tr., p. 93).  ADM then directed him to the Work 
Well Clinic for further medical care. (Id. at 38).  Work Well, however, did not have any 
open appointments that day so Jacobs went to Unity Point Urgent Care on March 1, 
2022. (JE 3, p. 28).  He was evaluated by Rachel Blackford, ARNP. (Id.). She 
diagnosed him with acute right knee pain, gave him a shot of Toradol, and work 
restrictions, and recommended he follow up with Work Well. (Id. at 30).  Jacobs was 
seen at Work Well on March 9, 2022, by Shirley Pospisil, M.D. (JE 4, p. 35).  Dr. 
Pospisil diagnosed him with right knee pain and ordered an MRI. (Id. at 36).  The MRI 
took place on March 17, 2022.  (Id. at 38).  It showed horizontal/oblique tears of his 
medial and lateral menisci and diffuse full-thickness chondral loss of the central medial 
compartment. (Id.).  Following the MRI, Jacobs was referred to Kyle Switzer, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon at Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa. (Id. at 38). Jacobs’ first appointment 
with Dr. Switzer took place on April 5, 2022. (JE 5, p. 75).  Dr. Switzer diagnosed him 
with tears of the medial and lateral meniscus of the right knee and primary 
osteoarthritis. (Id. at 76).  He discussed treatment options with Jacobs. (Id.).  Jacobs 
expressed his desire to proceed with a right knee arthroscopy with partial medial and 
lateral meniscectomy and chondroplasty. (Id.).   
Jacobs had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Pospisil on April 20, 2022. (JE 4, p. 
40).  He complained of low back pain and numbness in his right foot and toes.  (Id.).  Dr. 
Pospisil diagnosed him with low back pain with right lower extremity radiating pain and 
ordered an MRI of his lumbar spine. (Id.).  Her treatment note indicates Jacobs had a 
very antalgic gait and that might be contributing to the back pain. (Id.).  The MRI was 
                                                 
1 Jacobs testified that he was no longer allowed to work in the feed house after his right knee treatment. 
(Tr., pp. 67-68).  ADM’s exhibits contain a piece of paper entitled “Bidding Restrictions.” (Ex. E, p. 68).  It is dated 
August 7, 2019, and states Jacobs is no longer eligible to bid into jobs in Feedhouse Utility. (Id.).   

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 5 
 
not performed until June 9, 2022. (Id. at 42).  It showed a disc bulge at L5-S1 and mild 
degenerative disc and hypertrophic facet changes of the lumbar spine. (Id. at 43).  
According to the medical records, Jacobs treated with chiropractor Chris Smith, 
DC, in 2018 for neck, lumbar back, and bilateral sacroiliac (SI) joint pain. (JE 2, p. 18).  
His pain complaints began after moving a washer and dryer. (Id.).  Jacobs received 
treatment from Dr. Smith on May 21, 2018, and May 22, 2018. (Id. at 18-21).  He 
returned to Dr. Smith on April 22, 2019, stating his neck, upper back, and lower back 
pain returned after lifting and twisting on April 18, 2019. (Id. at 22).  His next 
appointment with Dr. Smith took place on September 19, 2019. (Id. at 23).  Dr. Smith’s 
treatment note indicates Jacobs’ back pain had increased in the “last 2-3 months due to 
a physically demanding job.” (Id.).  Jacobs returned for chiropractic treatment on his 
neck and lumbar spine again on November 5, 2019, December 4, 2020, and December 
10, 2020. (Id. at 24-26).  Jacobs’ final appointment with Dr. Smith took place on July 13, 
2021. (Id. at 27).  At that appointment he complained of neck, lumbar back and bilateral 
SI joint pain. (Id.).  Dr. Smith diagnosed him with intervertebral disc degeneration of the 
lumbar region. (Id.).  
Jacobs returned to see Dr. Pospisil on June 15, 2022. (Id. at 44).  Dr. Pospisil’s 
treatment note from that date states that Jacobs’ knee surgery had to be rescheduled 
due to transportation issues, as well as a positive COVID test.  (Id.; see also JE 5, p. 
92).  It also indicated that he was still experiencing tingling and numbness in his toes 
and heel, but his orthopedist thought it was unrelated to his knee injury. (JE 4, p. 44).  
Dr. Pospisil noted his lumbar MRI showed mild disc bulges throughout. (Id.).  She 
referred him to the pain clinic for further treatment of his back complaints. (Id.).  
On August 26, 2022, Dr. Switzer performed a right knee partial medial and lateral 
meniscectomy with chondroplasty. (See Tr., p. 42; JE 5, pp. 109-110).  Jacobs received 
follow-up treatment from Dr. Switzer, as well as attended physical therapy at Rock 
Valley Physical Therapy. (See JE 6, pp. 133-147).  
Jacobs had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Switzer on September 7, 2022. (JE 
5, p. 98).  Dr. Switzer’s treatment note says that Jacobs fell the Monday after surgery. 
(Id.).  No other information is provided about the fall. (Id.).  Dr. Switzer noted Jacobs 
had an effusion on his knee and recommended an aspiration to remove fluid from the 
knee, as well as an injection. (Id. at 99).  This was performed. (Id.).  Jacobs returned to 
Dr. Switzer’s office on September 15, 2022.  The note from this visit indicates the 
purpose of this visit was for the fitting of a locking knee brace. (Id. at 100).  
On October 5, 2022, Jacobs presented to Dr. Pospisil complaining of bilateral 
wrist pain. (JE 4, p. 45).  He told Dr. Pospisil that he fell on September 13, 2022, due to 
knee instability, and landed on his outstretched hands. (Id.).  He told her his hands had 
been painful and tingly since two days after that fall. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil diagnosed 
Jacobs with bilateral wrist and forearm pain following a fall, and low back pain with right 
lower extremity radiating pain. (Id.).  She gave him wrist splints and ordered x-rays. (Id. 
at 46).  The x-rays showed mild to moderate osteoarthritis, but no fractures or soft 
tissue injuries. (Id. at 48-51).  

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 6 
 
An EMG was taken of Jacobs’ right lower extremity on October 25, 2022. (JE 5, 
p. 113). It showed mild axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy, but no radiculopathy, focal 
neuropathy, plexopathy or myopathy. (Id. at 114).  On October 27, 2022, Jacobs 
followed up with Dr. Switzer. (Id. at 101).   Dr. Switzer’s treatment note indicates 
Jacobs’ knee was hyperextending when he walked. (Id.).  He also complained of 
weakness and locking and catching. (Id.).  He told Dr. Switzer he’d had multiple falls. 
(Id. at 102).  Dr. Switzer felt his pain complaints were out of proportion. (Id.).  He 
ordered a new MRI. (Id.).   
Jacobs’ next appointment was with Dr. Pospisil on November 14, 2022. (JE 4, p. 
52). He was there to discuss his bilateral wrist pain. (Id.).  Jacobs told Dr. Pospisil that 
he had fallen 32 times because of knee instability.2 (Id.).  He did not think the wrist 
splints were helping. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil diagnosed him with low back pain with right knee 
and right lower extremity radiating pain, bilateral wrist pain after fall.  (Id.).  She ordered 
EMGs of his bilateral upper extremities. (Id. at 53).   
On November 21, 2022, Jacobs had a new MRI taken of his right knee. (JE 8, 
pp. 156-157).  The test showed: 1) complex tears of both menisci (there may have been 
a prior partial medial meniscectomy with recurrent tear, 2) interval increase in thickening 
and increased signal in the superior portion of the medial collateral ligament suggesting 
a partial tear, 3) partial tear in the fibular collateral ligament, progressed from previous 
study, 4) mild quadriceps tendinopathy, 5) moderate joint effusion, and 6) no evidence 
of bony injury. (Id. at 157).   
The bilateral upper extremity EMGs were performed on December 13, 2022. (JE 
5, pp. 115-123).  They showed bilateral median neuropathies at the wrists that were 
moderate in severity and distal prolongation of the right ulnar motor nerve response 
suggestive of a possible mild ulnar neuropathy at the wrist.  (Id. at 115).  Thomas 
Rodgers, D.O., the test administrator, indicated the results were consistent with bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome. (Id.).   
Jacobs followed up with Dr. Switzer on December 15, 2022. (JE 5, pp. 125-127).  
Dr. Switzer diagnosed him with a tear of the medial collateral ligament in the right knee, 
status post medial meniscectomy, left knee pain, and a hyperextension deformity of the 
right knee with increased laxity of his MCL. (Id. at 126). Dr. Switzer applied a fiberglass 
cast to his right leg to deal with the increased laxity. (Id.).  Dr. Switzer noted that Jacobs 
had increased laxity in both knees, so he did not think it was related to the work injury 
on February 18, 2022. (Id. at 127).  He did not recommend further surgery. (Id.).  
Jacobs returned to see Dr. Switzer on December 20, 2022, complaining about his cast. 
(Id. at 129-130).  He returned again on January 26, 2023. (Id. at 131-132).  His cast had 
broken in half. (Id.).  Dr. Switzer noted he also had a wound on the back of his Achilles 
tendon. (Id. at 131).  Dr. Switzer’s treatment note also mentioned him being in an 
                                                 
2 Jacobs was questioned about this figure during his deposition. (Cl Ex. 9, p. 135).  He testified that he 
created a list of every fall he had and gave it to Dr. Pospisil. (Id.).  This list is not in the hearing record.  

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 7 
 
accident and a broken knee brace.3 (Id.). Dr. Switzer indicated he did not think a knee 
replacement was a good idea due to Jacobs’ MCL laxity and continued smoking. (Id. at 
132).  Dr. Switzer put him in a new knee brace. (Id.). 
Jacobs returned to Dr. Pospisil on February 28, 2023.  (JE 4, p. 57).  He 
complained of low back pain with radiation, right foot numbness, and bilateral carpal 
tunnel symptoms. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil did not think the bilateral carpal tunnel was causally 
related to the work injury. (Id.).  She also opined that his mild length dependent 
polyneuropathy could be caused by a nutritional vitamin imbalance, alcoholism, 
exposure to toxins, liver and/or kidney disorders, hormonal imbalances, an immune 
disease, and/or vascular and blood problems. (Id. at 58).  She ordered a new MRI of his 
low back. (Id.). The MRI took place on March 8, 2023. (Id. at 60-61).  It revealed low-
grade degeneration of the lumbar spine with more advanced disc predominate 
degeneration at L5-S1 with possible irritation and/or impingement of the bilateral S1 and 
L5 nerve roots.  (Id. at 61).  Radiology recommended an epidural steroid injection. (Id.).   
Dr. Pospisil reviewed the MRI results with Jacobs on March 13, 2023. (Id. at 62).  
She asked if he drank alcohol and/or whether he had been diagnosed with diabetes. 
(Id.).  He indicated he did not have diabetes. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil stated that the carpal 
tunnel symptoms and right foot numbness did not appear to be related to his back.  
(Id.).  She referred him to the pain clinic for treatment.  (Id.).  
On May 2, 2023, Jacobs was evaluated by Tork Harman, M.D., at St. Luke’s 
Interventional Pain Clinic. (JE 8, p. 158).  Dr. Harman diagnosed him with lumbosacral 
degenerative disc disease, lumbar foraminal stenosis, and lumbosacral radiculitis. (Id.).  
He noted a small broad-based disc bulge at L5-S1 but no high-grade central 
impingement. (Id. at 159).  He also noted numbness and tingling in both feet consistent 
with peripheral neuropathy. (Id. at 161).  Dr. Harman gave Jacobs an epidural steroid 
injection.  (Id. at 162).   
Jacobs followed up with Dr. Pospisil for his back pain on May 22, 2023. (JE 4, p. 
65).  He indicated his right lower extremity pain was better, but still had slight pain in his 
right buttock. (Id.).  His right foot numbness was unchanged. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil’s note 
indicated that Dr. Harman told Jacobs the numbness did not follow the L5-S1 
distribution, and he did not know the source of the pain/neuropathy. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil 
did not think his right foot numbness was related to the work injury. (Id.). She indicated 
he could return as needed. (Id. at 66).  
On June 1, 2023, Dr. Pospisil issued an impairment report. (JE 4, p. 69).  She 
opined Jacobs had 1 percent whole person permanent impairment for his medial 
meniscectomy, citing to Table 17-33 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (Id.).  She, however, wrote that she wasn’t sure whether the 
impairment was related to the work incident, as Jacobs had a known meniscal tear prior 
to the incident. (Id.).   
                                                 
3 During his deposition Jacobs testified that his car was rear-ended in January 2023, on Blairs Ferry Road, 
and a drum fell onto the brace, bending it. (Cl Ex. 9, p. 134).   

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 8 
 
On June 29, 2023, Dr. Harman gave Jacobs a second epidural steroid injection. 
(JE 8, pp. 176-182).  Jacobs returned to Dr. Pospisil on July 24, 2023. (JE 4, pp. 70-71).  
Dr. Pospisil’s treatment note indicates Jacobs had been having heartburn since his 
second epidural injection, as well as instant right arm numbness that he later said went 
away. (Id. at 70).  Jacobs told Dr. Pospisil he did not have any pain and was ready to be 
discharged. (Id.).  She placed him at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and 
discharged him from her care without restrictions. (Id.).   
The hearing record contains several expert opinions.  Dr. Bollier performed a 
records’ review at ADM’s request. (See Defendant’s Exhibit B).  He issued a report on 
April 29, 2023.  (Id. at 21).  In that report, Dr. Bollier diagnosed Jacobs with a temporary 
aggravation of right knee pain, right degenerative-type meniscal tearing and right knee 
degenerative arthritis. (Id. at 35).  Dr. Bollier opined that the February 18, 2022 work 
injury had caused a temporary aggravation of Jacobs’ knee pain, but that the underlying 
meniscal tear and arthritis conditions were degenerative and not causally related to the 
work incident. (Id. at 35-36).  His report states that Jacobs’ “subjective complaints 
worsened after the work incident, there is no objective evidence that the work incident 
caused or aggravated the degenerative condition.” (Id. at 36).  Dr. Bollier indicated 
Jacobs would likely need a total knee replacement in the future, but the need for that 
surgery was not causally related to the February 18, 2022 work incident; it was 
necessitated by his pre-existing knee conditions. (Id.).   He did not believe Jacobs 
needed any additional treatment because of the work injury, placed him at MMI on May 
18, 2022, did not assign him any permanent impairment because of the work incident 
and/or suggest permanent work restrictions. (Id.).  
On August 11, 2023, Jacobs attended an independent medical evaluation (IME) 
with Trevor Schmitz, M.D., at ADM’s request. (Ex. A, p. 5).  Dr. Schmitz diagnosed 
Jacobs with self-reported axial low back pain along with right leg radicular complaints. 
(Id. at 11).  He also documented EMG findings consistent with neuropathy and 
multilevel degenerative changes throughout his lumbar spine. (Id.).  Dr. Schmitz, 
however, determined that Jacobs’ lumbar spine and right lower extremity/foot conditions 
were degenerative and not causally related to the February 18, 2022 work injury. (Id. at 
12).   He did not assign Jacobs any permanent impairment for the above diagnoses and 
did not recommend any permanent work restrictions for the conditions. (Id.).   
 
On September 21, 2023, Jacobs attended a second IME with Farid Manshadi, 
M.D., at his attorney’s request. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).  Dr. Manshadi diagnosed him with a right 
knee injury, and right-sided low back pain with right lower extremity radiculopathy, 
probably at L5-S1, as well as bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome as a sequela injury.  (Id. 
at 7-8). He causally related all of these diagnoses to the work injury on February 18, 
2022.  (Id.).  Dr. Manshadi opined that Jacobs’ bilateral carpal tunnel symptoms were 
caused by numerous falls onto his hands because of his right knee instability. (Id. at 8).  
Dr. Manshadi also thought his use of crutches contributed to the carpal tunnel 
symptoms. (Id.).  He assigned Jacobs 10 percent permanent impairment to the right 
lower extremity for his knee injury, citing to Table 17-33 of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Id. at 8).  He also assigned 15 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 9 
 
percent whole person impairment for Jacobs’ bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, citing to 
Tables 16-10, 16-11 and 16-15 of the AMA Guides. (Id. at 8-9).  Finally, Dr. Manshadi 
indicated Jacobs’ low back injury fell under DRE Lumbar Category 2, and assigned him 
6 percent whole person impairment, citing to Table 15-3 of the AMA Guides.  (Id. at 9).  
He suggested permanent work restrictions of no lifting more than 10 pounds; avoid 
bending, stooping or twisting at the waist; no prolonged standing or walking for more 
than 15-20 minutes; avoid crawling, ladders and stairs; sit, stand and walk as needed, 
and limit repetitious gripping activities to an occasional basis. (Id. at 9).  Dr. Manshadi 
also recommended Jacobs proceed with bilateral carpal tunnel releases, a total knee 
arthroplasty, and epidural steroid injections for his back complaints. (Id. at 8-9).   
 
Jacobs attended a third IME at his attorney’s behest on December 7, 2023. (Cl 
Ex. 2, p. 10).  This took place with Mark Taylor, M.D.  (Id.).  Dr. Taylor diagnosed him 
with right knee arthralgia, meniscal tears, and chondromalacia of the medial 
compartment post right knee arthroscopy with chondroplasty and partial medial and 
partial lateral meniscectomy; persistent knee arthralgia with MRI evidence of recurrent 
meniscal tear; chronic lumbago and radiculitis with radiation into the right buttock/leg; 
and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome per EMG. (Id. at 22-23).  Dr. Taylor causally related 
all of these diagnoses to the February 18, 2022 injury date. (Id. at 23).  Dr. Taylor 
assigned 10 percent permanent impairment to Jacobs’ right lower extremity for his 
partial medial and partial lateral meniscectomy, citing to Table 17-33 of the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition. (Id. at 25).  He indicated Jacobs fell under DRE Category 2 for his back 
condition, and assigned him 7 percent whole person impairment, citing to Table 15-3 of 
the AMA Guides.  (Id. at 26-27).  Dr. Taylor opined that it was premature to assign 
impairment to Jacobs’ bilateral upper extremities, as Jacobs was likely a candidate for 
carpal tunnel release surgery, and his impairment should be rated after the surgery.  (Id. 
at 26).  Dr. Taylor recommended Jacobs see an upper extremity specialist to discuss 
proceeding with the carpal tunnel release surgery. (Id.).  He also recommended Jacobs 
see an orthopedic specialist for his back complaints, attend additional physical therapy, 
and see a pain management specialist. (Id. at 27).  Dr. Taylor suggested a referral to a 
joint replacement specialist and physical therapy for Jacobs’ knee. (Id. at 25).   He 
agreed with Dr. Manshadi’s suggested 10-pound lifting restriction, but also indicated 
Jacobs might be able to handle lifting 15-20 pounds at or near waist and chest level. (Id. 
at 27).  Dr. Taylor also indicated he should have the ability to alternate sitting, standing, 
and walking for comfort. (Id.).  He suggested Jacobs curtail sitting, standing and/or 
walking to 15 to 30-minute periods before taking a break. (Id. at 27-28).  He also stated 
Jacobs should avoid crawling, climbing ladders, forceful and repetitive gripping and 
grasping with his hands, and rarely use stairs or vibratory/power tools. (Id. at 28).   
 
ADM asked Dr. Schmitz to review the IME reports authored by Dr. Manshadi and 
Dr. Taylor.  (Ex. A, p. 13).  Dr. Schmitz sent a follow-up report on April 1, 2024. (Id. at 
16).   Dr. Schmitz disagreed that Jacobs’ lumbar spine condition was a sequela injury 
from the February 2022 work incident. (Id.).  Dr. Schmitz reiterated that Jacobs had 
previously treated with a chiropractor for low back pain and had an MRI that showed 
only chronic degenerative changes, nothing acute. (Id.).  He indicated Jacobs’ back had 
returned back to its baseline status by July 24, 2023, and had no structural impairment. 
(Id.).  Dr. Schmitz also addressed Dr. Taylor’s conclusion that Jacobs’ low back 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 10 
 
condition was caused by his altered gait after his knee injury, as well as several post-
injury falls. (Id.).  He indicated that Dr. Taylor’s conclusion was flawed because Jacobs 
suffered from an altered gait and low back pain prior to the work injury. (Id.).  Further, Dr. 
Schmitz thought Jacobs’ EMG results were likely caused by his 2016 stroke. (Id.).  He 
did not believe the work fall led to any significant change in his physical conditions, and 
he did not believe Jacobs needed any permanent work restrictions because of the work 
injury. (Id. at 17).   
 
ADM also asked Dr. Pospisil to review Dr. Manshadi’s and Dr. Taylor’s IME 
reports. (Ex. C, p. 41).  Dr. Pospisil issued a report on April 23, 2024. (Id. at 44).  Dr. 
Pospisil opined that Jacobs suffered from longstanding known medial and lateral 
meniscal tearing in his right knee, as well as degenerative arthritis. (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil 
indicated that Jacobs may have had an increase in pain when he fell, but she agreed 
with Dr. Bollier’s orthopedic assessment that there was “no clear indication that the 
menisci were torn further from the event.” (Id.).  Dr. Pospisil was also asked to comment 
on whether Jacobs’ bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome was causally related to the work 
incident. (Id. at 45).  On April 30, 2024, she opined that Jacobs’ bilateral carpal tunnel 
median nerve changes were likely not work related. (Id.).  While she conceded that 
trauma can cause carpal tunnel nerve damage, she was not convinced that Jacobs had 
actually fallen 32 times after his knee surgery.  (Id.).  Additionally, Dr. Pospisil noted that 
Jacobs had peripheral neuropathy that was not work related. (Id.).   
 
The hearing record also contains numerous vocational evaluations.  On January 
16, 2024, Jacobs obtained an employability assessment from Barbara Laughlin, M.A. 
(Cl Ex. 3, p. 32). Ms. Laughlin interviewed Jacobs, reviewed his treatment records, and 
the opinions of Dr. Bollier, Dr. Manshadi, Dr. Taylor, and Dr. Schmitz, as well as the job 
demands for Jacobs’ past positions at ADM. (Id. at 32-33).  Jacobs told Ms. Laughlin 
that he had no computer skills beyond what he learned at ADM, and that he could only 
walk comfortably for 10 minutes, stand for 30 minutes, and sit for 15 minutes before 
needing to lie down. (Id. at 36, 38).  He also indicated that he suffered from finger 
numbness and dropped things daily. (Id. at 38).   
 
Ms. Laughlin opined that under Dr. Manshadi’s suggested restrictions Jacobs 
had a 100 percent loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations in the closest match 
jobs, a 100 percent loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations in the good match 
jobs, as well as a 100 percent loss of all unskilled occupations.  (Cl Ex. 3, p. 43).  
Utilizing the restrictions suggested by Dr. Taylor, Ms. Laughlin opined Jacobs had a 100 
percent loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations in the closest match jobs, a 100 
percent loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations in the good match jobs, and a 
96.7 percent loss of all unskilled occupations.  (Id. at 44).  Ms. Laughlin stated that 
given his restrictions, Jacobs would be unable to locate or obtain employment in any 
well-known branch of the labor market, and jobs he may find are so limited in quality, 
quantity, or dependability that there is no reasonably stable labor market for them. (Id. at 
46).  
 
On January 26, 2024, ADM obtained an employability analysis from Lana Sellner, 
MS, CRC, CEAS II, REAS.  (Ex. D, p. 49).  Prior to issuing her report, Ms. Sellner 
reviewed Jacobs’ treatment records, the opinions from Dr. Bollier, Dr. Manshadi, Dr. 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 11 
 
Taylor, and Dr. Schmitz, Jacobs’ answers to interrogatories, and Ms. Laughlin’s 
employability analysis. (Id.).  She had also done a prior site visit to observe Jacobs’ 
position at ADM. (Id. at 53).  Ms. Sellner did not meet with Jacobs prior to issuing her 
report. (Id. at 49).  Ms. Sellner opined that Jacobs had no occupational loss under the 
opinions of Dr. Bollier, Dr. Pospisil and Dr. Schmitz because they had not assigned any 
work restrictions. (Id. at 52).  Ms. Sellner found four open positions that Jacobs could 
still perform under Dr. Manshadi’s suggested restrictions. (Id.).  Those jobs were: a 
production scheduler at a coop, earning $26.02 an hour; a customer operations 
specialist at a windows, siding and door company, earning $16-17 an hour; a front desk 
clerk for a hotel, making $14 an hour; and a maintenance call center representative, 
which pays $18.50 an hour. (Id.).  Ms. Sellner identified three potential positions that 
Jacobs could perform under Dr. Taylor’s suggested restrictions.  (Id. at 52-53).  Those 
jobs were: a shuttle driver for a car dealership, earning $15.10 an hour; a lot driver for a 
car rental company, making $12 an hour; and a Lyft driver, wage unknown. (Id.).  Ms. 
Sellner also reviewed Ms. Laughlin’s report. (Id. at 53).  She disagreed that Jacobs’ age, 
educational background, computer skills, and suggested work restrictions rendered him 
unable to obtain employment in any well-known branch of the labor market. (Id. at 52-
57).   
 
In April 2024, Jacobs’ counsel asked Ms. Laughlin to provide a rebuttal to Ms. 
Sellner’s report. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 49).  She issued her rebuttal assessment on April 17, 
2024. (Id.).  In it, Ms. Laughlin takes issue with the list of computer skills Ms. Sellner 
said Jacobs obtained and utilized in his job at ADM. (Id.).  She argues that many of the 
“skills” utilized by Ms. Sellner in her vocational assessment are not actually skills, but 
rather soft skills, basic skills, knowledge or temperaments. (Id. at 50-52).  Ms. Laughlin 
opines that Ms. Sellner’s report fails to utilize appropriate skills individualized to Jacobs’ 
past work, utilizes aggregated data, and fails to list complete job postings for the open 
positions she found.  (Id. at 55).  Ms. Laughlin also indicated that she contacted the 
employers for the job listings provided in Ms. Sellner’s report. (Id. at 55-59).  According 
to Ms. Laughlin’s report, each employer she contacted indicated Jacobs did not have 
the necessary skills and/or could not physically perform the position listed. (Id.).   
 
 
ADM also requested a rebuttal report. (Ex. D, p. 59).  Ms. Sellner issued her 
rebuttal report on April 30, 2024. (Id.).  Ms. Sellner reviewed Ms. Laughlin’s rebuttal 
report, as well as Jacobs’ deposition transcript prior to issuing her second report. (Id.).  
Ms. Sellner concluded that Ms. Laughlin’s critique of the skills listed in her vocational 
assessment was irrelevant.  (Id.).  She stated that vocational specialists are not required 
to define each skill a job utilizes but reiterated that while soft skills are not essential job 
criteria, they are still assets to employers and considered in hiring decisions. (Id. at 59-
60).  Ms. Sellner indicated that Ms. Laughlin’s reported conversations with the 
employers listed in her report did not change her opinion on whether Jacobs could 
perform the positions listed, because she did not know the entirety of what Ms. Laughlin 
said to those employers. (Id. at 60).  For example, were Ms. Laughlin’s questions 
leading? (Id.).  Did Ms. Laughlin ever ask about acceptable accommodations and/or 
training provided to new hires? (Id.).  Ms. Sellner also disagreed with some of the new 
job requirements Ms. Laughlin listed, such as the lifting requirements for the driving 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 12 
 
position at a car dealership. (Id. at 61).  Ms. Sellner reiterated that in her opinion Jacobs 
is capable of finding work within his labor market with the restrictions suggested by Dr. 
Taylor and Dr. Manshadi. (Id.).   
 
 
At the hearing, Jacobs testified that ADM fired him on March 9, 2022. (Tr., p. 54).  
He indicated that he was fired for engaging in horseplay. (Id.).  Jessica Krob testified on 
behalf of ADM at the hearing. (Id. at 88).  She is the mill department superintendent at 
ADM. (Id. at 89).  She was one of Jacobs’ supervisors. (Id.).  Krob also testified about 
Jacobs’ termination. (Id. at 94).  She indicated that Jacobs called her on February 22, 
2022, to report horseplay by other ADM employees. (Id. at 91).  She testified that 
Jacobs accused another employee of harassment. (Id. at 92).  Jacobs, however, did not 
mention his fall on February 18, 2022, during that phone call.4 (Id. at 91). After receiving 
his phone call, Krob held a meeting with Jacobs’ entire department to discuss 
appropriate work conduct. (Id. at 92).  Following that meeting, Krob indicated that other 
employees came forward and stated Jacobs had been spraying another employee with 
a water hose and engaging in water fights/horseplay. (Id.).  Krob stated that when asked 
about the alleged horseplay, Jacobs admitted to bringing a water hose into the control 
room and threatening to pour a water bottle over another employee’s head. (Id. at 95).  
Krob indicated these incidents occurred on February 18, 2022, the same day as Jacobs’ 
alleged work injury. (Id. at 96).  Krob testified that ADM follows a progressive discipline 
program, which indicates a verbal warning, a written warning, a final written warning, 
and then finally termination. (Id. at 94).  Krob testified that all four of the people who 
were involved in the water fight received their next stage of discipline.  (Id.).  Jacobs, 
however, was already at the final written warning stage when the horseplay incident 
occurred. (Id.).  His next step of progressive discipline was termination. (Id.).  ADM’s 
exhibits contain several pages of documents detailing Jacobs’ past work violations for 
absenteeism, failure to follow work instructions and safety guidelines, refusal to take 
necessary tests, combative behavior, and prior incidents of horseplay with co-workers. 
(Ex. E, pp. 69-76).  In January 2022, Jacobs was given a one-day suspension for failure 
to follow lock-out rules. (Id. at 76).  There is a locker clean out form, dated March 11, 
2022, detailing the belongings that were returned to Jacobs after his termination, but no 
other documents memorializing his termination. (Id. at 77).   
 
At the hearing, Jacobs testified he continues to experience instability and 
episodes of hyperextension in his knee, difficulty walking, back pain, hip pain, bilateral 
wrist pain and numbness, as well as issues with dropping objects. (Tr., p. 55).  He 
indicated his symptoms are worse today than when he was released from care in 2023, 
especially in his wrists and hands. (Id. at 80-82).  Jacobs testified he does not currently 
have health insurance. (Id. at 60).  He was covered by Medicaid until approximately a 
month prior to hearing, when his insurance company changed, and he neglected to fill 
out some necessary paperwork. (Id. at 61).  He plans to re-apply for Medicaid coverage. 
(Id.).  He is currently treating at the Community Health Free Clinic for his blood 
                                                 
4 Krob testified that they also investigated Jacobs’ allegation that his co-workers zip tied his chair to a table. 
(Tr., p. 96).  The other employees indicated they had no knowledge of the zip-tie incident.  (Id.).   No one corroborated 
his allegations. (Id.).   

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 13 
 
pressure, but has not sought any treatment for his knee, back, or bilateral hands since 
being released in 2023. (Id. at 82-83).   
 
At the hearing, ADM introduced surveillance video of Jacobs dated January 11, 
2023, through January 14, 2023.  (Ex. K).  It shows Jacobs entering and leaving an 
apartment building several times, walking down steps and around a parking lot, talking 
to neighbors, getting into and out of a car, as well as a U-Haul van that required him to 
go up and down two steps, watching a tow truck driver unload a car with a broken 
taillight, and driving the U-Haul van out of the parking lot.  (Id.).  Jacobs walks with a 
slight limp but does not appear unstable and does not stumble during the video.  (Id.).  
He is not utilizing crutches, a walker, or a cane in the video. (Id.).  He also does not 
have any trouble driving the U-Haul van. (Id.).  At the hearing, Jacobs testified that his 
limp is more pronounced today than it was at the time of the video. (Tr., p. 86).  
 
Jacobs was not working at the time of the hearing.  He testified he was receiving 
Social Security retirement benefits. (Tr., p. 57).  He has been receiving those benefits 
since October 2022. (Cl Ex. 9, pp. 116-117).  He has not applied for any jobs since 
being terminated by ADM. (Id. at 138).  During his deposition, Jacobs talked about 
meeting with Iowa Workforce Development to explore potential jobs. (Id.).  He, however, 
did not mention Iowa Workforce Development during the hearing.    
The undersigned does not find Jacobs’ testimony credible.  He made statements 
that are not supported and/or directly contradicted by the hearing evidence.  For 
example, Jacobs insisted that he did not engage in horseplay on February 18, 2022, 
and that the employees who zip-tied his chair were harassing him. (See Tr., pp. 54, 57-
58, 91-92).  He, however, gave a detailed account of spraying them with water hoses in 
retaliation earlier that evening during his deposition. (Cl Ex. 9, pp. 125-126).  He was 
also written up in December 2021 for horseplay. (Ex. E, p. 73).  Jacobs testified that 
since February 18, 2022, he has walked with a pronounced limp and requires a walker 
to move about his room/apartment. (Tr., pp. 56, 79-80; Cl Ex. 2, p. 20).  However, 
surveillance video taken in January 2023, shows him walking up and down stairs and 
through a parking lot without a walker and only a slight limp. (Ex. K).  Jacobs told Dr. 
Pospisil that he fell 32 times after his surgery because of knee instability. (JE 4, p. 52).  
There is, however, scant medical evidence to corroborate so many falls. Jacobs never 
sought medical attention from Dr. Pospisil or Dr. Switzer after any of these alleged falls. 
That does not appear reasonable and/or feasible.  Given the above, this deputy does 
not put much weight on his testimony.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 14 
 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, 420 
(Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995).  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
When an expert's opinion is based upon an incomplete or incorrect history, it is 
not necessarily binding on the commissioner or the court. It is then to be weighed, 
together with other facts and circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder 
of the fact.  Musselman v. Central Telephone Company, 154 N.W.2d 128, 133 (Iowa 
1967); Bodish v. Fischer, Inc., 257 Iowa 516, 522, 133 N.W.2d 867, 870 (1965).  The 
commissioner as trier of fact has the duty to determine the credibility of the witnesses 
and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and circumstances, 
and then to accept or reject the opinion.  Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
Jacobs alleges work-related injuries to his right knee, low back, and bilateral 
wrists as a result of his fall on February 18, 2022. (See Petition).  He relies upon the 
opinions of Dr. Taylor and Dr. Manshadi to prove his claims.  I do not find either report 
persuasive.  In his report, Dr. Taylor opines that Jacobs injured his low back during the 

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 15 
 
fall on February 18, 2022, because he did “a twisting-type motion as he forcefully fell to 
the ground.” (Cl Ex. 2, p. 24).  This statement is not supported by the hearing record.  
Jacobs has been asked to describe the February 18, 2022 fall many times throughout 
this litigation.  (See Tr., pp. 32-33; Cl Ex. 9, p. 127; JE 1, p. 14; JE 3, p. 28).  He has 
never described a back twisting motion as indicated in Dr. Taylor’s report.  (See Tr., pp. 
32-33; Cl Ex. 9, p. 127; JE 1, p. 14; JE 3, p. 28). Dr. Taylor’s back opinion is based upon 
an inaccurate history.  
In his report, Dr. Taylor also admits that Jacobs had documented meniscal tears 
in his right knee prior to the work incident on February 18, 2022. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 24). He, 
however, opines that Jacobs’ current right knee complaints are causally related to the 
work incident because it aggravated his pre-existing arthritis.  (Id.).  Yet, he does not 
assign Jacobs any permanent impairment for his arthritis; he only assigns impairment 
for the meniscectomy, a surgery that in his opinion was necessary prior to the work 
injury and unrelated to the work incident.  (Id.).  He also does not point to any objective 
testing in the hearing record showing the work incident substantially worsened Jacobs’ 
arthritic condition. In 2019, Dr. Steinbronn had already diagnosed Jacobs with 
osteoarthritis and severe medial compartment chondromalacia. (See JE 1, pp. 9-13). Dr. 
Taylor does not point to objective testing showing that the work fall caused those pre-
existing conditions to worsen.  Further, Dr. Taylor opines that the cause of Jacobs’ 
bilateral knee hyperextension, a source of his instability, is unclear; he does not causally 
connect the laxity to the work injury. (Id. at 25).  This tracks with Dr. Switzer’s opinion 
that Jacobs’ bilateral knee laxity was unrelated to the work incident. (See JE 5, p. 127).  
Finally, he opines Jacobs’ bilateral carpal tunnel symptoms were caused by his many 
falls after the alleged February 18, 2022 date of injury. (See Cl Ex. 2, p. 25).  As noted 
above, however, the medical evidence does not support Jacobs’ allegation of falling 32 
times after his knee surgery.  Given the above issues, the undersigned does not find Dr. 
Taylor’s opinion persuasive.  
Dr. Manshadi’s report is very terse.  He opines that the work injury on February 
18, 2022, was a substantial contributing factor in producing Jacobs’ right-sided low back 
pain with radiculopathy likely at L5-S1,5 and that it was also a materially aggravating 
factor in Jacobs’ knee injury and need for arthroscopic surgery, and that his bilateral 
carpal tunnel was a sequela caused by his numerous post-surgery falls and use of 
crutches. (Cl Ex. 1, pp. 7-8).  Dr. Manshadi, however, does not provide any further 
analysis to explain these alleged causal relationships.  (Id.).  He does not adequately 
address Jacobs’ prior medical treatment and pre-existing diagnoses, his EMG results, 
the results of his imaging tests, and/or the contrary opinions of Dr. Pospisil and Dr. 
Switzer, his treating physicians.  Additionally, like Dr. Taylor, Dr. Manshadi only assigns 
permanent impairment for Jacobs’ meniscectomy, a surgery to repair tears he acquired 
prior to the work incident on February 18, 2022, but he does not assign any impairment 
                                                 
5 Dr. Harman’s treatment records indicate Jacobs’ numbness does not follow the L5-S1 distribution. (See, 
e.g., JE 4, p. 65).   Additionally, the EMG taken of his right lower extremity showed mild axonal sensorimotor 
polyneuropathy, but no radiculopathy. (JE 5, p. 114).  Dr. Harman indicated the EMG results showed length 
dependent polyneuropathy. (JE 8, p. 170).   

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 16 
 
for an aggravation to Jacobs’ osteoarthritis.  Given these inconsistencies, I do not find 
Dr. Manshadi’s report convincing.  
The objective evidence shows that Jacobs already had meniscal tears and 
degenerative arthritis in his right knee prior to the February 18, 2022 work incident.  
While his pain complaints increased after the incident, there is no objective medical 
evidence that the incident caused and/or accelerated these conditions.  There is also 
insufficient medical evidence of a causal relationship between Jacobs’ back and 
bilateral arm conditions and the alleged work incident.  I conclude Jacobs failed to meet 
his burden of proof to show he sustained a permanent injury that arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with ADM on February 18, 2022.  He is not awarded any 
permanent partial disability benefits in this action. Because Jacobs failed to meet his 
burden of proof on causation, the remaining issues of whether claimant is entitled to 
penalty benefits, the payment of medical expenses, and entitlement to alternate medical 
care are moot; the undersigned will make no fact findings on those issues.  
Finally, Jacobs seeks an award of costs, which are outlined in claimant’s exhibit 
11. (Cl Ex. 11, pp. 175-190).  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy 
commissioner hearing the case. See 876 IAC 4.33; Iowa Code § 10A.328.  
Administrative Rule 4.33 provides as follows:  
Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ 
deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable 
costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) 
filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees incurred by using 
the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons reviewing health 
service disputes. 
876 IAC 4.33.   
 
Jacobs incurred costs of $128.75 for the filing fee for his petition and $8.10 for 
service of that petition on ADM.  (Cl Ex. 11, p. 175).  He also seeks reimbursement for 
the cost of Dr. Taylor’s report in the amount of $5,940.00, and the cost of ordering his 
own deposition transcript in the amount of $624.50. (Id.). Jacobs received temporary 
partial benefits as a result of the February 18, 2022 work incident.  I conclude it is 
reasonable to assess his filing fee and service costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7), as 
well as his deposition transcript charges pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2), as the deposition 
was utilized and cited to in this decision.  I did not find Dr. Taylor’s report persuasive and 
did not rely upon it in this decision.  I conclude it is not appropriate to assess the cost of 
Dr. Taylor’s report against ADM.  

JACOBS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 17 
 
 
I assess costs totaling $761.35. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take no permanency benefits from this proceeding.  
Defendant shall pay costs of seven hundred sixty-one and 35/100 dollars 
($761.35).   
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _20th __ day of November, 2024. 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Robert Legislador (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers ’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
