Case Number: 1660515.01
Case Title:  ZUNIGA, JUVENIO V. SMITHFIELD FOODS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Zuniga Juvenio-1660515.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JUVENIO ZUNIGA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 1660515.01 
SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                   ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CAS. CORP., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                    Head Note No. 1803.1 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Juvenio Zuniga, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Smithfield Foods, Inc., employer, and Safety National 
Casualty Corporation, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by James 
Byrne.  The defendants were represented by Michael Miller. 
The matter came on for hearing on April 6, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 
11; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 8; and Defense Exhibits A through Q.  Prior to 
hearing, defendants filed an objection or Motion in Limine in regard to Claimant’s Exhibit 
3.  Claimant’s Exhibit 3 was admitted into evidence, however, the undersigned deferred 
on ruling about the relevance of information contained in this report. 
The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to William Mischnick.  Vanessa 
Marcano-Kelly and Ernest Nino-Murcia served as the Spanish language interpreters.  
Dina Dulaney was appointed and served as court reporter for the proceeding.  The 
matter was fully submitted on May 10, 2021 after extensive briefing by the parties.  The 
briefs submitted by counsel were both well-written and provided extensive insight as to 
the positions of the parties. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-24  16:07:55     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES & STIPULATIONS 
The parties submitted a number of stipulations through the hearing report, in 
addition to issues for determination.  The stipulations in the hearing report are 
memorialized here and are accepted by the agency at this time.  Such stipulations are 
deemed binding upon the parties. 
The parties have stipulated that there was an employer-employee relationship at 
the time of the alleged injury.  The parties further stipulated that claimant sustained an 
injury, which arose out of and in the course of his employment on March 18, 2018.  The 
parties also stipulate that this injury is a cause of permanent disability.  The defendants 
dispute that this injury was to any other body part than claimant’s right shoulder and 
deny any permanency to any other body part than the right shoulder. 
At the time of hearing, claimant was not seeking any additional temporary 
disability benefits.  He was seeking permanency benefits and the parties disputed the 
nature and extent of such benefits, as well as the commencement date for any benefits. 
The defendants have waived affirmative defenses. 
While the claimant’s average gross earnings are stipulated by the parties, they 
dispute claimant’s marital status and entitlement to exemptions.  Claimant stipulated 
that he would have filed his tax returns in 2018 as “single.”  (Transcript, page 7)  Section 
85.27 expenses are not in dispute.  Claimant is seeking reimbursement for a Section 
85.39 examination.  Defendants agreed to reimburse the portion of the IME which was 
related to claimant’s right shoulder condition, but not the remainder. 
The parties stipulated that, prior to hearing, defendants paid four weeks of 
compensation at the rate of $595.10. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Juvenio Zuniga was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  He was born in 
Guatemala in 1971.  Mr. Zuniga’s primary language is Spanish and his testimony was 
translated through two different interpreters through the course of the hearing with the 
consent of all parties.  Mr. Zuniga testified live and under oath during the course of the 
video hearing.  I find his testimony to be highly credible.  He is not a sophisticated 
witness, however, he proved to be an accurate historian.  He generally kept his answers 
simple.  His answers corresponded well with the other evidence in the record.  There 
was nothing regarding Mr. Zuniga’s demeanor which caused me any concern regarding 
his truthfulness. 
Mr. Zuniga testified regarding his educational background in Guatemala.  He 
testified that he has a learning disability which inhibited his educational progress.  (Tr., 
pp. 13-14)  It is likely that he is not truly literate in Spanish, although he testified he can 
read and write “a bit.”  (Tr., p. 14)  He is unable to type or use a computer. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Mr. Zuniga testified that he has been married to Sandra Nanette Garcia Duerte 
since 1986.  (Tr., p. 11)  She resides in Guatemala.  He testified that he supports her 
financially, sending her $200 to $300 per week.  The parties have stipulated that he did 
not or would not have claimed her on his taxes in 2018.  In his brief, claimant’s counsel 
contends this is because she does not have a Social Security number.  There is no 
other evidence in the record regarding claimant’s marital status.  I believe him that he is 
married.  I find, as a matter of fact, that Mr. Zuniga was married at the time of his 
stipulated work injury. 
Farmland Foods (n/k/a Smithfield) hired Mr. Zuniga in 2017.  Mr. Zuniga testified 
that he had no problems or injuries with respect to his right shoulder prior to starting at 
Smithfield.  He also never had any mental health issues.  (Tr., p. 21)  Mr. Zuniga did 
testify that he was in an automobile accident in 2014, which resulted in an injury to his 
left shoulder and low back.  He was treated with medications and temporary restrictions 
and he was released without restrictions sometime in 2015. 
At Smithfield, Mr. Zuniga’s job was to hook carcasses.  The employer’s job 
description is in evidence which notes repetitive motion and awkward body mechanics 
are involved in the job.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 6, page 107)  There is also a photograph 
and video of the job, which show a portion of the work Mr. Zuniga performed.  (Def. Exs. 
N, O)  As described at hearing, he placed a hook in the belly of a hog carcass that was 
hanging from an overhead rail.  He would reach above his head with his right arm to 
retrieve several hooks at a time from a chain that came down to him.  This work was 
highly repetitive.  He would then maneuver the hogs to hook them appropriately.  He 
testified that he performed this work on approximately 10,000 hogs per day, 5 or 6 days 
per week, up to 10 hours per day.  (Tr., pp. 23-33) 
On March 18, 2018, Mr. Zuniga notified his employer of the onset of right 
shoulder area pain from the repetitive work he was performing.  The pain came on 
gradually.  Mr. Zuniga testified at hearing that the motions which bothered his shoulder 
area and arm the most were the retrieving of the hooks from above his head and 
pushing and pulling the hogs.  (Tr., pp. 33-34)  The parties have stipulated that a 
cumulative injury, which arose out of and in the course of his employment, manifested 
on March 18, 2018.   
Mr. Zuniga actually sought medical care from Denison Family Health Center in 
January 2018 where it was noted he had been experiencing right shoulder pain for a 
month with no specific injury.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 48)  He was diagnosed with right rotator cuff 
syndrome, provided some medication (Naproxen), and an injection for the pain.  (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 49) The employer’s medical department records document Mr. Zuniga being 
evaluated on March 20, 2018 and complaining of right shoulder pain and symptoms 
from hooking hogs.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 121)  Thereafter, he was regularly seen in the medical 
department for ice therapy. 
The employer directed Mr. Zuniga’s medical care.  On April 25, 2018, Todd 
Woollen, M.D., examined Mr. Zuniga.  He documented gradually worsening pain in the 
right shoulder and numbness if he works over his head.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9)  He diagnosed 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
right shoulder pain consistent with supraspinatus injury.  He provided work restrictions, 
some medications and physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9)  In May 2018, Dr. Woollen 
ordered an MRI, which he noted demonstrated minimal findings and opined that an 
orthopedic referral was not necessary.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11)  He did adjust the work 
restrictions to ensure that Mr. Zuniga was actually placed in a light-duty job.  (Jt. Ex. 1, 
pp. 11-12)  Mr. Zuniga returned to Dr. Woollen in September 2018.  It was noted that 
physical therapy had not helped, nor had light duty.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13)  An injection for 
the pain was considered, as well as orthopedic referral. 
Orthopedic surgeon, Bradley Lister, M.D., examined Mr. Zuniga on October 15, 
2018.  Dr. Lister reviewed the history and the MRI from May 2018.  He diagnosed 
tendinitis of the right rotator cuff and arthritis of the acromioclavicular.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 16)  
He performed an injection and raised the possibility of AC decompression surgery if his 
symptoms do not improve.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 17)  He provided severe medical restrictions.  
Mr. Zuniga returned to Dr. Lister for follow up in November and December 2018.  He 
kept him on the highly limiting restrictions and recommended a second orthopedic 
opinion. 
In January 2019, Timothy Vinyard, M.D., examined Mr. Zuniga.  Dr. Vinyard 
quickly diagnosed right rotator cuff tendonitis and recommended surgery.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 
173-177)  Surgery was performed on February 19, 2019.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 223-224)  The 
post-operative diagnosis was:  right rotator cuff tear (near full thickness tear involving 
the junction of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus), proximal biceps tendinopathy, 
superior labrum anterior and posterior tear, shoulder impingement and AC joint 
arthropathy.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 223-224)  Mr. Zuniga testified that he developed a bulge in 
his right biceps area known as the “Popeye effect.”  (Tr., p. 39)  He was placed in an 
immobilizer/sling and given significant work restrictions. 
His recovery period was complicated and challenging.  On March 7, 2019, Dr. 
Vinyard documented significant continued pain.  By March 11, 2019, Mr. Zuniga was 
experiencing significant mental health symptoms.  He was seen in his primary care 
clinic and diagnosed with depression.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 61-64)  “Pt reports increased stress 
and depression related to current health issues.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 64)  He was prescribed 
medication for a major depressive disorder.  He took a leave of absence under the 
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA).  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 65-69)  From this point forward, he 
has had continuous mental health treatment up through the date of hearing. 
Mr. Zuniga’s shoulder symptoms did improve somewhat with physical therapy.  
He followed up with Dr. Vinyard in May, June and July 2019, however, he still noted 
constant pain, particularly with activity.  In July 2019, a follow-up MRI of the right 
shoulder was performed which showed additional, untreated tears.   
1. Interval supraspinatus tendon repair.  Repaired tendon shows 
moderate intermediate signal with focal infrasubstance tear likely to be 
concealed at the time of the arthroscopy.  This tear approaches the 
bursal surface without clear violation.  No definite high-grade partial or 
full thickness supraspinatus re-tear. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
2. New low-grade articular sided tear of the infraspinatus tendon at its 
anterior footprint with mild intrasubstance extension.  Additional edema 
at the myotendinous junction of the infraspinatus muscle belly which 
may relate to developing sentinel cyst formation versus grade 1 
myotendinous muscle strain. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 161-162)   
Mr. Zuniga testified these findings were never explained to him.  In August 2019, 
Dr. Vinyard documented Mr. Zuniga was still having constant, worsening, sharp 
shoulder pains which were aggravated by lifting.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 201)  Nevertheless, Dr. 
Vinyard placed him at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and released him without 
any restrictions on August 19, 2019.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 201-203)  Mr. Zuniga returned to the 
job hooking carcasses.  (Tr., p. 42)  Mr. Zuniga testified this was very painful.  In 
October 2019, Mr. Zuniga followed up for his depression and he was taken off work 
again for a couple of days.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 77-82) 
Mr. Zuniga also returned to Dr. Vinyard in October 2019, complaining of 
worsening right shoulder pain.  Dr. Vinyard opined Mr. Zuniga was not giving maximum 
effort and ordered a functional capacity evaluation (FCE).  (Jt. Ex. 7 pp. 204-206)  On 
October 21, 2019, he underwent an FCE at Athletico Physical Therapy in Omaha, 
Nebraska.  (Jt. Ex. 10)  Mr. Zuniga testified credibly that the testing was very difficult for 
him because of the pain.  I find this testimony credible, particularly in light of the 
objective MRI findings in July 2019.  The physical therapist deemed the FCE invalid 
primarily based upon pain behaviors during examination.  On October 24, 2019, Mr. 
Zuniga returned to Dr. Vinyard who reviewed the results and declined to place any 
restrictions upon him.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 207-209)  A week later, he opined Mr. Zuniga 
sustained a 1 percent impairment for the shoulder condition. 
In November 2019, Mr. Zuniga’s primary care provider excused him from work 
again for his mental health condition.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 87-91) 
Mr. Zuniga then underwent a second FCE with Daryl Short, DPT on December 1, 
2019.  This evaluation was deemed valid and placed rather severe restrictions on him.  
(Cl. Ex. 1)  His specific restrictions are set forth on pages 4 and 5 of Claimant’s Exhibit 
1.  They include no frequent lifting from waist to crown and 15-pound maximum, among 
others. 
Mr. Zuniga underwent an independent medical examination (IME) with Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., on December 4, 2019.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  Dr. Bansal took a history, reviewed 
numerous appropriate medical records and performed a thorough examination before 
offering his expert opinions. Dr. Bansal diagnosed right shoulder rotator cuff tear, 
proximal biceps tendinopathy, superior labrum anterior and posterior tear, shoulder 
impingement and acromioclavicular joint arthropathy, noting that the disability is 
proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  Claimant’s surgery necessitated removal of a 
portion of the distal clavicle, which is also proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  (Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 43)  He assigned a 12 percent right upper extremity disability which converts to 7 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
percent of the whole body and recommended he follow the restrictions set forth in his 
December 2019 FCE.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 43-46) 
On January 23, 2020, Mr. Zuniga returned to Dr. Vinyard.  By report, Mr. 
Zuniga’s pain had increased and was aggravated by lifting.  Dr. Vinyard assessed 
chronic right shoulder pain.  He discussed the Popeye deformity which was likely not 
contributing to his symptoms. Dr. Vinyard opined it was safe for him to return to work.  
(Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 212-214)  He specifically opined that he had no further treatment to offer. 
In March 2020, Mr. Zuniga returned to his primary care clinic and was evaluated 
by Michael Luft, D.O.  He diagnosed reactive depression, continued the medications 
and removed Mr. Zuniga from work for a week.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 96-99)  He followed up 
again in May and August 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 101-107) 
In April 2020, Dr. Vinyard provided expert medical opinions to defense counsel.  
(Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 218-219)  He disagreed with Dr. Bansal’s rating, noting, “it is not 
customary for me to assign an additional 10% impairment rating for an isolated distal 
clavicle total shoulder arthroplasty.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 218)  He also reviewed the valid FCE 
from Mr. Short.  He opined that the earlier invalid test was “concerning for malingering 
type behaviors.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 218)  “However, I am willing to place the patient on 
permanent restrictions as outlined in his valid functional capacity evaluation.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, 
p. 218)  He opined firmly that his surgery was exclusive to the right shoulder and not the 
body as a whole.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 219) 
In this record, it is unclear to me whether these restrictions were utilized by the 
employer in any way.  It appears in this record that he continued his regular job of 
hooking hogs. 
Dr. Vinyard re-examined Mr. Zuniga again on July 6, 2020.  He documented Mr. 
Zuniga’s ongoing symptoms.  Dr. Vinyard apparently forgot that he had agreed to the 
permanent restrictions because he opined that due to the earlier invalid FCE, he could 
not assign restrictions and stated he had nothing further to offer by way of treatment.  
(Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 220-221) 
Robert Arias, Ph.D., performed a neuropsychological evaluation on behalf of 
defendants on July 30, 2020.  (Def. Ex. C)  Dr. Arias does not speak Spanish and 
conducted testing through an interpreter.  His opinion is summarized as follows: 
These results revealed pervasive problems with 
performance/symptom validity psychometrically/empirically.  He 
specifically performed extremely outside of normal limits on multiple 
measures of validity in all areas.  This is congruent with previous records 
indicating an invalid FCE, with lack of consistent effort, as well as 
subjective complaints that are out of proportion with objective findings.  
Records from Iowa Ortho were also remarkable for concerns with regard 
to “malingering-type behaviors.”  These opinions are offered within a 
reasonable degree of neuropsychological certainty, and were derived 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
following empirically accepted algorithms of interpreting the data utilized in 
this assessment.  Given these findings, this individual presents as a high 
risk for a poor outcome from interventions targeted at ameliorating 
subjective pain complaints.  Notably, falsifiability is the essence of 
science.  In the absence of objective impairments, particularly in the 
presence of empirically invalid findings noted in this evaluation, placing 
permanent work restrictions will only likely lead to further disability. 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 33)  Dr. Arias had important details wrong, such as the understanding 
that Mr. Zuniga had four years of education in Guatemala and was an “advanced” 
student.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 34) 
In September 2020, Mr. Zuniga was evaluated at St. Anthony’s Clinic where he 
was instructed to continue to take his mental health medications consistently.  (Jt. Ex. 
11) 
Mr. Zuniga testified that he began to develop left-sided shoulder pain from 
overuse at work in October 2020.  (Tr. pp. 48-50; 96-97)  He reported this to the plant 
nurse.  Specifically, he testified that pulling the hooks from overhead, in addition to 
pulling the carcasses toward him, started to cause pain on his left side.  (Tr., pp. 49-50)  
He testified that the plant medical personnel would not provide any treatment. 
Mr. Zuniga was evaluated by Catalina Ressler, Ph.D., a Spanish-speaking 
psychologist on November 20, 2020.  Dr. Ressler took a full, accurate history from Mr. 
Zuniga.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 63-75)  Dr. Ressler chose not to perform any written testing with 
Mr. Zuniga.   “Mr. Zuniga does not have the required minimum reading level for the 
assessment to be valid.”  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 62)  She diagnosed persistent depressive 
disorder with anxious distress.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 66)  She opined that Mr. Zuniga is not 
malingering and specifically rebutted Dr. Arias’s conclusion in convincing detail. 
Mr. Byrne, you also asked that I please comment on whether I 
believe that Mr. Zuniga is malingering.  I first want to comment on how a 
previous conclusion was made about this being the likely case for Mr. 
Zuniga when he completed a neuro-psychological evaluation on 
07/03/2020.  I would like to note that he appeared to primarily draw this 
conclusion from the results of the MMPI-2 administration.  I disagree with 
Dr. Arias’ choice to administer assessments such as the MMPI-2 while 
ignoring Mr. Zuniga’s reading level and then basing conclusions off this 
and other measures.  The [sic] only has a 1st grade level of educational 
attainment.  I would therefore argue that such results are invalid and 
should not be considered when drawing conclusions about Mr. Zuniga’s 
current mental health or other behaviors. 
I do not believe that Mr. Zuniga is malingering.  His claimed stress 
appears to be congruent with the observations of other providers, his 
social history, his family’s expressed concerns, as well as my clinical 
observation.  Mr. Zuniga has consistently received a diagnosis of major 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
depression by various providers and has responded well to the medication 
regimen in the sense that he has had some mild symptom reduction.  
Moreover, I believe his narrative is consistent with what one would expect 
of an individual with his experiences.  For example, being dismissed by 
Smithfield’s nurse leading to feelings of hopelessness and helplessness 
from feeling trapped is not an uncommon or unrealistic outcome.   
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 67)  She opined that Mr. Zuniga has sustained permanent psychological 
impairment as a result of the work injury. 
 
Given the combination of factors described above, I conclude that 
this is likely a permanent impairment.  Using the Guides to the Evaluation 
of Permanent Impairment, I would rate Mr. Zuniga’s to be in Class 2 – Mild 
Impairment (Impairment levels are compatible with most useful 
functioning).  Mr. Zuniga is demonstrating most impairment in his social 
functioning, activities of daily living, and concentration tasks.  Comparably, 
using the VA Disability Ratings for Mental Health Disorders, I would offer a 
30% rating since Mr. Zuniga does need his medication regimen in order to 
function; he is also experiencing frequent drops in mood; is often anxious 
or stressed; has difficulty sleeping; and has become suspicious (primarily 
of those whom he works for).  Moreover, Mr. Zuniga is having trouble 
occasionally fulfilling his job requirements because of depression or pain; 
and he is struggling to maintain social connections outside of those he has 
with close family members. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 68) 
I find Dr. Ressler’s opinions to be the most credible, accurate opinions regarding 
Mr. Zuniga’s mental condition in the record. 
Mr. Zuniga then had a second IME with Dr. Bansal on December 11, 2020.  He 
had been taken off work for depression by his primary care provider at this time as well.  
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 119)  Dr. Bansal affirmed his earlier (December 2019) opinions related to 
the right shoulder area, however, he opined that Mr. Zuniga had aggravated his left 
shoulder impingement from overuse and overcompensation.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 54) 
In my medical opinion, Mr. Zuniga developed probable left shoulder 
pathology as a result of overuse and overcompensation from his right 
shoulder pathology.  He had returned to work full duty with increased use 
and strain of his left arm, including reaching for and pulling heavy hog 
carcasses.  In these situations it is common to have contralateral arm 
rotator cuff pathology, as there will be excessive overreaching, abduction 
and shoulder rotation forces, stressing the rotator cuff. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 54)  He also agreed with Dr. Ressler’s opinions regarding Mr. Zuniga’s 
mental health condition. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
His primary care provider took him off work for a few days again for depression in 
January 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 120) 
Finally, Mr. Zuniga was evaluated by Ian Crabb, M.D., for a defense IME in 
February 2021.  Dr. Crabb opined that Mr. Zuniga had sustained 2 percent impairment 
of his right upper extremity per the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 18)  
Regarding the left shoulder, Dr. Crabb opined the following: 
Mr. Zuniga claims, when clipping the hogs together, that he felt he 
had to pull harder with his left arm.  Mr. Zuniga had a preexisting condition 
of the left shoulder injury at the time from a motor vehicle accident which 
he suffered in 2015 and is outlined in the medical record.  There is no 
evidence that Mr. Zuniga suffered an injury to the left shoulder.  The idea 
that the contralateral shoulder is aggravated by “overuse” when there is an 
injury to one arm is not supported in the medical literature.  The action that 
Mr. Zuniga is doing as he demonstrated to me was an internal rotation 
force generated by each arm.  This would not be a motion that would 
typically be expected to cause a rotator cuff injury.  Again, his right 
shoulder has essentially full strength, and so the argument that he 
somehow had to compensate is nonsensical. 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 20)  He opined in the “absence of further workup” the best diagnosis is 
“left shoulder pain, not otherwise specified.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 20) 
Dr. Bansal prepared a rebuttal report on March 3, 2021.  He specifically 
disagreed with Dr. Vinyard and Dr. Crabb regarding their refusal to rate the distal 
clavicle excision.  “I suggest that Drs. Crabb and Vinyard take that issue up with the 
Orthopedic Editorial Board for the upper extremity chapter of the Guides.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
58)  He went on to challenge Dr. Crabb’s analysis of Mr. Zuniga’s alleged sequela left 
shoulder condition. 
Turning specifically to Dr. Crabb’s examination, we find that Mr. Zuniga 
has severely compromised range of motion of his right shoulder.  Dr. 
Crabb measured 110 degrees of flexion (normal 180 degrees) and internal 
rotation of 24 degrees (normal 90 degrees).  This loss of range of motion 
can itself explain the overcompensation needed by his left arm, in addition 
to the fatigue potential outlined. 
  
Turning to his left shoulder examination, we find that it also is 
compromised in range of motion with 110 degrees of flexion and 23 
degrees of internal rotation. . . . The loss of ROM in the left shoulder is 
also further noted in the FCE recently performed at Short Physical 
Therapy.  He also found deficits in strength for the right shoulder.  Overall 
the FCE found functional deficits with corresponding restrictions for both 
shoulders, further supportive of the bilateral shoulder restrictions I 
assigned. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
The overcompensation necessitated by the left shoulder is the best 
explanation for its restriction in light of the logical progression, timing, and 
mechanism in play.  As Dr. Crabb points out, Mr. Zuniga had to pull harder 
with his left arm to hook the hog carcasses.  He further states/implies that 
the forceful repetitive internal rotation of the shoulder would not affect the 
rotator cuff.  This is a counterintuitive statement, as internal rotation as 
implied by the term itself (rotation) is governed by the rotator cuff. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 58-59) 
Since he was released by Dr. Vinyard in August 2019, Mr. Zuniga has continued 
in his same position hooking carcasses at Smithfield.  The parties agree that he has not 
had a decrease in his wages as a result of his work injury.  Mr. Zuniga testified at 
hearing that both of his shoulders are highly symptomatic.  (Tr., pp. 53-54)  He 
continues to suffer from depression and anxiety. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is the correct rate of compensation.  The parties 
have actually stipulated to claimant’s gross earnings.  The only dispute is about the 
claimant’s marital status at the time of injury and his exemptions. 
In calculating the rate of compensation, the injured worker’s marital status and 
number of dependents entitled to be claimed are necessary.   “The weekly benefit 
amount payable to any employee for any one week shall be upon the basis of eighty 
percent of the employee’s weekly spendable earnings, . . .”  Iowa Code Section 85.37 
(2015)  Weekly spendable earnings is defined as the amount remaining after payroll 
taxes are deducted from gross weekly earnings.  Iowa Code Section 85.61(9) (2015). 
Iowa Code Section 85.61(6) defines payroll taxes: 
“Payroll taxes” means an amount, determined by tables adopted by the 
workers’ compensation commissioner pursuant to chapter 17A, equal to 
the sum of the following: 
a. An amount equal to the amount which would be withheld pursuant to 
withholding tables in effect on July 1 preceding the injury under the 
Internal Revenue Code, and regulations pursuant thereto, as 
amended, as though the employee had elected to claim the maximum 
number of exemptions for actual dependency, blindness and old age to 
which the employee is entitled on the date on which the employee was 
injured. 
Iowa Code Section 85.61(6) 2015). 
The agency “has long held that actual exemptions claimed on the income tax 
return controls.  . . . A claimant is typically limited to those exemptions claimed on his 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
tax returns.”  Kayser v. Farmers Cooperative Society, File No. 5034699 (Arb. March 13, 
2012) citing DeRaad v. Fred’s Plumbing & Heating, File No. 1134532 (App. Jan. 16, 
2002) and Webber v. West Side Transport, File No. 1278549 (App. Dec. 20, 2002).  In 
essence, the agency recognizes a presumption that the claimant is entitled to the 
number of exemptions and marital status which were actually claimed on their tax 
returns.  The party seeking to overcome that presumption must present sufficient 
evidence at hearing to rebut the presumption. 
In this case, the issue is whether claimant’s testimony is enough to overcome the 
rebuttable presumption.  I find that it is.  I have found claimant to be a highly credible 
witness.  I have no reason to disbelieve him that he is married to Sandra Nanette Garcia 
Duerte since 1986.  He provides her financial support although she has remained in 
Guatemala.  While claimant did not provide a marriage certificate or other 
documentation, the medical records are replete with references to his marital status 
which bolsters his credible testimony.  Mr. Zuniga is married with two exemptions, and 
utilizing the appropriate rate book his rate of compensation is $626.67 per week. 
The next issue is the nature of claimant’s disability.  The parties have stipulated 
that Mr. Zuniga sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment which manifested on or about March 18, 2018.  The parties have further 
stipulated that this injury caused some level of temporary and permanent disability to his 
right shoulder area.  The primary question submitted is the nature of this disability.  The 
claimant contends the following:  (1) that his injury has led to disability which extends 
past his shoulder as defined by Iowa law and into his body as a whole; (2) that his injury 
has caused a mental sequela which should be deemed permanent; and (3) that his 
injury has caused a left shoulder area sequela which also should be deemed 
permanent.  Thus, claimant alleges his disability extends into his whole body and must 
be evaluated under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v).  The defendants deny all of this and 
contend that Mr. Zuniga’s only permanent disability is a minimal impairment rating in his 
right shoulder under Section 85.34(2)(n). 
This is, fundamentally, an issue of medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
As an initial matter, the claimant contends that his disability should be assessed 
under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v) (2019) because the disability extends beyond his 
“shoulder.”  Since 2017, “shoulder” disabilities are assessed under Iowa Code Section 
85.34(2)(n).  
Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(n) states: For the loss of a shoulder, weekly 
compensation during four hundred weeks. 
Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v) states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u”, the compensation 
shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks 
as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the 
disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee 
possessed when the injury occurred.  A determination of the reduction in 
the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall take into 
account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the number 
of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee 
would work at the time of the injury.  If an employee who is eligible for 
compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is offered work for 
which the employee receives or would have received at the time of the 
injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon the 
employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee’s earning capacity.  Notwithstanding section 
85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is eligible for compensation 
under this paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated 
from employment by that employer, the award or agreement for settlement 
for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of 
reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s 
permanent partial disability. 
Claimant cites Rubalcava v. Siouxpreme Egg Products, File No. 5066865 (Arb. 
6/23/20) for the proposition that a shoulder area surgery which results in a distal clavicle 
excision should be analyzed under subsection (v) as opposed to (n).  A number of the 
cases cited in Rubalcava have been overturned on appeal.  Moreover, there is contrary 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
authority at the deputy level in Bautista v. Iowa Premium Beef, File No. 1643891.01 
(Arb. 6/15/21), which was decided after Deng and Chavez and has since been affirmed 
on appeal.  Bautista v. Iowa Premium Beef, File No. 1643891.01 (App. 12/6/21). 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, and applying the correct legal 
principles, I conclude that the claimant’s right shoulder area injury itself is limited to 
permanent disability analysis under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(n). 
The next issue considered is whether claimant sustained either a mental sequela 
or a left shoulder sequela. 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
An employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury if the employee 
sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability that is a proximate 
result of the original injury.  Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 5029834 (Appeal 
February 15, 2012).  A sequela can be an after effect or secondary effect of an injury. 
Lewis v. Dee Zee Manufacturing, File No. 797154, (Arb. September 11, 1989). One 
form of sequela of a work injury is an adverse effect from medical treatment for the 
original injury.  Where treatment rendered with respect to a compensable injury itself 
causes further injury, the subsequent injury is also compensable. Yount v. United Fire & 
Casualty Co., 256 Iowa 813, 129 N.W.2d 75 (1964). For example, the death of a 
claimant who died on the operating table during surgery for a work injury may be 
compensable, since the injury caused the need for surgery. Breeden v. Firestone Tire, 
File No. 966020, (Arb. February 27, 1992). As another example, a claimant who fell as a 
result of dizziness from medication he was taking to treat a work injury is to be 
compensated for both the original injury and the resulting fall as a sequela of the first 
injury. Hamilton v. Combined Ins. Co. of America, File Nos. 854465, 877068, (Arb. 
February 21, 1991).   
A sequela can also take the form of a secondary effect on the claimant's body 
stemming from the original injury. For example, where a leg injury causing shortening of 
the leg in turn alters the claimant's gait, causing mechanical back pain, the back 
condition can be found to be a sequela of the leg injury. Fridlington v. 3M, File No. 
788758, (Arb. November 15, 1991).  
A sequela can also take the form of a later injury that is caused by the original 
injury. For example, where a leg injury leads to the claimant's knee giving out in a 
grocery store, the resulting fall is compensable as a sequela of the leg injury. Taylor v. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
Oscar Mayer & Co., Ill Iowa Ind. Comm. Rep. 257, 258 (1982). 
Based upon the expert opinions of Dr. Ressler and Dr. Bansal, I find that 
claimant has, in fact, met his burden of proof that he has sustained permanent disability 
in both his left shoulder area, as well as a permanent psychological disability.  For the 
reasons set forth in the findings of fact I find these opinions more convincing than the 
expert opinions of Dr. Crabb and Dr. Arias.  Simply stated, the opinions of Dr. Ressler 
and Dr. Bansal more closely align with the underlying facts of this case, including the 
claimant’s testimony, as well as the contemporaneous medical documentation. 
The next issue is to assess the degree of disability to the claimant’s mental 
disability, right shoulder and left shoulder.   
     In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American Medical 
Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining 
functional impairment and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2019).  
Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with an injured worker’s actual loss of 
use or functional disability as determined by the evidence, but rather the impairment 
rating as assigned by the adopted version of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment.  The only function of the agency is to determine which 
impairment rating should be utilized. 
It is noted that there is no evidence that Mr. Zuniga has lost any earnings at this 
time since he has returned to work for the same employer, in the same position, with the 
same or better earnings.  Consequently, whether there is a valid sequela condition or 
not, the analysis under subsection (x) mandates an assessment which is limited to the 
impairment ratings. 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, I find the expert opinion of Dr. 
Bansal to be the most compelling impairment ratings in the record regarding claimant’s 
physical impairments to his right and left shoulders.  Consequently, I find the claimant 
has sustained a 12 percent functional loss of the right upper extremity and a 3 percent 
impairment of the left upper extremity.  Therefore, I conclude he is entitled to 48 weeks 
for the right shoulder and 12 weeks for the left shoulder.  These benefits shall be paid 
consecutively commencing on October 24, 2019.  The claimant has not obtained an 
impairment rating pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment for his depression and anxiety and therefore is not entitled at this time to 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
any benefits for this condition. 
It is noted that defendants objected to Dr. Ressler’s report and moved to exclude 
Claimant’s Exhibit 3.  The defense motion in limine is denied.  The report contains 
significant relevant information.  While I am prohibited by statute from utilizing the final 
impairment rating for purposes of awarding benefits, this goes to the weight of the 
evidence, not the admissibility.1 
The final issue is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for his IME or 
other costs. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
                                                 
1 Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(x) is quite clear that the only basis for awarding permanency 
benefits when the claimant has returned to work with the same and better earnings, is an impairment 
rating pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.  This agency is precluded 
from any type of assessment of the worker’s actual functional disability.  The Guides state the following 
regarding permanent disability ratings for mental injuries:  “Percentages are not provided to estimate 
mental impairment in this edition of the Guides.”  AMA Guides, 5th ed., Section 14.3, p. 361.  This section 
goes on to explain how mental disabilities are assessed in some detail, however, there is nowhere in the 
Guides – that I can locate - which provide a numeric rating.  The result is that workers, such as Mr. 
Zuniga, who have permanent mental disability, are not entitled to any compensation under the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act.  In essence, the Legislature has chosen to discriminate between physical 
and mental injuries for purposes of compensating permanent disabilities.  Workers with permanent mental 
disabilities take nothing.  While this result appears, on its face, to be absurd, counter-intuitive, and 
contrary to fundamental principles of justice and fairness, this agency has no authority to question the law 
as enacted. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 16 
 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).  
I find that claimant is entitled to payment of IME expenses in the amount of 
$2,672.00 for Dr. Bansal’s report and $1,293.00 for the Dr. Ressler report.  He is 
entitled to additional costs amounting to $2,690.50. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant sixty (60) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of six hundred twenty-six and 67/100 ($626.67) per week from 
December 19, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the four (4) weeks previously paid. 

ZUNIGA V. SMITHFIELD FOODS, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the IME expenses of Dr. Bansal and Dr. 
Ressler as set forth above. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of two thousand six hundred ninety 
and 50/100 dollars ($2,690.50). 
Signed and filed this ___24th ____ day of January, 2022. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James Byrne (via WCES) 
Michael J. Miller (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal mus t 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
