Case Number: 1665279.01
Case Title:  HOWARD, NAZARETH V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Howard Nazareth-1665279.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NAZARETH HOWARD, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 1665279.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY CORP., : 
 
 
  :     Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1403.20, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
    1703, 1803.1, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  :   
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Nazareth Howard filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants Prestage Foods of Iowa, LLC, employer, and 
Safety National Casualty Corporation, insurer. The hearing occurred before the 
undersigned on January 20, 2021, via CourtCall video conference.  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of: Joint Exhibits 1 through 10, Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 9, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through J. Claimant testified on his 
own behalf. Andrea Jondle also testified. The evidentiary record was closed at the end 
of the hearing, and the case was considered fully submitted upon receipt of the parties’ 
briefs on February 15, 2021. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained a work-related neck/cervical spine injury. 
2. Whether claimant’s injury was limited to his right shoulder or extended into 
the body as a whole. 
3. Whether permanency is ripe for determination, and if so, the extent of 
claimant’s permanent disability. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to additional temporary benefits. 
5. Claimant’s rate. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Apr-14  15:27:56     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 2 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to additional medical care for his neck. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for his independent medical 
examination (IME) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
8. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The parties agree claimant sustained a work-related injury on May 1, 2019 when 
he slipped and fell and landed on the right side of his body. (Hearing Report; Hrg. 
Transcript, p. 20) There is no dispute that claimant injured his right shoulder as a result 
of this slip and fall, but defendants dispute whether claimant’s injury extends beyond his 
right shoulder into the body and whether claimant injured his neck/cervical spine during 
the incident.  
After the fall, claimant was immediately evaluated in defendant-employer’s 
nurse’s office before being sent to an occupational medicine clinic. (Tr., pp. 20-21) 
When conservative treatment, including physical therapy, failed, claimant was referred 
to Mark Palit, M.D., an orthopedist, for his right shoulder. (JE 1, p. 7)  
Notably, the records from claimant’s treatment at the occupational medicine clinic 
are devoid of any mentions of neck pain. (JE 1)  Claimant similarly did not mention his 
neck on his medical history questionnaire that he completed prior to initiating physical 
therapy. (JE 6, p. 79) 
Claimant likewise did not represent neck pain at his first appointment with Dr. 
Palit. Instead, he complained only of right shoulder pain, for which Dr. Palit 
recommended surgery. (JE 3, pp. 22-23) That surgery—a right shoulder arthroscopy 
rotator cuff repair with labral debridement and subacromial decompression—was 
performed on June 19, 2019. (JE 3, p. 27) 
Claimant continued to report significant right shoulder symptoms during his follow 
ups with Dr. Palit in June, July and August of 2019, but Dr. Palit’s notes make no 
mention of neck pain until an appointment on September 17, 2019. (JE 3, p. 36) Dr. 
Palit diagnosed claimant with cervical radiculopathy and recommended an MRI. (JE 3, 
p. 37)   
Dr. Palit indicated the MRI revealed significant stenosis at C4-C5 and C5-C6 for 
which he recommended a cervical epidural steroid injection (ESI). (JE 3, p. 42) Dr. Palit 
also stated, “This is work comp related.” (JE 3, p. 42) He restricted claimant from 
returning to work until the ESI was performed. (JE 3, p. 42) 
Defendants then scheduled claimant for another cervical MRI for purposes of a 
second opinion. (See JE 3, p. 43)  
In the meantime, defendants authorized Dr. Palit’s recommendation for a cervical 
ESI. The ESI was performed by John Rayburn, M.D., a pain management specialist, 
who also prescribed claimant gabapentin and recommended an EMG. Notably, that 
EMG was negative for cervical radiculopathy. (JE 5, p. 74) 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 3 
Unfortunately, Dr. Rayburn’s ESI provided only brief relief. (JE 4, p. 50) As a 
result, claimant was referred to spine surgeon Trevor Schmitz, M.D. (JE 4, p. 52) In the 
interim, Dr. Rayburn recommended continued use of the gabapentin. (JE 4, p. 52) 
After his initial evaluation of claimant on December 11, 2019, Dr. Schmitz 
recommended a nerve block to diagnose whether claimant had a radicular component 
to his pain. (JE 4, p. 58) When the nerve block provided claimant no relief, Dr. Schmitz 
offered the following opinion: “I think his shoulder symptoms are likely stemming from 
the shoulder. There is nothing further to offer from his neck. He points directly over his 
shoulder as the source of his symptoms.” (JE 4, p. 60) Dr. Schmitz then released 
claimant from his care. 
In a January 23, 2020 letter to defendants’ counsel, Dr. Schmitz opined 
claimant’s May 1, 2019 work injury did not cause, materially aggravate, or accelerate 
claimant’s neck condition. (Defendants’ Ex. A, pp. 1-2) Dr. Schmitz later reaffirmed this 
opinion in an April 6, 2020 check-the-box style letter. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 5-6) 
On April 23, 2020, Dr. Palit authored a letter to claimant’s counsel in which he 
opined that claimant’s cervical spine complaints were caused by the May 1, 2019 work 
injury and that further treatment, including surgical consultation, was appropriate. (Cl. 
Ex. 3, p. 19) 
Claimant continued to report shoulder pain during his treatment with Dr. Rayburn 
and Dr. Schmitz. As a result, defendants authorized treatment with Kyle Galles, M.D.  
Claimant was first seen by Dr. Galles on April 1, 2020. Dr. Galles was concerned that 
claimant’s rotator cuff failed to heal, so he recommended another MRI and placed 
claimant on work restrictions. (JE 4, p. 64) 
On April 2, 2020, defendants’ counsel penned a letter to claimant’s counsel 
indicating defendant-employer had work available within Dr. Galles’ restrictions. (Ex. D, 
p. 21) The letter included details of lodging, meals, and transportation and 
communicated to claimant that if he refused the offer, he must do so in writing and 
would not be entitled to temporary benefits during the refusal. (Ex. D, p. 21)  
Dr. Galles’ April 1, 2020 restrictions remained in place until he performed surgery 
on claimant on April 27, 2020. The surgery consisted of a right shoulder manipulation 
under anesthesia, arthroscopic acromioplasty and extensive arthroscopic debridement. 
(JE 4, p. 66) Dr. Galles later opined that this surgery was limited to the right shoulder 
“and did not extend into the body.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 12) 
Dr. Galles maintained claimant’s lifting restrictions during his post-operative 
treatment, including when he released claimant from surgical care on August 27, 2020 
and referred claimant back to Dr. Rayburn for pain management. (JE 4, p. 73) 
Dr. Galles clarified in a September 10, 2020 check-the-box style letter that the 
restrictions he assigned were temporary until claimant underwent pain management. 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 12) He also clarified that the pain management sessions were to 
determine if additional treatment was necessary or claimant had reached maximum 
medical improvement (MMI). (Def. Ex. B, p. 12) 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 4 
As a result, claimant returned to Dr. Rayburn on September 16, 2020. Claimant 
was “adamant” to Dr. Rayburn that he was interested in any additional injections or 
surgeries. (JE 4, p. 74) Because claimant failed gabapentin, Dr. Rayburn indicated 
opioid pain medications were not appropriate and he had nothing else to offer. (JE 4, p. 
74) As such, he placed claimant at MMI and released him from his care. (JE 4, p. 74) 
On November 16, 2020, Dr. Galles authored a letter indicating claimant reached 
MMI as of August 27, 2020. He assigned a 13 percent upper extremity impairment 
rating based on claimant’s range of motion deficits. (Def. Ex. B, p. 14a) 
Claimant underwent an IME with Charles Wenzel, M.D., in July of 2020 before he 
was released from Dr. Galles’ care. In his August 27, 2020 report, Dr. Wenzel opined 
claimant sustained an aggravation/acceleration of his pre-existing cervical degeneration 
as a result of his May 1, 2019 work injury. (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 9) Dr. Wenzel disputed 
Dr. Schmitz’s concern that claimant did not immediately note neck pain or a radicular 
component to his pain; Dr. Wenzel pointed to claimant’s treatment records from May 5, 
2019, in which claimant reported pain and numbness down his arm. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10)  
Dr. Wenzel opined claimant was not at MMI for either his neck condition or his 
right shoulder condition. He recommended a second opinion for the neck and physical 
therapy for the shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) He opined that claimant’s right shoulder 
condition extended into the body as a whole because claimant had surgery on the “torso 
side of the body.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13) Dr. Wenzel also provided provisional impairment 
ratings of 5 percent whole percent impairment for loss of range of motion in claimant’s 
neck and 17 percent upper extremity impairment for loss of range of motion in 
claimant’s shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) 
Claimant testified he went back to work with Dr. Galles’ restrictions in April of 
2020 and was “wiping tables,” but he was at times unable to continue the work due to 
pain. (Tr., pp. 43-44) He acknowledged, however, that no doctor restricted him from 
working entirely, that he notified defendant-employer via phone call only, and that 
defendant-employer always had light-duty work available to him. (Tr., pp. 86, 88) 
Claimant worked at least some days in April, May, June, July, August and September, 
and he last appeared for work on September 10, 2020. (See Tr., pp. 95, 10) At the time 
of the hearing, defendant-employer was still offering claimant work within his 
restrictions, but claimant was calling in daily indicating he was unable to work due to 
pain. (Tr., pp. 100-101) 
Turning first to the nature of claimant’s injuries, I am not persuaded by claimant’s 
testimony that he experienced and reported neck pain in the immediate aftermath of his 
slip and fall. As discussed above, there is no notation of neck pain in any of the 
treatment records until months after the May 1, 2019 incident. Claimant did not even 
identify his neck as an injured body part in his answers to defendants’ interrogatories in 
September of 2019. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 50-51) 
I acknowledge Dr. Palit’s statement in his record from claimant’s September 16, 
2019 appointment that claimant’s neck condition “is work comp related” and his 
subsequent letter on April 23, 2020 in which he opined that claimant’s cervical spine 
condition was related to the May 1, 2019 injury, but Dr. Palit failed to offer any 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 5 
explanation regarding claimant’s delayed reporting of his neck pain. It is also unclear 
whether Dr. Palit reviewed claimant’s negative EMG or any of Dr. Schmitz’s or Dr. 
Rayburn’s treatment records prior to offering his April 23, 2020 opinion. 
I likewise acknowledge Dr. Wenzel’s opinion that the May 1, 2019 slip and fall 
aggravated claimant’s pre-existing neck condition. Dr. Wenzel, however, was seemingly 
under the impression that claimant was experiencing and reported neck and radicular 
symptoms immediately after the injury. Dr. Wenzel also failed to address claimant’s 
negative EMG and failure to respond to the nerve block.  
Dr. Schmitz, on the other hand, treated claimant’s neck condition, evaluated 
claimant after he received no relief from his nerve block injection, and observed 
claimant point directly over his shoulder as the source of his symptoms. Given 
claimant’s delayed reporting of his neck symptoms and his failed response to the nerve 
block injection, I find Dr. Schmitz’s opinion most convincing. I therefore find insufficient 
evidence that claimant sustained a neck injury as a result of his May 1, 2019 slip and 
fall. 
With respect to claimant’s right shoulder, I find claimant reached MMI on August 
27, 2020, as indicated by Dr. Galles. At that point, Dr. Galles recommended one to two 
pain management visits, which claimant pursued, but Dr. Rayburn had nothing further to 
offer.  
Dr. Wenzel opined that claimant had not yet reached MMI because he “should 
complete physical therapy and any other treatment recommended by Dr. Galles.” (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 10) In his November 16, 2020 letter, however, Dr. Galles confirmed he had no 
additional treatment recommendations.  
Using the measurements taken in claimant’s IME with Dr. Wenzel, Dr. Galles 
assigned a 13 percent upper extremity impairment rating. Unlike Dr. Wenzel, however, 
Dr. Galles did not include impairment’s for claimant’s loss of extension or adduction. Dr. 
Galles failed to explain why he did not include these measurements in his rating. I 
therefore find Dr. Wenzel’s rating to be most persuasive. I find claimant sustained a 17 
percent right upper extremity impairment for range of motion deficits. 
Turning to claimant’s rate, claimant’s calculation assumes claimant worked a set 
45 hours per week every week. Claimant, however, testified his hours varied. (Tr., p. 54) 
In fact, claimant’s wage records indicate claimant, during his short tenure with 
defendant-employer, never worked 45 hours. (See Def. Ex. C) Defendants’ rate 
calculation is based on claimant’s actual hours worked and corresponding wage 
records. I therefore find it more persuasive. I adopt defendants’ rate calculation and find 
claimant’s average weekly wage to be $650.48.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 6 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
As discussed above, considering claimant’s delayed reporting, failure to respond 
to a nerve block and the opinions of Dr. Schmitz, among other facts, I found insufficient 
evidence that claimant sustained a neck injury resulting from his work-related slip and 
fall on May 1, 2019. I therefore conclude claimant failed to satisfy his burden to prove he 
sustained a work-related injury to his neck or cervical spine. 
Having determined claimant failed to prove causation with respect to his neck or 
cervical spine, I conclude claimant failed to prove his entitlement to additional medical 
care for his neck. 
Claimant did, however, sustain a stipulated injury to his right shoulder. The 
question is whether that injury is limited to a scheduled “shoulder” under the 
legislature’s 2017 amendments to Iowa Code section 85.34 or extends into claimant’s 
body as a whole. 
The Iowa legislature modified section 85.34 in 2017 by adding the shoulder to the 
list of scheduled members. The new subsection states, in its entirety: “For the loss of a 
shoulder, weekly compensation during four hundred weeks.” Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n). 
In Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883 (App. September 29, 2020) 
and Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270 (App. September 30, 2020), the 
Commissioner addressed what constitutes “shoulder” under the law. In Deng, the 
Commissioner determined the muscles that make up the rotator cuff are included within 
the definition of “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n). In Chavez, the Commissioner 
determined both the labrum and the acromion are likewise included in the definition. 
In this case, claimant underwent a right shoulder arthroscopy rotator cuff repair 
with labral debridement and subacromial decompression followed by a subsequent 
arthroscopic acromioplasty with extensive arthroscopic debridement. As discussed, the 
rotator cuff, labrum and acromion have all been deemed by the Commissioner to be 
injuries to the scheduled member shoulder. In fact, like claimant in this case, the 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 7 
claimant in Chavez similarly underwent a rotator cuff repair, along with debridement of 
the labrum and a subacromial decompression. Thus, I conclude claimant’s injury is 
limited to the “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) and does not extend into the body as 
a whole.  
Claimant asserts the extent of his entitlement to permanent partial disability 
(PPD) benefits is not ripe for determination. As discussed, however, I found claimant 
reached MMI on August 27, 2020. Iowa Code section 85.34(2), as amended by the 
legislature in 2017, provides that “[c]ompensation for permanent partial disability shall 
begin when it is medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury 
has been reached . . . . “Iowa Code § 85.34(2). Having found claimant reached MMI, I 
conclude the extent of claimant’s permanency is ripe for determination and that 
claimant’s PPD benefits should commence on August 27, 2020. 
Permanent partial disability compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based 
on a maximum of 400 weeks. Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n). Having adopted Dr. Wenzel’s 
17 percent right upper extremity impairment for range of motion deficits, I conclude 
claimant is entitled to 68 weeks of permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits. 
Claimant asserts he is entitled to a running award of temporary benefits. Iowa 
Code section 85.33, as amended in 2017, states: 
3.a. If an employee is temporarily, partially disabled and the employer 
for whom the employee was working at the time of injury offers to the 
employee suitable work consistent with the employee's disability the 
employee shall accept the suitable work, and be compensated with 
temporary partial benefits. If the employer offers the employee suitable 
work and the employee refuses to accept the suitable work offered by the 
employer, the employee shall not be compensated with temporary partial, 
temporary total, or healing period benefits during the period of the 
refusal. . . . 
b. The employer shall communicate an offer of temporary work to the 
employee in writing, including details of lodging, meals, and transportation, 
and shall communicate to the employee that if the employee refuses the 
offer of temporary work, the employee shall communicate the refusal and 
the reason for the refusal to the employer in writing and that during the 
period of the refusal the employee will not be compensated with temporary 
partial, temporary total, or healing period benefits, unless the work refused 
is not suitable.  If the employee refuses the offer of temporary work on the 
grounds that the work is not suitable, the employee shall communicate the 
refusal, along with the reason for the refusal, to the employer in writing at 
the time the offer of work is refused. Failure to communicate the reason 
for the refusal in this manner precludes the employee from raising 
suitability of the work as the reason for the refusal until such time as the 
reason for the refusal is communicated in writing to the employer. 
Iowa Code § 85.33(3) (emphasis added). 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 8 
The statute first requires defendants to communicate their offer of temporary 
work in writing. The offer in question in this case occurred on April 2, 2020, in writing, 
and I found it included all of the details required in section 85.33(b). 
As discussed in the findings of fact, claimant admitted there were many days 
during which he failed to show up for work despite defendant-employer’s offer of 
suitable work. While claimant testified he notified defendant-employer via phone call, 
the statute requires (“shall”) claimants to communicate such refusals in writing.  
The legislature set forth specifically what occurs if a claimant fails to comply with 
the statutory requirements when refusing an offer of temporary work: “[D]uring the 
period of the refusal the employee will not be compensated with temporary partial, 
temporary total, or healing period benefits, unless the work refused is not suitable.”  
Iowa Code § 85.33(3)(b).  
In this case, claimant testified he was unable to perform the work offered to him 
due to pain, but claimant failed to assert the work was not suitable in writing as required 
by the statute. As such, the statute indicates he is unable to claim suitably of the work 
as the reason for his refusal. Iowa Code § 85.33(3)(b). I therefore conclude claimant 
should not be compensated with temporary benefits on any of the days after April 2, 
2020 when he failed to appear for work through the date of the hearing.1 
With respect to claimant’s rate, Iowa Code section 85.36(6) provides that if an 
employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings are computed 
by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately preceding the 
injury. In this case, however, claimant worked for defendant-employer less than 13 
calendar weeks immediately preceding his injury. As such, section 85.36(7) indicates 
the rate is supposed to be determined by looking at the earnings of other similarly 
situated employees. The parties, however, neglected to include any such evidence.  
As such, the best evidence available in this case is claimant’s earnings in the 
weeks preceding his injury, even though the full 13 weeks are not available. I found 
defendants’ rate calculation to be post persuasive because it relies on claimant’s actual 
hours worked and wage records. Defendants also excluded a week that did not reflect 
claimant’s customary earnings, as required by section 85.36(6). Thus, I adopt 
defendants’ rate calculation and found claimant’s average weekly wage to be $650.48. 
Relying on the parties’ stipulations, claimant was single and entitled to two 
exemptions at the time of his injury. Using the rate book in effect at the time of 
claimant’s injury (July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019), I conclude claimant’s rate is 
$423.22.  
Per the stipulations in the hearing report, defendants paid some of claimant’s 
benefits at an inflated rate. Iowa Code section 85.34(5), as amended in 2017, indicates 
that defendants are entitled to a credit for those overpayments against “any future 
                                                 
1 Claimant sought a running award of temporary benefits starting on September 26, 2019. Per the parties’ stipulation 
on the hearing report, however, claimant was already paid temporary benefits from June 19, 2019 (the date of his first 
right shoulder surgery) through April 5, 2020. Thus, to the extent claimant was entitled to temporary benefits before 
April 2, 2020, he has already received them.  

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 9 
weekly benefits due pursuant to subsection 2 [relating to permanent partial disabilities], 
for any current or subsequent injury.” Thus, defendants are entitled to a credit for their 
overpayment against any outstanding PPD benefits.  
Claimant also seeks reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Wenzel and his costs. 
Turning first to the IME, the reimbursement provisions of Iowa Code section 85.39 are 
not triggered until “an evaluation of permanent disability ha[s] been made by a physician 
retained by the employer.” Iowa Code § 85.39(2). In this case, Dr. Wenzel issued his 
report on August 27, 2020. At that point, no physician retained by the employer had 
performed an evaluation of permanent disability; Dr. Galles did not issue his rating until 
November of 2020. I therefore conclude claimant is not entitled to reimbursement under 
Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Per the Iowa Supreme Court’s holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit 
Authority v. Young, (hereinafter “DART”), however, claimant still may be able to recover 
the costs of the IME report under the administrative rules. 867 N.W.2d 839, 846-47 
(Iowa 2015); 876 IAC 4.33(5). 
Per a health insurance claim form provided by claimant, Dr. Wenzel charged 
$1,299.00 for his IME examination and $2,641.50 for the report itself. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 32a). 
Under DART, I conclude claimant is entitled to reimbursement in the amount of 
$2,641.50. 
Claimant is also seeking reimbursement for $350.00 for Dr. Palit’s “medical 
conference and report.” (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 32) Per DART, however, only the cost of the report 
itself can be assessed. Dr. Palit charged $200.00 for his conference and $150.00 for the 
letter containing his opinions. As such, I conclude claimant is only entitled to a cost 
assessment in the amount of $150.00. 
Claimant is also seeking reimbursement for his filing fee, which defendant does 
not dispute. Defendants are therefore taxed $100.00 for claimant’s filing fee. 876 IAC 
4.33(7). 
Lastly, claimant seeks an assessment in the amount of $79.00 for obtaining 
copies of medical records. This is not an allowable cost under the rules.  
In total, defendants are assessed with $2,891.50. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant sixty-eight (68) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on August 27, 2020, at the rate of four hundred twenty-
three dollars and 22/100 ($423.22) per week. 
 
 

HOWARD V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 10 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for their overpayment of benefits against any 
outstanding permanency benefits.  
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33, defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the 
amount of two thousand eight hundred ninety-one and 50/100 dollars ($2,891.50). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this _14th _ day of April, 2021. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         STEPHANIE J. COPLEY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
Jennifer Clendenin (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following addres s:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
