Case Number: 1602684.02
Case Title:  NELSON, DEAN V. MEDIACOM LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Nelson Dean-1602684.02m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
DEAN NELSON, 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
File No. 1602684.02 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  :  
 
MEDIACOM, LLC, 
  : 
       ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
Employer, 
  :             
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
DECISION 
 
 
  :   
TRAVELERS INDEMNITY CO. OF CT,   : 
 
 
  : 
 
 
                           
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  :  
                  Headnote: 2701 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Dean Nelson.  
 
The hearing for this alternate medical care claim was held on May 22, 2024.  
Claimant appeared personally and through his attorney Bryant Engbers. Defendants 
appeared through their attorney Caitlin Kilburg. The proceedings were digitally recorded. 
That recording constitutes the official record of this proceeding.  
 
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023, Order, the undersigned has been 
delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of the 
decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
 
The hearing record consists of: 
 
 Claimant’s exhibit 1; 
 Defendants’ exhibit A  
 
Claimant testified at the hearing.  Counsel for both parties also provided argument. 
The record closed at the end of the alternate medical care telephonic hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-23  16:19:44     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

NELSON V. MEDIACOM, LLC 
Page 2 
 
ISSUE 
 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care in the form of: 
 
 Authorization for a CT scan of his right shoulder and an order mandating 
defendants schedule that CT scan take place within the next fourteen 
(14) days.1  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
 
This is the second alternate medical care petition filed by the claimant for the April 
22, 2015 date of injury.  The first petition was filed on March 7, 2024.  It requested 
defendants approve treatment recommended by claimant’s authorized physician.  On 
March 20, 2024, claimant filed a motion to dismiss his petition.  The motion indicated 
defendants had already authorized the requested care.  On that same day, the agency 
issued an order of dismissal.  Claimant filed this action on May 13, 2024.  In it, he 
requested defendants authorize and schedule a CT of his right shoulder with Dr. Gibbons’ 
office.  On May 22, 2024, defendants filed an answer admitting liability for the injury to 
claimant’s right shoulder.  
 
At the hearing, claimant testified that he was working for the employer on 
November 22, 2023, when his right shoulder popped out of joint. (Hearing Testimony).  
He informed his supervisor of the injury and was taken to urgent care. (Id.).  Claimant did 
not indicate what type of treatment he received in urgent care. Claimant testified that 
urgent care referred him to Dr. Potthoff for follow-up care. (Id.).   
 
Dr. Potthoff evaluated claimant’s shoulder in December 2023. (Id.).  He diagnosed 
claimant with advanced osteoarthritis and referred him to Dr. Gibbons for further 
treatment. (Id.).  Claimant’s first appointment with Dr. Gibbons was shortly after that, in 
January 2024. (Id.).  Claimant testified that Dr. Gibbons recommended a total shoulder 
replacement and ordered a pre-surgical CT scan of his right shoulder.  (Id.).  Dr. Gibbons’ 
treatment record is not in evidence.   
 
Claimant stated that he has been unable to get the CT scan scheduled since 
receiving Dr. Gibbons’ recommendation in January. (Hearing Testimony).  He indicated 
                                                 
1 During the hearing, claimant’s counsel also verbally requested that the agency order defendants 
approve a total shoulder replacement with Dr. Gibbons. (Hearing Transcript).  This request is not clearly 
articulated on claimant’s petition, nor are there any medical notes in this hearing record indicating Dr. 
Gibbons has definitively decided to proceed with the requested surgery.  In fact, the only piece of evidence 
addressing the issue is an email indicating the CT scan must be completed before the doctor can decide 
whether surgery is appropriate. (Ex. A, p. 1).  Given this, the undersigned finds that request is not properly 
before the agency in this proceeding. See, e.g., 876 IAC 4.6.  However, during the hearing defendants’ 
counsel also stated they would authorize whatever treatment is recommended by Dr. Gibbons after he has 
reviewed the CT scan. (Hearing Testimony).   

NELSON V. MEDIACOM, LLC 
Page 3 
 
that he filed the first alternate care action in March 2024, in an attempt to get the CT scan 
scheduled. (Id.).  Claimant testified defendants agreed to authorize the CT scan during 
that action and instructed him to call Dr. Gibbons’ office and get the scan scheduled.  (Id.).  
Claimant testified he called Dr. Gibbons’ office and was informed the CT scan had not 
been authorized by defendants. (Id.).  Claimant indicated that he continued to follow-up 
with Dr. Gibbons’ office—going in person to speak with his office staff at least twice and 
calling several times. (Id.).  Each time he was told the CT scan still had not been 
authorized. (Id.).   
 
Claimant filed the current alternate care action on May 13, 2024. (See Petition).  In 
it, he again requested defendants authorize the CT scan recommended by Dr. Gibbons.  
(Id.).  Claimant testified that he called Dr. Gibbons’ office again on May 16 or 17, 2024, 
and was informed for the first time that the CT scan had been authorized by defendants. 
(Hearing Testimony).  In their exhibits, defendants included a letter Travelers sent to Dr. 
Gibbons’ office on May 13, 2024, authorizing the right shoulder CT scan. (Ex. A, p. 5).  
Claimant testified that Dr. Gibbons’ office staff told him someone would call him on 
Monday, May 20, 2024, to schedule the appointment for the CT scan. (Id.).  However, at 
the time of the hearing on Tuesday, May 22, 2024, no one from Dr. Gibbons’ office had 
returned claimant’s call and the CT scan remained unscheduled. (Id.).   
 
At the hearing, claimant’s counsel submitted several emails exchanged between 
the parties documenting claimant’s attempts to get the CT scan scheduled. (Cl Ex. 1, pp. 
1-6, 10).  Those emails are dated March 19, 2024, through May 10, 2024. (Id.).  
Defendants also submitted several emails exchanged between the attorneys.  (Ex. A, pp. 
1-4).  Those emails are dated May 13, 2024, through May 22, 2024. (Id.).  In the first 
email, dated May 13, 2024, defendants’ counsel sends claimant’s counsel a copy of the 
authorization letter sent to Dr. Gibbons with instructions to call her if the claimant is still 
unable to get the CT scan scheduled. (Id. at 4).  In the last email, dated May 22, 2024, 
defendants’ counsel indicates she called Dr. Gibbons’ office that morning and was told 
Dr. Gibbons wanted claimant to fill out additional paperwork before scheduling the CT 
scan. (Id.).  Claimant testified that Dr. Gibbons’ office never informed him that he needed 
to complete additional paperwork before the CT scan could be scheduled. (Hearing 
Testimony).   
 
At the hearing, claimant testified that he wants to move forward with the care 
recommended by Dr. Gibbons in January 2024, and is still waiting on a call back from Dr. 
Gibbons’ office to get the CT scan scheduled.  (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel indicated that 
they have already authorized the CT scan claimant seeks, but do not control Dr. Gibbons’ 
office and therefore cannot guarantee he will perform the CT scan within the next fourteen 
(14) days. (Hearing Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted compensability for a workplace 
injury has a right to control the care provided to the injured employee.  Ramirez-Trujillo 

NELSON V. MEDIACOM, LLC 
Page 4 
 
v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016).  The relevant statute provides 
as follows: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the 
right to choose the care. . . . The treatment must be offered promptly and 
be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).   
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation under the  
statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id. An application 
for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant is dissatisfied 
with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical care is not 
ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather, the claimant 
must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the 
injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. See Iowa Code § 
85.27(4). By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment and seeking alternate care, 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa 
R. App. P 6.904(3)(e); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.    
An employee’s desire for a different “reasonable” treatment plan does not make 
the employer-authorized care unreasonable.  See Long, 528 at 124.  A finding that the 
treatment requested by the claimant is reasonable does not result in an implicit finding 
that the authorized treatment is unreasonable. Id.  The employee must prove the care 
being offered by the employer is unreasonable to treat the work injury, not that another 
treatment plan is reasonable. Id.; See also Lynch Livestock, Inc. v. Bursell, 870 N.W.2d 
274 (Table) (Iowa Ct. App. 2015).  Determining whether care is reasonable under the 
statute is a question of fact.  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123.  
 
Under Iowa Code section 85.27, claimant bears the burden of providing 
“reasonable proofs of the necessity” to order alternate care.  Defendants have already 
authorized the shoulder CT scan recommended by Dr. Gibbons.  Because defendants 
have already authorized the care claimant seeks, the issue of authorization is moot and 
need not be ruled upon.  However, under the statute, a claimant is entitled to care that is 
both reasonable and prompt.  Defendants agreed to authorize the CT scan back in March 
2024, and claimant still does not have an appointment date for the procedure.  That is not 
prompt.  While defendants are correct that they cannot control Dr. Gibbons’ schedule or 

NELSON V. MEDIACOM, LLC 
Page 5 
 
force him to perform the procedure in the next fourteen (14) days, they can assist claimant 
with the process and use their resources to make sure he obtains a date certain for the 
CT scan to take place.  Therefore, within the next fourteen days, defendants must provide 
claimant with an appointment date for the CT scan at Dr. Gibbons’ office or contact 
another provider of their choosing to perform the CT scan promptly.   
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant's petition for alternate medical care is denied in part and granted in part.   
 
Claimant’s request for authorization for a shoulder CT scan is denied as moot.  
However, defendants are ordered to provide claimant an appointment date for the 
shoulder CT scan at Dr. Gibbons’ office or contact another provider of their choosing to 
perform the CT scan promptly. The appointment date must be provided within the next 
fourteen (14) days.  
 
Signed and filed this _23RD _ day of May, 2024.  
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Bryant Engbers (via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg (via WCES) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
