Case Number: 5066604.01
Case Title:  KUCERA, RAMONA V. ADVANCE SERVICES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Kucera Ramona-5066604.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RAMONA KUCERA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 5066604.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
ADVANCE SERVICES, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  Headnotes: 1402.40, 1803.1, 2501, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
            2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Ramona Kucera, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Advance 
Services, Inc., as the employer and Ace American Insurance Company, as the 
insurance carrier.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
January 31, 2022.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, this case was heard via videoconference using CourtCall.  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, as well as Defendants’ Exhibits A through M.  Claimant testified on her own 
behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the hearing.  The evidentiary record closed 
at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing. 
Counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  This 
request was granted and both parties filed briefs on March 21, 2022.  The case was 
considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to healing period benefits between October 1, 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Aug-25  07:18:03     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
2018, and October 1, 2019; 
2. The nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits; 
3. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of past medical expenses; and 
5. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Ramona Kucera, claimant, is a 55-year-old individual who sustained a slip and 
fall injury in a dining hall kitchen at Iowa State University on October 1, 2018.  She is a 
high school graduate, who also attended college for digital design. (Hearing Transcript, 
pages 10-11)  Her employment history largely consists of work involving cooking and/or 
food preparation. (Exhibit 4, pages 7-9)  Ms. Kucera began working for the defendant 
employer, a temporary staffing agency, in August 2018.  During her employment with 
Advance Services, Ms. Kucera was assigned to work as a kitchen helper in dining 
services at Iowa State University. (Hr. Tr., p. 14)    
On October 1, 2018, Ms. Kucera was preparing lunch when she slipped on some 
grease that had accumulated on the floor. (Hr. Tr., pp. 14-15)  She fell to the ground 
and experienced immediate pain in her upper back. (See Joint Exhibit 7, page 1)  Upon 
learning of the injury, the defendant employer directed claimant’s medical care. 
Claimant first presented to the McFarland Clinic, where she described pain in the 
mid back. (JE7, p. 1)  Notably, she did not describe pain in her neck and she 
demonstrated full range of motion in the cervical spine, without issue. She was 
prescribed medications, placed on modified duty, and instructed to follow-up with the 
clinic in three days. (JE7 pp.1-2)  On October 4, 2018, she was seen in follow-up.  She 
described the pain in the middle of her back as burning and constant.  She further 
described radiating pain into her shoulders.  She was tolerating work activities but 
reported that she was sore after each shift.  She was prescribed physical therapy and 
light duty work restrictions. (JE7, p. 6)   
Ms. Kucera was not satisfied with the care she was receiving and requested a 
transfer to another provider. (See JE7, p. 50)   
Ms. Kucera presented to Kelly Jo Balignasay, ARNP on October 9, 2018. (JE8, 
page 1)  Ms. Kucera relayed her frustrations with McFarland Clinic to Ms. Balignasay. 
(See id.)  Ms. Balignasay described claimant’s injury as a “left middle back and upper 
back injury[.]” (Id.)  However, claimant’s intake form was positive for back pain, 
myalgias, and neck pain. (Id.)  On examination, Ms. Kucera demonstrated full, active, 
and pain-free range of motion in the cervical spine, mild paraspinal muscle tightness, 
and muscle tenderness in the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius. (Id.)  Ms. Balignasay 
diagnosed claimant with muscle strains in the thorax and neck. (Id.)  Like the McFarland 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Clinic, Ms. Balignasay referred claimant to physical therapy and recommended work 
restrictions. (JE8, p. 2) 
At her initial physical therapy session on October 12, 2018, Ms. Kucera 
described pain in the back of her head, the base of her neck, her midthoracic spine, 
right trapezius, and over the top of her shoulder. (Id.)  Again, claimant demonstrated full 
active range of motion throughout her spine, and her pain indicators were largely noted 
to be in her thoracic spine and right shoulder. (JE8, p. 3)  The physical therapist noted 
that claimant presented with an “evolving clinical presentation with changing clinical 
characteristics which could impact the plan of care[.]” (Id.)  He ultimately assessed 
claimant with right shoulder and thoracic pain. (Id.) 
On October 16, 2018, the same physical therapist noted that claimant’s body 
mechanics, active range of motion, and strength were all intact; however, she 
complained of pain throughout her entire session. (JE8, p. 5)  It is documented that 
claimant asked questions and made conversation without noticeable increases in pain 
or distress following her session.  It is also noted that claimant carried her winter coat 
without difficulty in either upper extremity. (Id.)  The physical therapist would later 
document that claimant tucked her right upper extremity – flexed at the elbow – into her 
body while she was in the clinic; however, after her sessions she would walk through 
the parking lot at a faster pace and with a natural arm swing, bilaterally. (JE8, p. 25) 
Ms. Kucera cancelled her October 17, 2018, physical therapy appointment due to 
an increase in pain she experienced following the October 16, 2018, session. (JE8, p. 6)  
When speaking with her physical therapist, Ms. Kucera listed several seemingly new 
pain complaints.  She described pins and needles in her mid and low back, with 
radiating pain down her leg, up her back, over her shoulder, and into her face. (Id.) 
In addition to the above pain complaints, claimant described intermittent pain, 
numbness, and tingling in her right upper extremity and hand when speaking with Ms. 
Balignasay on October 18, 2018. (JE8, pp. 6-7)  Claimant reported no improvement in 
the severity of her pain since the date of injury, and expressed her belief that physical 
therapy was making her symptoms worse. (JE8, p. 7)  In her assessment of claimant’s 
condition, Ms. Balignasay noted that Ms. Kucera’s subjective pain complaints were 
inconsistent on examination. (Id.)  Ms. Balignasay prescribed a cervical MRI, “to 
determine if the reported right upper extremity pain, numbness, and tingling are 
originating from her neck.” (JE8, pp. 7-8) 
Ms. Kucera submitted to an MRI of the cervical spine on October 25, 2018. (See 
JE8, p. 9)  The imaging revealed mild to moderate cervical spondylosis. (JE8, p. 9)   
After reviewing the October 25, 2018, MRI, Ms. Balignasay reiterated to claimant 
that her pain was “primarily myofascial.” (JE8, p. 13)  She then referred claimant back to 
physical therapy and stressed the importance of attending her physical therapy 
appointments and performing home exercises as prescribed. (JE8, pp. 13-14)  Lastly, 
Ms. Balignasay referred claimant for a pain management consultation and estimated 
that claimant would be released to full duty at her next appointment. (JE8, p. 14) 
Similar to her initial transition from the McFarland Clinic to Story County Medical 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Center, Ms. Kucera returned to the McFarland Clinic on December 1, 2018, reporting 
that she did not want to follow-up with her provider at Story County because she “knows 
nothing.” (See JE7, pp. 35, 38)   
Ms. Kucera would eventually present for an MRI of the right shoulder. (See JE8, 
p. 10)  The December 6, 2018, MRI revealed supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and 
subscapularis tendinopathy without full-thickness tear. (JE8, p. 10)  It also showed mild 
degenerative changes and a slight irregular tear of the proximal long head biceps 
tendon, without rupture. (Id.; see JE7, p. 39)   
Ms. Balignasay referred claimant for an orthopedic evaluation of her right 
shoulder and placed her at maximum medical improvement for her muscle strains to the 
posterior thorax and neck on December 11, 2018. (JE8, pp. 36-37)   
Two days later, Ms. Kucera presented to the emergency department at 
McFarland Clinic and asked if she could be seen by one of its orthopedic surgeons. 
(JE7, p. 39)   
Timothy Vinyard, M.D. performed surgery on claimant’s right shoulder on 
January 29, 2019. (JE4, pp. 5-6)  The surgery consisted of a right shoulder arthroscopic 
rotator cuff repair, a biceps tenodesis, a subacromial decompression, and a distal 
clavicle excision. (Id.)  Despite undergoing surgery, claimant continued to complain of 
pain in the posterior aspect of the shoulder, between her shoulder blades, in her neck, 
and in the back of her head. (Hr. Tr., p. 24; JE4, pp. 24-25, 29)   
In a letter to defendants, dated May 30, 2019, Dr. Vinyard addressed claimant’s 
alleged neck injury.  He opined that he did not have any objective evidence to support 
ongoing pathology for claimant’s subjective complaints in the neck region.  He further 
opined that he did not believe claimant suffered any injury, beyond her right shoulder 
injury, as it related to the October 1, 2018, work incident. (JE4, p. 25) 
Dr. Vinyard discussed the above opinions with Ms. Kucera at her July 8, 2019, 
follow-up appointment. (JE4, p. 30)  He told Ms. Kucera that he did not believe her back 
and neck symptoms were coming from her shoulder.  He further explained that he is a 
shoulder specialist and may not be the best physician to evaluate her neck.  He then 
told Ms. Kucera that she had the right to seek a second opinion. (Id.) 
On August 12, 2019, Dr. Vinyard placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) and released her to return to work, without restrictions. (JE4, p. 32)  
Shortly thereafter, Dr. Vinyard assessed claimant’s permanent impairment.  Utilizing the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition, Dr. Vinyard 
assigned 3 percent upper extremity impairment for the decrease in claimant’s shoulder 
flexion. (JE4, p. 33) 
There is no evidence claimant presented for medical treatment related to her 
alleged injuries between August 14, 2019, and July 23, 2020.  
On July 24, 2020, Ms. Kucera presented to Staci Little, ARNP, as a self-referral 
for an evaluation of her upper back and neck pain. (JE3, p. 1)  She reported continuous 
stabbing and burning pain throughout her cervical spine, in the upper portion of her 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
thoracic spine, and into her right shoulder and arm. (Id.)  Ms. Little assessed claimant 
with right neck pain secondary to cervical spondylosis without myelopathy and ordered 
an updated MRI of the cervical spine. (JE3, p. 3) 
The MRI, dated July 30, 2020, returned negative for any findings that would 
explain claimant’s ongoing symptoms. (JE2, p. 1; see JE3, p. 5)  There was no 
neuroforaminal or central canal narrowing and no significant disc changes. (See JE3, p. 
5)  After reviewing the diagnostic imaging, Ms. Little recommended claimant return to 
Dr. Vinyard for further evaluation. (JE3, p. 5)  Ms. Kucera told Ms. Little that “the 
surgeon at Iowa Ortho” told her she likely had a re-tear of the rotator cuff but no follow-
up evaluation was performed.  Ms. Kucera then requested a referral to a new orthopedic 
surgeon. (See id.)  More specifically, she requested a referral to see Jeffrey Davick, 
M.D. (See id.)  There is no evidence to support claimant’s assertion that Dr. Vinyard told 
her she likely sustained a re-tear of the rotator cuff. 
Ms. Kucera presented to Dr. Davick for an evaluation on September 23, 2020. 
(JE3, p. 14.)  Following his examination, Dr. Davick ordered an MR Arthrogram of 
claimant’s right shoulder to evaluate her rotator cuff and the previous repair. (JE3, p. 15)   
The September 29, 2020, MRI revealed post-surgical changes without evidence 
of a re-tear. (JE2, pp. 3, 5)  
Ms. Kucera sought an independent medical evaluation, performed by Jacqueline 
Stoken, D.O. on February 3, 2021. (Ex. 3, p. 1)  Dr. Stoken issued her report on March 
8, 2021. (Id.)  Dr. Stoken placed claimant at maximum medical improvement as of 
October 1, 2019, and opined that claimant sustained permanent impairment to the right 
upper extremity, neck, back, and body as a whole as a result of the October 1, 2018, 
work injury. (Ex. 3, pp. 18, 24)  Notably, she did not provide a causation analysis.   
With respect to claimant’s right shoulder condition, Dr. Stoken assigned 11 
percent upper extremity impairment for deficits in range of motion, 10 percent upper 
extremity impairment for the distal clavicle excision, 6 percent upper extremity 
impairment due to deficits in flexion strength, 3 percent upper extremity impairment due 
to deficits in abduction strength, and 2 percent upper extremity impairment due to 
deficits in adduction strength, for a combined total of 28 percent upper extremity 
impairment. (Ex. 3, p. 19)  Utilizing the Combined Values Chart, 28 percent upper 
extremity impairment converts to 17 percent whole person impairment.  
Turning to the alleged neck condition, Dr. Stoken placed claimant’s condition in 
DRE Category II and assigned 5 percent whole person impairment due to claimant’s 
asymmetric range of motion and muscle spasms. (Ex. 3, p. 19)  Combining the 
impairment ratings for claimant’s neck and right shoulder results in a total of 21 percent 
whole person impairment. (Ex. 3, p. 19) 
Dr. Stoken imposed permanent work restrictions that required claimant to avoid 
work at or above the shoulder level, lifting more than 10 pounds on a frequent basis, 15 
pounds on an occasional basis, or 20 pounds on a rare basis. (Ex. 3, p. 24)  In other 
words, Dr. Stoken placed claimant in the light functional demand category. (See Id.) 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Claimant sought additional treatment following Dr. Stoken’s examination.  She 
presented to Joseph Brunkhorst, D.O. for an evaluation of her ongoing right shoulder 
pain. (JE3, p. 9)  Dr. Brunkhorst documented that while claimant was providing her oral 
history, she consistently pointed to her shoulder when describing where she felt pain. 
(Id.) Claimant further reported that she sometimes felt radiating pain into the base of her 
neck. (Id.)  Dr. Brunkhorst reviewed the 2020 MRI and confirmed it did not show a 
rotator cuff tear. (JE3, p. 10)  He assessed claimant with chronic right shoulder pain and 
recommended subacromial injections. (JE3, p. 11) 
Dr. Brunkhorst administered a subacromial injection on August 9, 2021. (JE3, p. 
11)  Claimant reported that the injection helped significantly at first; however, the pain 
returned by her September 13, 2021, follow-up appointment. (JE3, p. 12)  Given 
claimant’s complaints, Dr. Brunkhorst recommended and administered a second 
injection. (JE3, pp. 12-13)   
Following the October 1, 2018, work injury, claimant worked a series of light duty 
positions, first handling odd jobs at Iowa State University, then as a bell ringer for the 
Salvation Army. (Hr. Tr., pp. 16-18)  She last worked for Advance Services on 
December 17, 2018, when she was terminated for allegedly falsifying a medical record 
providing her temporary work restrictions.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-21) 
Claimant presented for an appointment with Dr. Vinyard on the same date, 
December 17, 2018. (See JE4, p. 2)  Following the appointment, Dr. Vinyard produced 
a patient status report, indicating claimant could return to work with a 10-pound lifting 
restriction. (JE4, p. 2)  The report also recommended that claimant avoid repetitive 
lifting, pulling, pushing, climbing, reaching overhead, and working above shoulder level. 
(Id.)  At some point in time following the appointment, Ms. Kucera produced a copy of 
the patient status report to the defendant employer.  The defendant employer also 
received a copy directly from Iowa Ortho.  When comparing the two reports, defendants 
noticed that the report provided by Ms. Kucera contained an extra recommendation to 
avoid repetitive sitting. (See Ex. I, p. 2)  After contacting Iowa Ortho regarding this 
discrepancy, the defendant employer determined that claimant had doctored her patient 
status report and terminated her employment. 
I have reviewed the patient status report in question and can confirm the report 
provided by Ms. Kucera contained an extra recommendation to avoid repetitive sitting.  
At hearing, claimant denied modifying the December 17, 2018, patient status report. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 20)   
After being terminated by the defendant employer, claimant sought and obtained 
employment as a kitchen lead for Casey’s General Store in Story City, Iowa. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 26-27)  As a kitchen lead, claimant organized the kitchen and managed kitchen 
employees. Claimant testified that she left her job at Casey’s to pursue a better 
opportunity. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  The better opportunity was Bethany Life, a retirement 
community in Story City, Iowa. (See Hr. Tr., p. 25) 
Ms. Kucera started working as a cook for Bethany Life in August 2019. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 25)  When questioned about her job application, Ms. Kucera testified she did not 
disclose her work restrictions or the October 1, 2018, work injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28)  

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Claimant testified she left her job with Bethany Life because it caused her too much 
pain. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  The personnel documents note that claimant quit to pursue 
personal interests. (Ex. B, p. 2) 
Claimant next worked for Cost Cutters as a receptionist; however, Cost Cutters 
ended up cutting claimant’s position in August 2020. (Hr. Tr., p. 31)  It appears that 
claimant was unemployed for the following 12 months. 
 
In September 2021, Ms. Kucera accepted a teaching position with Child Care 
Junction in Boone, Iowa. (Hr. Tr., p. 32)  She was still employed by Child Care Junction 
at the time of hearing.  Ms. Kucera teaches four-year-olds and works approximately 79 
hours every two weeks, earning $12.00 per hour. (Id.)   
Defendants introduced approximately 21 minutes of surveillance video taken on 
March 27, 2019, and March 28, 2019. (Ex. C)  In the video, claimant can be seen exiting 
a vehicle with her right arm in a sling.  She subsequently enters her home and shortly 
thereafter walks outside with one of her large dogs and without her sling.  For the 
majority of the video, claimant is outside walking or brushing hair off of her two large 
dogs.  I did not observe any specific activities on the surveillance footage that would 
clearly violate the medical restrictions recommended at that time by Dr. Vinyard.  On 
February 13, 2019, Dr. Vinyard recommended that claimant continue to wear a sling for 
an additional 4 weeks, and to use caution and common sense as she progresses 
through her recovery. (JE4, p. 13)  The dates of the surveillance footage fall outside of 
the 4-week sling recommendation, and the videos do not show claimant using her right 
arm to a significant extent. 
Defendants also introduced approximately 5 minutes of surveillance video 
captured on March 20, 2021.  In the video, claimant is seen driving her vehicle and 
running errands.  At one point in the video claimant can be seen carrying her purse with 
her right arm flexed at a 90-degree angle.  The video ends with footage of claimant 
walking her two large dogs.  Again, I did not observe specific activities on the 
surveillance footage that would clearly violate the medical restrictions recommended by 
Dr. Vinyard. 
In addition to the surveillance footage, defendants introduced a physical health 
screening Ms. Kucera performed prior to accepting a position with Bethany Life in 2019. 
(Ex. B, pp. 12-13)  At the screening, claimant demonstrated the ability to two-hand lift 
and transfer 75 pounds for 10 repetitions. (Ex. B, p. 13)  She also demonstrated the 
ability to two-hand push/pull 75 pounds of force, for one foot, eight times at a height of 
23 inches, 50 pounds of force at 23 inches for five feet, and 50 pounds of force at 41 
inches for 200 feet. (Id.)  Lastly, she demonstrated the ability to lift 10 pounds from waist 
to overhead five times. (Id.)  It was determined that claimant met the functional 
requirements of the job description at Bethany Life. (Id.)   
The first issue to be addressed in this case is whether claimant’s injury extends 
beyond the right shoulder and into the neck and/or back. 
In this respect, claimant relies on the expert medical opinions of Dr. Stoken.  As 
previously discussed, Dr. Stoken did not provide a significant amount of analysis when 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
causally connecting claimant’s alleged neck and back injuries to the events of October 
1, 2018, and assigning permanent impairment to the same.   
While Dr. Stoken explained why claimant’s various injuries cannot be classified 
as injuries to the shoulder (Ex. 3, pp. 19-21), she never specifically connected any of 
the injuries to claimant’s cervical or thoracic spine.  Moreover, Dr. Stoken failed to 
provide an objective diagnosis for claimant’s alleged neck condition.  Instead, Dr. Stoken 
broadly diagnosed claimant with chronic pain of the upper back and neck, and assigned 
permanent impairment based on asymmetric range of motion and muscle spasms. (Ex. 
3, pp. 18-19) 
Dr. Stoken’s report also failed to address the lack of objective medical evidence 
supporting her conclusion that claimant sustained permanent disability to the neck.  
Claimant has obtained multiple MRIs of the cervical spine.  The October 25, 2018 MRI 
showed only mild/moderate cervical spondylosis. (JE8, p. 9)  The July 30, 2020, MRI 
revealed no focal abnormalities, and the ordering nurse practitioner opined there were 
no findings that would explain claimant’s then-current symptoms. (JE3, p. 5)  When 
asked to address causation for claimant’s alleged neck condition, Dr. Vinyard opined 
that he did not have any objective evidence to support ongoing pathology for her 
subjective complaints involving the neck region. (JE4, p. 25)  Dr. Vinyard’s opinion is 
supported by the medical records and opinions of Ms. Little, Dr. Davick, and Dr. 
Brunkhorst.  While these three medical professionals did not expressly opine on 
causation, they each evaluated claimant’s neck and independently determined the right 
shoulder was the source of claimant’s pain.  
Claimant’s first provider, Ms. Balignasay, diagnosed muscle strains in the thorax 
and neck.  After reviewing the October 25, 2018, MRI of the cervical spine, Ms. 
Balignasay reiterated to claimant that her pain was “primarily myofascial.” (JE8, p. 13)  
When diagnostic imaging revealed issues within the right shoulder, Ms. Balignasay 
placed claimant at maximum medical improvement for the muscle strains to the 
posterior thorax and neck on December 11, 2018. (JE8, pp. 36-37)   
When claimant attempted to establish care for the alleged neck condition in 
August of 2020, Ms. Little reported that there were no findings on her cervical MRI that 
would explain her symptoms.  Instead of recommending further treatment of the cervical 
spine, Ms. Little recommended claimant return to Dr. Vinyard for a re-evaluation of her 
right shoulder. (JE3, p. 5)  Dr. Davick, the specialist claimant decided to see instead of 
Dr. Vinyard, solely focused on the right shoulder. (JE3, pp. 14-15)   
Claimant then presented to Joseph Brunkhorst, D.O. for an evaluation of her 
ongoing right shoulder pain.  Dr. Brunkhorst documented that while claimant was 
providing her oral history, she consistently pointed to her shoulder when describing 
where she felt pain. (JE3, p. 9)  Dr. Brunkhorst assessed claimant with chronic right 
shoulder pain and recommended subacromial injections. (JE3, p. 11) 
Lastly, Dr. Stoken’s report does not address claimant’s pain complaints when she 
initially presented for medical treatment.  There is no credible evidence that claimant 
reported neck pain to her treating physicians immediately following the work injury.  At 
the McFarland Clinic, claimant reported “middle back pain” on October 1, 2018 and 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
October 4, 2018.  (JE7, pp. 1, 6)  Claimant also demonstrated full, painless range of 
motion in her cervical spine upon examination on October 1, 2018, and October 9, 
2018,  (JE7, p. 2; JE8, p. 1)  Additionally, when claimant did report neck pain, she noted 
that the pain radiated from her shoulder to her neck, not from the neck down to her 
shoulder. (JE8, pp. 7, 8; JE3, pp. 5, 9, 12)  She continued to describe pain radiating 
from her shoulder up into her neck at her deposition and the evidentiary hearing. (Ex. G, 
Depo. p. 31; Hr. Tr., p. 54) 
Given Dr. Stoken’s lack of analysis, and the objective medical evidence to the 
contrary, I am not persuaded by Dr. Stoken’s opinion that claimant sustained a 
permanent injury to the cervical spine as a result of the October 1, 2018, work injury.  I 
therefore find insufficient evidence that claimant's work-related injury extends beyond 
the shoulder and into her neck and/or back.   
When comparing the impairment ratings assigned to claimant’s right shoulder, I 
note that Dr. Vinyard performed, but did not assign permanent impairment for, a distal 
clavicle excision.  As noted in Dr. Stoken’s report, Table 16-27 on page 506 of the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition provides that a distal clavicle excision warrants an impairment 
rating of 10 percent. (Ex. 3, p. 19) 
The Iowa legislature has mandated that determinations of functional impairment 
under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act must be made solely by utilizing the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition.  In this instance, the AMA Guides allow for an additional 10 
percent upper extremity impairment for a distal clavicle excision.  Dr. Vinyard provided 
no explanation as to why he did not include an impairment rating for the distal clavicle 
resection, and it does not appear as though defendants followed up with Dr. Vinyard to 
address the same following Dr. Stoken’s report.  Consequently, Dr. Vinyard’s 
impairment rating is afforded less weight.  As such, I accept Dr. Stoken’s impairment 
rating as the more accurate representation of claimant’s permanent impairment to the 
right shoulder.   
The next issue to be addressed is the proper commencement date for permanent 
partial disability benefits.  Claimant relies on the opinions of Dr. Stoken and asserts an 
MMI date of October 1, 2019.  Defendants rely on the opinions of Dr. Vinyard and assert 
an MMI date of August 12, 2019, or approximately six months after claimant’s right 
shoulder surgery.  
Dr. Stoken did not provide an explanation for the MMI date of October 1, 2019, 
and a review of the evidentiary record does not reveal anything significant about 
October 1, 2019, outside of it being one year after the date of injury.  Claimant did not 
present for any medical treatment relating to her right shoulder for nearly a year after 
being released by Dr. Vinyard on August 12, 2019.  Dr. Vinyard’s opinion that claimant 
reach MMI six months after surgery is reasonable and convincing in this matter.  
Therefore, I accept Dr. Vinyard’s opinion and find claimant reached MMI on August 12, 
2019.  As such, I find the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits 
is August 13, 2019. 
Ms. Kucera seeks an award of healing period benefits from October 1, 2018, 
through October 1, 2019.  Defendants dispute whether claimant is entitled to benefits 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
and whether claimant was off work during this period of time.  Claimant did not provide 
argument regarding the same in her post-hearing brief.   
As an initial matter, I found claimant reached MMI on August 12, 2019.  As such, 
I find claimant is not entitled to healing period benefits between August 13, 2019, and 
October 1, 2019.   
After the October 1, 2018, work injury, claimant continued working for Advance 
Services until December 17, 2018, when she was terminated.  Dr. Vinyard performed 
surgery on claimant’s right shoulder on January 29, 2019.  After surgery, Dr. Vinyard 
returned claimant to modified duty work, which included no use of the right upper 
extremity. (JE4, p. 10)  At hearing, claimant testified to working for several employers 
between December 2018 and August 2019; however, she could not provide her dates of 
employment.  Claimant did not address this issue in her post-hearing brief.  As such, I 
find the evidence submitted is insufficient to show what periods of time claimant was off 
work and in a period of recovery.   
Ms. Kucera also seeks an award of past medical expenses.  The expenses are 
outlined in Exhibit 2.  Claimant is requesting reimbursement for $802.00 owed to Des 
Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons, P.C. for treatment she received between August 6, 
2020, and August 28, 2020.  Claimant selected this provider.  The care claimant 
received was for the alleged neck condition.  Accordingly, I find the medical care 
claimant received from Ms. Little was unauthorized care.  The expenses related to 
cervical spine treatment claimant received, if any, between August 6, 2020, and August 
28, 2020, are not causally related to the work injury.  The cervical spine care did not 
provide significant benefits for claimant’s injuries or symptoms.  I find that claimant 
failed to prove the same was reasonable and beneficial care.   
The issue of costs will be addressed in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is whether claimant’s injury is limited to her right 
shoulder, or if she has also sustained an injury to her neck, back, and body as a whole.   
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods. Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling. Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant asserts that her work injury extends beyond the right shoulder into the 
body as a whole.  Defendants contend that the injury is limited to the right shoulder and 
should be compensated as a scheduled member injury pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n) (2017).  
The Iowa legislature enacted significant amendments to the Iowa workers' 
compensation laws, which took effect in July 2017. As part of those amendments, the 
legislature specified that injuries to the shoulder should be compensated as scheduled 
member injuries on a 400-week schedule. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2017). 
This case involves injuries to several of the muscles that make up the rotator 
cuff, including the subscapularis, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus.  This case also 
involves a distal clavicle excision and a biceps tendon tear. (Ex. 3, pp. 19-23)   
Injuries to the rotator cuff and biceps tendon constitute injuries to the shoulder 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 972 N.W.2d 727, 
728 (Iowa 2022) (injuries to the infraspinatus and labrum are included in the definition of 
the shoulder); Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 665 (Iowa 2022) (claimant 
who underwent extensive debridement of the labrum, biceps tendon, and subacromial 
space with biceps tenotomy and a subacromial decompression sustained an injury to 
the shoulder and not the body as a whole).  Additionally, under agency precedent, distal 
clavicle excisions are compensated as a shoulder injury. Welch v. Seneca Tank, File 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
No. 1647781.01, (App. Oct. 20, 2021) (claimant's distal clavicle excision for a shoulder 
surgery should be compensated as a shoulder injury). 
With these cases in mind, as well as the accepted medical opinions provided by 
Dr. Vinyard, I conclude claimant failed to prove that any of her injuries or conditions are 
compensable as unscheduled, whole body injuries under section 85.34(2)(v).  Instead, I 
find claimant is entitled to compensation for her scheduled member shoulder under 
section 85.34(2)(n).  
Having concluded that the disability is a scheduled member evaluated under 
Section 85.34(2)(n), I must now assess the degree of disability to the claimant's right 
shoulder. 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through “t”, 
or paragraph “u” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by 
utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the 
American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner 
by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized 
in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining functional impairment and not loss of 
earning capacity. 
After reviewing all evidence in the record related to claimant’s extent of 
impairment under the AMA Guides, I found Dr. Stoken’s right shoulder impairment 
rating to be most persuasive. I conclude claimant has sustained 28 percent right upper 
extremity impairment as a result of the October 1, 2018, work injury. 
Permanent partial disability compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based 
on a maximum of 400 weeks. Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n).  Having adopted Dr. Stoken’s 
28 percent upper extremity impairment rating, I conclude claimant is entitled to 112 
weeks of PPD benefits.  Having found Ms. Kucera reached MMI on August 12, 2019, I 
find PPD benefits shall commence on August 13, 2019.  
Ms. Kucera is also seeking an award of healing period benefits from October 1, 
2018, through October 1, 2019.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to 
an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has 
returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery. The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition. See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981). Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent. 
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Having found that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on August 
12, 2019, I conclude that claimant failed to prove entitlement to any healing period 
benefits after August 12, 2019.  I further found that claimant failed to prove the dates in 

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 13 
 
which she was off work and in a period of recovery between December 18, 2018, and 
August 12, 2019.  Therefore, I conclude claimant failed to establish entitlement to 
healing period benefits between October 1, 2018, and October 1, 2019. 
Next, Ms. Kucera seeks payment of the past medical expenses contained in 
Exhibit 2.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Iowa Code section 85.27. Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Review of Exhibit 2 demonstrates that claimant seeks payment of outstanding 
medical expenses from Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons, P.C., all for care rendered 
between August 6, 2020 and August 28, 2020.  It is important to note that the service 
dates for the documents provided are July 24, 2020, and August 6, 2020. (See Ex. 2, p. 
3)   
On July 24, 2020, claimant presented to Ms. Little as a self-referral for an 
evaluation of her upper back and neck pain. (JE3, p. 1)  Claimant reported continuous 
stabbing and burning pain throughout her cervical spine, in the upper portion of her 
thoracic spine, and into her right shoulder and arm. (Id.)  Ms. Little assessed claimant 
with right neck pain secondary to cervical spondylosis without myelopathy and ordered 
an updated MRI of the cervical spine. (JE3, p. 3) 
On August 6, 2020, claimant returned to Ms. Little to go over her July 30, 2020, 
MRI of the cervical spine. (JE3, p. 5)  After opining that the MRI revealed no findings to 
explain the symptoms in claimant’s neck, Ms. Little recommended claimant return to Dr. 
Vinyard for further evaluation of her right shoulder. (Id.)  When claimant requested a 
different orthopedic surgeon, Ms. Little told her the same would not qualify as an 
approved visit through workers’ compensation. (Id.) 
Defendants denied compensability for claimant’s alleged neck injury.  Claimant 
was seeking treatment for the alleged neck injury at the July 24, 2020, and August 6, 
2020, medical appointments.  After seeking treatment for the alleged neck injury, and 
obtaining imaging related to the alleged neck injury, Ms. Little, like Dr. Vinyard, 
determined the issue was within claimant’s shoulder and referred her for further 
evaluation of the same.  Based on this information, I cannot award the medical 
expenses for the July 24, 2020, and August 6, 2020, appointments. 
Lastly, Ms. Kucera seeks assessment of her costs. Costs are assessed at the 
discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 85.40.  In this case, claimant recovered 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude it is 
appropriate to assess claimant's costs in some amount.   

KUCERA V. ADVANCE SERVICES, INC. 
Page 14 
 
Claimant identifies her requested costs in Exhibit 1.  The first and only cost is a 
request for reimbursement of claimant’s filing fee ($103.00).  This is a permitted cost 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7) and is assessed against defendants. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred twelve (112) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on August 13, 2019.  Weekly benefits are payable 
at the stipulated weekly rate of three hundred eighty and 23/100 dollars ($380.23). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred three 
and 00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___25th __ day of August, 2022. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Erik Luthens (via WCES) 
Timothy Wegman (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
