Case Number: 23000988.01
Case Title:  BRACAMONTES, RAFAEL V. JUST-STAFFING LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bracamontes Rafael-23000988.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RAFAEL BRACAMONTES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                       File No. 23000988.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
JUST-STAFFING, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                   ARBITRATION DECISION         
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
HARTFORD UNDERWRITERS INS. CO.,: 
 
 
  : 
      Headnote Nos.: 1100, 1108, 1802, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
           1803, 3301, 4000 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Rafael Bracamontes, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Just-Staffing, LLC, employer, and Hartford Underwriters 
Insurance Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of an alleged 
injury sustained on November 30, 2022.  This matter came on for hearing before Deputy 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch on October 3, 2024, via 
videoconference, using Zoom. The proceedings were interpreted by Spanish-language 
interpreter, Alina Salvat. 
At the commencement of hearing, the following exhibits were admitted into 
evidence: joint exhibits 1 through 9, claimant’s exhibits 1 through 9, and defendants’ 
exhibits A through L. During redirect, claimant moved to introduce rebuttal evidence in 
the form of claimant’s exhibit 10. The exhibit was admitted into evidence. Due to 
evidentiary questions raised at hearing, the record was left open for the potential 
additional evidence from defendants regarding the unavailability of a witness due to 
incarceration. Post-hearing, defendants’ offered exhibit M. Initial post-hearing briefs 
were filed on November 8, 2024.  
Following hearing and prior to issuance of a decision, on December 11, 2024, 
defendants moved to introduce evidence regarding newly received and not previously 
disclosed medical records. At hearing, claimant testified he had recently been 
hospitalized, but suffered only ongoing eyesight issues relative to the hospitalization. 
Following hearing, defendants ordered claimant’s medical records related to the recent 
hospitalization; defendants represented over 700 pages of such records were received 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Sep-25  14:50:15     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 2 
 
on December 5, 2024. Defendants moved to admit 25 pages of the records, arguing the 
hospitalization occurred after the close of discovery and was not disclosed prior to 
hearing. Over claimant’s objection, the undersigned permitted defendants to introduce 
25 pages of the previously unknown medical records as defendants’ exhibit N. The 
parties were granted the ability to submit supplemental briefs, due January 31, 2025.  
Accordingly, the record consists of joint exhibits 1 through 9, claimant’s exhibits 1 
through 10, defendants’ exhibits A through N, and the testimony of the claimant and 
Leanna Lloyd.  Following supplemental briefing, the matter was considered fully 
submitted on January 31, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury on November 30, 2022 which arose 
out of and in the course of his employment;  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability, and if so, the 
extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability. Specifically, 
claimant seeks a running award of temporary disability benefits;  
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, including 
whether the alleged work injury is a cause of claimant’s ongoing 
complaints;  
4. If the injury is a cause of permanent disability, the extent of claimant’s 
industrial disability and the commencement date for permanent disability 
benefits, if awarded; 
5. The rate of compensation;  
6. Whether defendants are responsible for claimed medical expenses found 
in claimant’s exhibit 8;  
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care under 
section 85.27;  
9. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of penalty benefits; 
10. Whether claimant is entitled to a specific taxation of costs, as found in 
claimant’s exhibit 9; and  
11. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for alleged overpayment of 
temporary total disability benefits. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 3 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant was 60 years of age at the time of hearing. Claimant is married and the 
father of six children. As of the date of his injury, claimant claimed only one of these 
children as a dependent. (Claimant’s testimony; Defendants’ Exhibit K, Tr. pp. 6-7) 
Claimant’s formal education consists of attendance through the 6th grade in his native 
Mexico, as well as limited English classes at Des Moines Area Community College. 
(Claimant’s testimony; DEI, p. 27; DEK, Tr. pp. 10, 12) Claimant is not fluent in English. 
Claimant testified he cannot write English, but he understands limited English, and 
speaks and reads a little English. (Claimant’s testimony; DEK, Tr. pp. 9-10) 
Claimant was born in Mexico and immigrated to the United States at the 
approximate age of 12. He lived in California for 38 years. (DEK, Tr. p. 7) While in 
California, claimant worked for 19 years as a truck driver. Claimant moved from 
California to Iowa in 2012. He testified he was in search of work and had extended 
family in Iowa. (DEI, p. 28; DEK, Tr. p. 8) In Iowa, claimant worked part time for one 
year at Service Master, cleaning offices. He then worked full time packing meat at Swan 
Packing. This employment lasted approximately 1.5 years. (Claimant’s testimony; DEI, 
p. 28; DEK, Tr. p. 13) While at Swan Packing, claimant sustained a work injury to his 
neck. (DEK, Tr. pp. 5, 13)  After the closure of Swan Packing, claimant worked at 
Heritage, a cleaning company. He then spent a brief period roofing. Claimant has also 
been self-employed in his own junk removal business. He estimated he earned $18,000 
in 2022 in this role. (Claimant’s testimony; DEK, Tr. p. 14) The evidentiary record is 
devoid of any records regarding claimant’s earnings in his self-employment.  
In late 2021, claimant began working at defendant-employer in a part-time 
capacity. Claimant was assigned to Lineage, a meat packing company. Claimant 
indicated he packed meat and performed janitorial duties. (Claimant’s testimony; DEI, p. 
28; DEK, Tr. p. 25) At his deposition, claimant testified his work hours varied and could 
range from 14 to 40 hours per week. (DEK, p. 27) At evidentiary hearing, claimant 
testified his hours varied considerably and ranged from 20 to 40 hours per week. 
(Claimant’s testimony) He earned $14.00 per hour. (DEK, Tr. p. 27) Defendant-
employer identified claimant’s position as that of janitor. The position was designated as 
a medium physical demand position, with lifting and carrying up to 50 pounds, as well 
as frequent standing, walking, twisting, stooping, bending, pushing, pulling, and 
squatting. (DEA, p. 1) 
Claimant’s relevant medical history includes treatment for multiple medical 
conditions. In July 2017, claimant was evaluated for continued neck, thoracic, and low 
back pain secondary to a work injury while pulling meat. Trevor Schmitz, M.D., noted 
claimant had been appropriately treated with medication and physical therapy, as well 
as permanent restrictions of a 15-pound lift. (Joint Exhibit 6, page 50) In November 
2019, claimant sought evaluation for blood sugar and memory problems. The provider 
assessed depression, insomnia, and diabetes mellitus type 2. Fluoxetine was 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 4 
 
prescribed for claimant’s depression and a referral was made for mental health 
evaluation. (JE8, pp. 88, 90, 92) In October 2020, claimant was evaluated for bilateral 
knee pain of a three to four year duration. (JE6, p. 53) Craig Mahoney, M.D. assessed 
bilateral osteoarthritis and performed cortisone injections. (JE6, p. 55) In January 2021, 
claimant was hospitalized following development of stroke-like symptoms. (JE2, p. 15) 
After evaluation with his primary care provider, claimant presented to the hospital with 
headache, neck pain, chest pain, and stroke-like symptoms, including facial drooping. A 
brain MRI revealed no evidence of stroke, but claimant was hospitalized for three days 
for evaluation and treatment. Multiple conditions, including elevated blood pressure, 
tension headache, and depression/anxiety were considered as potential causes. 
Following release, claimant was directed to follow up with psychiatry. (JE2, p. 16) 
Claimant alleges he sustained a work-related injury on November 30, 2022. At 
his deposition, claimant testified he was cleaning the warehouse when the garbage cart 
he was pushing was struck by a forklift. After the cart was struck, claimant stated the 
cart was pushed into him, impacting his stomach area. (DEK, Tr. pp. 28-29) Claimant 
testified he was pushed backwards into a stack of boxes and when the cart was moved 
away, he then fell forward onto his knees. (DEK, Tr. p. 31) Claimant’s testimony at 
evidentiary hearing was consistent with this mechanism of injury. (Claimant’s testimony)  
Claimant testified he reported the injury and went home. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant testified he developed stomach pain shortly after the incident and then 
developed back pain. (DEK, Tr. p. 32) He elected to see a doctor that same date. 
(Claimant’s testimony)  
Claimant was evaluated at DoctorsNow. Triage notes indicated claimant was hit 
in the stomach by a forklift and developed mild stomach pain, moderate right hip pain, 
and low back pain. Diagnoses included an abdominal strain, right hip pain, and low back 
pain. Prescriptions for diclofenac sodium and methocarbamol were issued. Claimant 
was released to light-duty work, with a maximum lift of 25 pounds, no heavy lifting, and 
no strenuous activity. (JE1, pp. 1-3) 
On December 7, 2022, claimant returned to DoctorsNow with continued 
complaints of mild stomach pain, moderate right hip pain, and low back pain. Due to 
progressive abdominal pain, claimant was advised to seek emergency evaluation. (JE1, 
pp. 9-10)  
Claimant presented to the emergency department at UnityPoint and reported he 
had been struck with a forklift at work the prior week. He complained of right-sided hip, 
abdomen, and back pain. (JE2, p. 21) Blood work was ordered, and a CT of claimant’s 
abdomen and pelvis was completed to evaluate for potential traumatic abdominal injury. 
(JE2, pp. 24-26) The CT did not reveal acute findings. A diagnosis of suspected 
abdominal wall contusion was issued and claimant was advised to follow up with his 
primary care provider. (JE2, p. 27)  

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 5 
 
Claimant returned to DoctorsNow on December 15, 2022, with continued pain 
complaints. Following evaluation, light duty restrictions were imposed, including no 
lifting over 20 pounds, no strenuous activity, and no ladder climbing. (JE1, pp. 11-12) 
Claimant returned to DoctorsNow on December 26, 2022 with complaints of 
continued abdominal pain and development of a mass under his skin. Claimant was 
referred to general surgery for evaluation of a potential inguinal hernia. (JE1, pp. 13-14)  
Claimant worked part-time hours for defendant-employer into December 2022. 
Earnings records revealed claimant worked 14.65 hours in the week ending December 
4, 2022, with gross earnings of $205.10. He worked 5.12 hours in the week ending 
December 11, 2022, earning $71.68. Claimant worked 36.48 hours during the week 
ending December 25, 2022, with gross wages of $510.72. Finally, in the week ending 
January 1, 2023, claimant worked 9.25 hours and earned $129.50. (DEC, p. 5)  
Thereafter, claimant’s work placement ended and defendants commenced 
payment of temporary total disability benefits. (DEE, p. 7; See Claimant’s Testimony; 
Leanna Lloyd’s testimony) Benefit payment amounts varied, but were typically paid at a 
weekly compensation rate of either $300.43 or $324.00. (DEE, p. 7) It is unclear based 
on the evidentiary record why claimant’s placement ceased at the end of December 
2022. However, he did not work for defendant-employer thereafter. Defendants 
commenced temporary total disability benefits effective December 28, 2022. (DEE, p. 7) 
In computing claimant’s rate, the parties reviewed claimant’s preinjury earnings. 
 
Week Ending Date 
Hours Worked 
Gross Wages 
August 28, 2022 
23.97 
$335.58 
September 4, 2022 
39.77 
$556.78 
September 11, 2022 
11.95 
$167.30 
September 18, 2022 
11.95 
$167.30 
September 25, 2022 
27.90 
$390.60 
September 25, 2022 
37.68 
$527.52 
October 2, 2022 
38.00 
$532.00 
October 9, 2022 
29.32 
$410.48 
October 16, 2022* 
27.95 
$391.30 
October 23, 2022 
31.43 
$440.02 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 6 
 
October 30, 2022 
37.62 
$526.68 
November 6, 2022 
35.75 
$500.50 
November 13, 2022 
14.83 
$207.62 
November 20, 2022 
0 
0 
November 27, 2022 
22.38 
$313.32 
*This week’s wages were voided by the employer as incorrect. 
(DEC, p. 5) 
At evidentiary hearing, claimant argued a proposed weekly rate of $381.58. In 
arriving at this computation, claimant utilized the weeks ending September 4, 2022 
through November 27, 2022. Claimant’s computation does not list the week of 
November 20, 2022; thus, I presume it was excluded as unrepresentative. Claimant 
also excludes four additional weeks from the computation, that of September 11, 2022, 
September 18, 2022, November 13, 2022, and November 27, 2022. Having excluded 
these weeks, claimant found total hours of 305.42. Payable at an hourly rate of $14.00, 
claimant’s gross earnings were computed as $4,275.88. After dividing this figure by the 
8 weeks during which the sums were earned, claimant arrived at an average weekly 
wage of $534.49. Utilizing a marital status of married with 3 exemptions, claimant 
argues a weekly rate of $381.58. (CE4, p. 26) Claimant argues the weeks of September 
11, 2022, and November 27, 2022, should be excluded due to inclusion of a holiday and 
the remaining two weeks should be excluded due to the low number of hours worked.  
At evidentiary hearing, defendants utilized the weeks ending August 28, 2022 
through November 27, 2022. Defendants excluded the weeks of October 16, 2022, and 
November 20, 2022, from its rate computation. On this basis, defendants found total 
hours of 362.60 hours over the course of 13 weeks. Utilizing claimant’s hourly rate of 
$14.00, defendants found total gross earnings of $5,076.40 over that 13-week period, 
equal to an average weekly wage of $390.49. Given claimant’s married marital status, 
defendants determined a weekly rate of $283.50 utilizing three exemptions. (DED, p. 6)  
On January 18, 2023, claimant was evaluated by general surgeon, Christopher 
Bell, M.D. Dr. Bell found no evidence of hernia and assessed an abdominal wall 
contusion, from which claimant required additional time to heal. (JE3, p. 33) 
On January 24, 2023, claimant was seen by general surgeon, Timothy Mayfield, 
M.D. Claimant reported being injured at work when a forklift rammed a cart into his 
abdomen, resulting in swelling of the abdomen and radiating pain down the leg. (JE4, p. 
34) Dr. Mayfield assessed traumatized, painful, deep subcutaneous tissue. He 
recommended use of a warm compress and Tylenol. (JE4, p. 35) Dr. Mayfield imposed 
work restrictions of no lifting over 20 pounds, pushing, pulling, or twisting. (JE4, p. 36) 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 7 
 
Due to continued symptoms, claimant followed up with Dr. Mayfield. Dr. Mayfield 
performed a kenalog injection on February 7, 2023. (JE4, p. 38) The injection resulted in 
improvement, but not resolution of symptoms. (JE4, p. 39) A repeat injection was 
ordered and undergone on February 28, 2023. (JE4, pp. 40-41) Due to improvement, an 
additional injection was performed in mid-March 2023. (JE4, pp. 41-42) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Mayfield on March 21, 2023. At that visit, Dr. Mayfield 
was able to appreciate a lipomatous mass and performed an excision. Claimant was 
removed from work for one week. (JE4, pp. 44-45) 
Following evaluation on March 28, 2023, Dr. Mayfield placed claimant at 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) and released claimant to return to work without 
restrictions. (JE4, p. 46)  
On April 12, 2023, claimant presented to Kurt Smith, D.O., with complaints of 
right lower lumbar pain and right hip pain. Claimant related his symptoms to a work 
injury wherein he was struck by a forklift. (JE6, p. 56) Dr. Smith assessed a lumbar 
strain. He prescribed ibuprofen, tizanidine, and physical therapy. Work restrictions were 
imposed, including a 20-pound lift and avoidance of repetitive lifting, bending, and 
twisting. (JE6, pp. 58-59)  
On April 28, 2023, an individual named Daniel Rolon approached Leanna Lloyd, 
president of defendant-employer. He signed a witness statement, wherein he stated 
claimant did not sustain a work injury and the “forklift barely touched [claimant’s] feet.” 
Mr. Rolon further stated claimant “used this same thing to sue” a former employer. 
(DEB, p. 2) 
Ms. Lloyd testified that Mr. Rolon, a former employee, entered her office on that 
date and indicated claimant was not telling the truth regarding the work injury and was 
trying to obtain money from defendant-employer, like he had with a previous employer. 
On advice from defendant-insurance carrier, Ms. Lloyd requested Mr. Rolon complete a 
witness statement. Ms. Lloyd wrote the statement based upon what Mr. Rolon stated, 
he signed the statement, and Ms. Lloyd sent the statement to defendant-insurance 
carrier. (Ms. Lloyd’s testimony) 
Ms. Lloyd’s testimony at evidentiary hearing was clear and direct. Her demeanor 
gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her veracity. Ms. Lloyd is found credible.   
Claimant testified that Mr. Rolon is his stepson. Claimant testified Mr. Rolon was 
not present at the time of his alleged injury and further, that claimant does not speak 
with Mr. Rolon. Claimant explained that Mr. Bracamontes and his wife were forced to 
ask Mr. Rolon to cease living with them due to concerns regarding theft. Claimant 
denied fabricating the injuries at defendant-employer or at his former employer, Swan 
Packing. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Mr. Rolon did not testify at evidentiary hearing. Evidence reveals Mr. Rolon was 
incarcerated and therefore, unavailable to testify. (CE10, pp. 50-51; DEM) 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 8 
 
Claimant began physical therapy on May 2, 2023. The provider noted claimant 
had been struck by a forklift, with immediate abdominal pain and subsequent back pain. 
(JE7, p. 83) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Smith on May 24, 2023 and reported improvement with 
physical therapy. Dr. Smith ordered additional physical therapy, with increased weights. 
He lessened claimant’s work restrictions to allow a 40-pound lift, with avoidance of 
repetitive lifting, bending, and twisting. (JE6, pp. 67, 69-70) 
On June 21, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Smith and reported continued 
improvement with physical therapy. (JE6, p. 72) Dr. Smith noted claimant was “[d]oing 
odd jobs, [but] did not give specifics.” (JE6, p. 73) Dr. Smith renewed claimant’s 
prescription for ibuprofen and ordered physical therapy, with work hardening. (JE6, p. 
74) 
At a physical therapy appointment on June 29, 2023, the therapist noted claimant 
had made little progress toward goals and was discharged from acute therapy. The 
provider noted they had contacted the insurance company for clarification regarding 
work conditioning, but had not received a response. (JE7, p. 87)  
Defendants secured surveillance of claimant on July 5, 2023, and July 8, 2023. 
Surveillance records in evidence include a report and slightly over 13 minutes of video 
surveillance. (DEH, pp. 15, 16; DEL) The report indicates that the intermittent video 
demonstrated claimant: changing three wheels on a van; utilizing a lug wrench, impact 
gun, and “heavy” floor jack; and leaning, squatting, and laying on the ground. (DEH, p. 
15) The investigator opined claimant “appeared to make full use of his lower back in an 
unrestricted manner.” (DEH, p. 16)  
The undersigned reviewed two surveillance videos provided in defendants’ 
exhibit L. The first video totals 2 minutes and 16 seconds; it is dated July 5, 2023. The 
sole activity performed by claimant in this video is driving and operating an SUV. The 
second video totals 10 minutes and 56 seconds; it is dated July 8, 2023. In this video, 
claimant is seen performing several typical activities of daily living, such as driving, 
walking around his yard/driveway, carrying what appear to be grocery-type items, and 
sitting in a chair. The video also shows claimant performing tasks around a minivan; 
these tasks are the most relevant in consideration of the issues presented for resolution 
by this proceeding. The video contains several brief, limited clips taken from the 
perspective of an individual driving past claimant’s home. In these brief clips, lasting 
only a few seconds each, claimant is seen: crouched beside the minivan in proximity to 
a car jack; sitting on the ground using what appears to be a lug wrench on a wheel; and 
on two occasions, laying on his side upon the ground beside the vehicle. In a stationary 
video clip, claimant is seen rising from sitting on the ground to standing, at which point 
he bent over to pick up the jack and carried it out of frame. He was also observed 
picking up handheld tools. Another stationary video depicts a very obscured view of 
claimant, as he is seen in the space between the vehicle and the ground and further 
obstructed by a grill. In this obstructed video, one can make out the top of claimant’s 
head, as he appears to lay on the ground beside the vehicle. On occasion, one can see 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 9 
 
him moving his arm on a pipe, which I presume is the handle on a jack. At no point is 
claimant observed removing, carrying, lifting, or mounting tires on the vehicle.   
Claimant testified that on the date in question, he was examining the brakes on 
his vehicle. He denied lifting or changing tires. Claimant admitted to lifting and moving a 
jack, but testified he did not personally use the jack to lift the vehicle. Claimant indicated 
it was his son who performed these tasks. (DEK, Tr. pp. 46-50) Claimant denied 
performing specific work on the car or looking under the vehicle. At the time of the 
surveillance, claimant indicated he was under a 40-pound restriction and he did not 
believe he performed any task beyond that restriction. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Photographs of the jack utilized by claimant are in evidence. The identified 
weight of the jack is 30.9 pounds. (CE5, pp. 28-29) 
At a follow-up appointment with Dr. Smith on July 25, 2023, claimant reported 
improvement, but that he had not yet begun work hardening. (JE6, p. 77) Dr. Smith 
renewed his order for work hardening and left the 40-pound restriction in place. (JE6, 
pp. 79-80) 
On August 10, 2023, counsel for defendants met with Dr. Smith for review of the 
surveillance video and report. (DEG, p. 11) Thereafter, Dr. Smith authored a report. 
Therein, Dr. Smith indicated the video demonstrated claimant changing tires using a 
jack, moving and carrying tires, stooping, bending, twisting, and getting under a vehicle, 
all without evidence of acute distress. Dr. Smith opined claimant’s activities were 
outside of the work restrictions imposed on claimant at the time, including a 40-pound 
lift and occasional twisting. He also opined claimant’s activities were inconsistent with 
the complaints claimant expressed to Dr. Smith. As a result, Dr. Smith placed claimant 
at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of the last office visit on July 25, 2023, 
without further treatment recommended. (DEG, p. 13) Dr. Smith released claimant to full 
duty without restrictions and without permanent impairment. (DEG, p. 14) 
On August 10, 2023, Dr. Smith authored a separate note placing claimant at 
maximum medical improvement and releasing him to return to work, without restrictions. 
(JE6, p. 82) 
Thereafter, defendants ceased payment of weekly indemnity benefits. (DEE, p. 7; 
DEF, p. 9) Claimant testified he no longer received authorized medical treatment after 
this date. (Claimant’s testimony) 
On August 17, 2023, claimant presented to his primary care practice, Primary 
Health Care. Claimant reported ongoing right-sided back pain, present for nine months. 
Claimant reported he “got ran over by a forklift” on the right portion of his abdomen. 
(JE8, p. 109) Lumbar back pain was assessed and cyclobenzaprine was prescribed. 
(JE8, p. 111) 
Thereafter, claimant participated in behavioral therapy. (JE8, p. 119) At a session 
on August 30, 2023, claimant indicated he had not worked since his work injury. The 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 10 
 
provider indicated claimant’s lack of work and ongoing recovery had a “devastating 
effect” on claimant’s mental state. (JE8, p. 120) 
At the referral of his counsel, on October 19, 2023, claimant presented to board-
certified occupational medicine physician, Sunil Bansal, M.D., for an independent 
medical examination (IME). Dr. Bansal issued a report containing his findings and 
opinions dated January 10, 2024. (CE1, pp. 1, 15) Dr. Bansal performed a medical 
records review. (CE1, pp. 2-9) Dr. Bansal noted the record also contained surveillance 
videos and a report. He noted the surveillance report indicated claimant was observed 
changing, moving and carrying car tires, stooping, bending, and getting under a vehicle. 
Claimant denied changing or carrying tires, but indicated he did carry a jack and got 
under the car to look for a water leak. (CE1, p. 10) Following his own review of the 
videos, Dr. Bansal indicated he did not observe claimant change a tire. He did observe 
claimant “intermittently working around a minivan” and operating a jack. He also 
observed claimant bending infrequently, which fit the definition of occasional bending 
and did not contradict claimant’s diagnoses or restrictions. (CE1, p. 14) 
 
Dr. Bansal performed a physical examination. (CE1, pp. 11-12) Claimant 
reported he continued to suffer with pain in his abdomen, particularly with squatting or 
prolonged bending. Claimant also reported low back pain, with radiation down into his 
bilateral legs and up into his neck. Claimant also reported numbness of the bilateral 
legs. (CE1, p. 10) Claimant indicated he had struggled to find work. (CE1, p. 11) With 
respect to the alleged injury, Dr. Bansal noted:  
[Claimant] was moving his cleaning cart, when the cart was struck hard by 
a forklift. He was not able to get out of the way in time, and when the cart 
was struck it was forced directly into his abdomen. He was then knocked 
down, falling backwards to the ground.   
(CE1, p. 9) 
 
Following records review, interview, and examination, Dr. Bansal assessed an 
abdominal contusion/strain, development of a deep subcutaneous lipoma of the right 
lower abdomen status post excision, and right sacroiliitis of the right back/hip. With 
respect to causation of claimant’s abdomen injury, Dr. Bansal opined the forklift 
impacting the cart back into claimant’s abdomen was consistent with the abdominal 
contusion and subsequent development of a subcutaneous lipoma. With respect to the 
right-sided back and hip complaints, Dr. Bansal related these complaints to a diagnosis 
of sacroiliitis. (CE1, pp. 12-13) As to the question of causation of this condition, Dr. 
Bansal opined:  
Not only did the direct trauma to the abdomen cause acute injuries to that 
region, but the impact would have also transmitted force to his lower back 
and pelvis areas which are biomechanically linked to the abdomen. The 
body’s natural response to such trauma is to engage in protective 
posturing, often leading to an involuntary reflexive tightening of the 
surrounding muscles.  

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 11 
 
Following this abdominal impact, [claimant] experienced a secondary 
trauma as he was knocked down, falling backwards to the ground. The 
mechanism of injury in such a fall involves a sudden uncontrolled descent 
in which the body’s full weight, as well as the additional force from the fall, 
impacts the ground. The lower back and sacroiliac region includes the 
sacroiliac joints which connect the spine to the pelvis, and are particularly 
vulnerable in such falls. The backwards fall would have not only caused a 
direct impact to this region, but would have resulted in a jarring or twisting 
motion as the body hit the ground. Such a motion can lead to disruptions 
or dysfunctions of the sacroiliac joints. 
(CE1, pp. 13-14)   
 
For the abdominal injury, Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Mayfield that claimant had 
achieved MMI as of March 28, 2023. For the back injury and absent further treatment, 
Dr. Bansal opined claimant had achieved MMI as of the date of his examination, 
October 19, 2023. (CE1, p. 15) Dr. Bansal recommended permanent restrictions of no 
lifting greater than 40 pounds and avoidance of prolonged bending and squatting. He 
recommended intermittent right sacroiliac joint injections for ongoing back complaints. 
(CE1, p. 14) Dr. Bansal opined claimant did not sustain ratable permanent impairment 
as a result of the abdominal injury. With respect to claimant’s back, Dr. Bansal opined 
claimant fell within DRE lumbar category II, with radicular pain, loss of range of motion, 
and guarding. As a result, Dr. Bansal assigned a 5 percent whole person impairment. 
(CE1, p. 15) 
 
On November 9, 2023, claimant presented to Primary Health Care and was seen 
by Maria Latoja-Lovan, ARNP. Claimant reported he had been run over by a forklift at 
work and had been receiving workers’ compensation benefits, but those benefits were 
“taken away because he was caught lifting a tire [weighing less than] 10 [pounds].” 
(JE8, p. 125) Ms. Latoja-Lovan assessed chronic low back pain with right-sided sciatica. 
She ordered Toradol injections and prescribed ibuprofen, gabapentin, and Voltaren gel. 
(JE8, p. 126)   
Following x-rays, claimant returned to Ms. Latoja-Lovan on November 15, 2023. 
Ms. Latoja-Lovan opined the x-rays revealed mild diffuse lumbar spondylosis and mild 
neural foraminal narrowing, right greater than left and more pronounced at levels L4 to 
S1. (JE8, p. 133) Ms. Latoja-Lovan assessed neuroforaminal stenosis of the 
lumbosacral spine and chronic low back pain with right-sided sciatica. She increased 
claimant’s gabapentin and issued an orthopedic referral. (JE8, p. 134) 
Claimant returned to Ms. Latoja-Lovan on November 28, 2023 for recheck of low 
back pain and diabetes. Claimant also reported increased depressive symptoms, with 
suicidal thoughts. Ms. Latoja-Lovan referred claimant for immediate mental health 
evaluation. (JE8, pp. 141-142) 
In February 2024, claimant’s counsel met with Dr. Smith to review and discuss 
the surveillance video and Dr. Smith’s August 10, 2023 letter. Thereafter, claimant’s 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 12 
 
counsel directed questions to Dr. Smith for his opinion, to which Dr. Smith responded on 
March 1, 2024. By his responses, Dr. Smith indicated he did not observe claimant 
carrying or moving tires on the surveillance video. (CE2, p. 20) In response to counsel’s 
question regarding whether Dr. Smith observed claimant lift anything heavier than the 
imposed 40-pound lift restriction, Dr. Smith replied yes and wrote:  
Hydraulic car jack - aluminum can weigh up to 60 pounds [...] steel can 
weigh 100 pounds 
(CE2, p. 20)   
 
Claimant’s counsel submitted claimant’s deposition transcript and photographs of 
the jack to Dr. Bansal for review. Dr. Bansal issued a supplemental report dated June 
18, 2024. By his supplemental report, Dr. Bansal indicated he stood by his prior 
opinions. He did note a “slight discrepancy” with respect to claimant’s fall, with 
claimant’s deposition testimony indicating claimant fell forward onto his knees rather 
than backwards. (CE1, p. 16) Dr. Bansal opined the “fundamental biomechanical 
principles outlined in my causation analysis remain applicable” as the forceful impact to 
the abdomen would have still transmitted significant forces to the low back and pelvic 
region, and a fall onto his knees would have caused sudden uncontrolled loading of the 
spine and sacroiliac joints. (CE1, p. 17) Dr. Bansal continued:  
The key point is that the powerful initial trauma to the abdomen, followed 
by the sudden impact of the fall (whether backwards or forwards), 
provides a clear biomechanical explanation for the diagnosed injuries to 
[claimant’s] abdomen, lower back, and sacroiliac region. The specific 
direction of the fall, while relevant for understanding the exact mechanism, 
does not change the underlying causative factors identified in my original 
analysis.  
Moreover, the weight of the jack that [claimant] used was 27.5 pounds. 
This weight was well within his restriction parameters.  
In conclusion, the discrepancy in the description of the fall and the 
clarification of the jack’s weight do not alter my fundamental causation 
opinion. The abdominal trauma and subsequent fall, as described in the 
deposition, still provide a medically probable and biomechanically 
plausible explanation for the injuries sustained by [claimant] in the 
November 30, 2022 work incident. 
(CE1, p. 17)  
On August 18, 2024, claimant was admitted to the hospital with complaints of 
right-sided headache and left-sided blurry vision that started during dialysis. (DEN, p. 
54) A CT scan showed subacute occipital infarction and a brain MRI revealed an acute 
ischemic stroke with petechial hemorrhages. (DEN, p. 59) Records reveal a principal 
diagnosis of occipital stroke. Additional active medical problems were identified: type II 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 13 
 
diabetes mellitus; hyperlipidemia; right facial pain; coronary artery disease; normocytic 
anemia; vision loss of the left eye; acute kidney injury superimposed on chronic kidney 
disease; benign hypertension with chronic kidney disease, stage IV; dysphagia; and 
impaired mobility and activities of daily living. He was discharged from the hospital on 
August 27, 2024. (DEN, p. 40) 
Claimant did not return to work for defendant-employer following his alleged 
injury, beyond a limited time in December 2022. Claimant admits he did not request an 
assignment from defendant-employer. Nor is there evidence that defendant-employer 
offered additional work. (Claimant’s testimony; Ms. Lloyd’s testimony; DEK, Tr. pp. 41-
42) Following the work injury, claimant indicated he attempted to work once as a 
machine operator for a metal priming company. The employment lasted approximately 
one week in 2024 and ended when claimant was unable to tolerate the bending 
required.  (Claimant’s testimony; DEI, p. 29) Claimant denies telling Dr. Smith that he 
was working odd jobs while receiving treatment. (DEK, Tr. pp. 42-43) He continued to 
own his junk removal business following his injury, but testified he did not perform any 
jobs post-injury and eventually closed his business. (Claimant’s testimony; DEI, p. 29; 
DEK, Tr. p. 43)  
Claimant testified he does not drive due to his current loss of vision tied to the 
stroke he suffered in August 2024. He explained that the vision has not returned to his 
left eye. He denied any other ongoing issues tied to the hospitalization. Claimant 
continues to treat with his primary care provider for his diabetes and kidney disease. 
(Claimant’s testimony)  
Claimant continues to experience back complaints, which he believes worsened 
slightly in the year preceding hearing. He believes he requires further treatment. 
Following denial of his workers’ compensation claim, claimant testified he received 
limited treatment with his personal physician but did not seek further care because he 
does not have health insurance. Claimant clarified he does have insurance that is 
designated for low income individuals. While unclear, the undersigned presumes this 
insurance is provided through the State of Iowa. Claimant testified he continues to 
experience stomach pain, but does not require additional treatment. Claimant testified 
he has fallen into a depression following the injury and has sought care for his 
symptoms. He did not claim a mental health injury related to his alleged work injury at 
defendant-employer. (Claimant’s testimony)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury on 
November 30, 2022 which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 14 
 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
Defendants argue claimant is not a credible witness and therefore, his testimony 
should not be entitled to any weight. Following review of the entirety of the record, I 
disagree and find claimant is credible. Claimant’s testimony at deposition and 
evidentiary hearing is consistent. While he did not provide verbatim testimony, I find the 
variations are within the realm of what is reasonable and expected given claimant’s 
English language skills and the use of interpreters. Defendants argue claimant’s 
behavior at evidentiary hearing demonstrated he understood the questions posed prior 
to completion of the translation; I did not observe such behavior. Rather, I noted that 
claimant consistently waited for completion of an interpreted question before providing 
an answer. Contrary to what was argued by defendants, I did not observe evasiveness 
or deception. Rather, I find his behavior and answers to questions to be in line with that 
one could expect from a 60-year-old man, with very limited education and lack of 
English skills. While claimant did appear hesitant at times, I did not observe any signs of 
deception, argumentativeness, or unwillingness to answer questions. Claimant was 
observed twisting his upper body in an apparent attempt to stretch his back during the 
course of his testimony. His demeanor gave the undersigned no compelling reason to 
doubt his veracity.  
The undersigned finds claimant was a credible witness. Claimant testified at 
deposition and hearing that he sustained an injury on November 30, 2022, when a 
forklift struck the cart he was pushing, causing the cart to strike his abdomen. He was 
then positioned between the cart and a stack of boxes, at which point he moved the cart 
forward and came down onto his knees. Claimant immediately reported the injury and 
sought medical care the same day. He then received medical care on a consistent basis 
thereafter.  
Defendants highlight the variation in such medical records denoting the precise 
mechanism of injury. While I agree that the accounts do vary and at times give the 
impression that claimant was personally struck by the forklift, rather than the forklift 
striking the cart into him, I do not find these variances sufficient to warrant discrediting 
claimant’s testimony or nullifying his reports. Rather, I find that these variations are 
more likely explained by claimant’s limited English skills and the use of various 
interpreters. Further, I note that defendants accepted claimant’s injury and provided 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 15 
 
medical care for a period of several months. At no point during this period does it 
appear that defendants took issue with the perceived discrepancies in claimant’s 
reported mechanism of injury.   
 
Neither side presented evidence from potential witnesses to the incident itself; for 
example, from the forklift driver and/or coworkers. No contemporaneous witness 
statements were taken and entered into evidence in investigation of this reported injury.  
The only witness statement in evidence pertains to the statement of Mr. Rolon, who was 
not a witness to the incident. Rather, Mr. Rolon approached Ms. Lloyd approximately 
five months later and reported claimant was lying about the injury. Mr. Rolon did not 
personally author a statement; he endorsed what was recorded by Ms. Lloyd. Mr. Rolon 
did not provide sworn testimony. Given claimant’s uncontradicted testimony regarding 
the fraught nature of their familial relationship and the timing of Mr. Rolon’s statement, I 
cannot award weight to Mr. Rolon’s statement.  
Quite simply, there is no evidence in the record which convincingly contests 
claimant’s version of events. Accordingly, I find that claimant has proven he sustained 
an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment on November 30, 2022.  
The next issue for determination is whether the work injury is a cause of 
temporary disability, and if so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary 
disability. Specifically, claimant seeks a running award of temporary disability benefits. 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Iowa Code § 85.33(1) (2015).  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar to the 
work performed at the time of injury.  Id.  
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are: (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  Iowa Code § 
85.33(2) (2015).  An employee is temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is 
not capable medically of returning to employment substantially similar to the 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 16 
 
employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of the injury but is able to 
perform other work consistent with the employee's disability.  Id.  Temporary partial 
benefits are not payable upon termination of temporary disability, healing period, or 
permanent partial disability simply because the employee is not able to secure work 
paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's weekly earnings at the time of the 
injury.  Id. 
Following the established work injury on November 30, 2022, claimant obtained 
authorized medical care, directed by defendants. Throughout the course of claimant’s 
authorized medical care, no provider opined that claimant’s complaints were not 
causally related to the work injury. Claimant obtained an independent medical 
examination with Dr. Bansal, who opined claimant's abdomen and back/hip conditions 
were causally related to the work injury. Defendants offered no medical opinion refuting 
Dr. Bansal’s opinion. Defendants urge the undersigned to reject Dr. Bansal’s report 
based on what they believe is an inaccurate history and unconvincing rationale. 
However, I do not find this argument persuasive. On its face, Dr. Bansal’s report does 
not contain any glaring errors which would warrant discrediting and rejecting the totality 
of the report. Further, defendants offered no opinions to counter the opinions expressed 
by Dr. Bansal. Therefore, the undersigned is left with an unrebutted causation opinion. 
Accordingly, I find that claimant has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
work injury of November 30, 2022, is a cause of temporary disability.   
Commencing on the date of injury, defendants directed claimant for medical care. 
Claimant was placed under restrictions by DoctorsNow on November 30, 2022. These 
restrictions prohibited claimant from meeting the physical requirements of his job 
placement, which specifically required a 50-pound lift. Thereafter, the evidentiary record 
demonstrates claimant worked part-time hours during the remainder of December 2022. 
Details of the work assignments offered and work performed during this time are 
extremely limited. However, to the extent that claimant’s earnings were limited during 
the period he labored under work restrictions, but was able to perform work consistent 
with his condition, claimant is entitled to temporary partial disability benefits.  
At the end of December 2022, claimant’s placement ended. The evidentiary 
record does not contain evidence that an offer of work was extended to claimant by 
defendant-employer thereafter. At this time, claimant remained under work restrictions, 
was not working, and had not achieved maximum medical improvement. Appropriately, 
defendants commenced payment of temporary total disability benefits commencing 
December 28, 2022. I therefore find claimant is eligible for temporary partial disability 
benefits from November 30, 2022 through December 27, 2022, as applicable. 
Having found claimant’s injury was a cause of temporary disability and that 
claimant remained under restrictions, had not returned to work, and had not achieved 
maximum medical improvement, claimant is entitled to an award of temporary total 
disability/healing period benefits. The best evidence establishes claimant’s temporary 
total disability period began on December 28, 2022, the date defendants commenced 
payment of temporary disability benefits.         

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 17 
 
Claimant argues he is entitled to a running award of temporary total 
disability/healing period benefits. I do not find this argument convincing. Claimant is only 
entitled to an award of such benefits for so long as he has not returned to work, was 
medically incapable of returning to substantially similar work, and had not achieved 
maximum medical recovery. In this instance, claimant has not returned to work and due 
to ongoing limitations, is not able to return to substantially similar work. However, 
claimant has been placed at maximum medical improvement by multiple providers. 
Specifically, Drs. Mayfield and Bansal opined claimant had achieved MMI as of March 
28, 2023 for his abdominal injury. Dr. Smith placed claimant at MMI for his back 
complaints effective July 25, 2023. Dr. Bansal opined that absent further treatment, 
claimant had achieved MMI for his back injury as of October 19, 2023. The only 
treatment option raised by Dr. Bansal was intermittent right sacroiliac joint injections, 
care that is maintenance in nature. Claimant did not obtain any significant treatment of 
his complaints following Dr. Bansal’s examination; any care received reflected 
symptomatic pain control only.  
Accordingly, I find that claimant’s period of recuperation following the work injury 
has terminated. Claimant achieved MMI for his abdominal injury on March 28, 2023. 
Therefore, it must be determined how long claimant’s temporary disability period 
extended thereafter. Dr. Smith opined an MMI date of July 25, 2023. He did so following 
review of the July 2023 surveillance report and videos. Thereafter, Dr. Smith opined that 
claimant demonstrated abilities that were beyond those which claimant reported on 
examination and which were inconsistent with claimant’s restrictions. Initially, Dr. Smith 
noted claimant was seen changing tires; he later indicated claimant was carrying a jack 
with a weight exceeding his restrictions. Dr. Smith’s observations are incorrect. 
Claimant did not change tires, and the jack he moved fell within the weight restriction 
imposed by Dr. Smith. It therefore appears that Dr. Smith’s report was reflexive in 
nature, rather than based upon claimant’s objectively observed abilities. I therefore do 
not award Dr. Smith’s report any weight. Accordingly, I adopt the opinion of Dr. Bansal 
with respect to the proper date of MMI for claimant’s back condition. 
I therefore find the date of October 19, 2023, as the termination of claimant’s 
temporary disability period. Claimant is therefore entitled to temporary total 
disability/healing period benefits from December 28, 2022 through October 19, 2023.    
 
The next issue for determination is whether the work injury is a cause of 
permanent disability, including whether the injury is a cause of claimant’s ongoing 
complaints. If the injury is a cause of permanent disability, the next issue for 
determination is the extent of claimant’s industrial disability and the commencement 
date for permanent disability benefits, if awarded. These issues will be considered 
together.  
 
As set forth supra, I adopted Dr. Bansal’s opinion causally relating claimant’s 
abdominal and back/right hip conditions, including his ongoing complaints, to the work 
injury of November 30, 2022. Accordingly, I find claimant has proven the work injury 
was a cause of permanent disability.  

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 18 
 
 
The next issue for determination is the extent of claimant’s permanent disability. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The parties stipulated claimant’s permanent disability should be evaluated 
industrially.  
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2) 
 
I first examine the medical opinions with respect to claimant’s functional 
impairment and need for activity restrictions. No physician has opined claimant 
sustained permanent disability relative to his abdominal injury. Dr. Bansal and Dr. Smith 
offered competing opinions with respect to claimant’s back/right hip complaints.  
 
Dr. Smith opined claimant did not sustain any permanent impairment and did not 
require permanent restrictions. Although claimant had been undergoing treatment with 
Dr. Smith, Dr. Smith issued his opinion upon review of surveillance evidence of 
claimant. As set forth supra, Dr. Smith’s opinion misstated multiple facts about the 
activities objectively performed and items handled by claimant in the surveillance 
videos. I, therefore, decline to award any weight to Dr. Smith’s opinion.  
 
Rather, I adopt the opinions of Dr. Bansal with respect to the extent of claimant’s 
functional impairment and need for work restrictions. Dr. Bansal reviewed and 
accurately summarized the activities performed by claimant on surveillance video. His 
findings and opinions are also consistent with claimant’s ongoing complaints and 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 19 
 
limitations. Dr. Bansal opined claimant sustained a 5 percent whole person impairment. 
He also imposed permanent restrictions of a 40-pound maximum lift and avoidance of 
prolonged bending and squatting. These restrictions are consistent with those imposed 
by Dr. Smith prior to his abrupt release of claimant from care.  
 
Claimant is a 60-year-old man, with very limited education and limited English 
language skills. His work history is limited to unskilled manual labor. A 40-pound lifting 
restriction impacts claimant’s ability to perform positions he held preinjury and limits his 
access to the labor market. Although claimant has been physically limited due to the 
work injury, claimant has not demonstrated motivation to continue employment. His 
preinjury work history is sporadic, and since the work injury, claimant did not request 
further assignments from defendant-employer, nor demonstrate more than a cursory 
search for employment.  
 
In light of the above and after consideration of all other relevant factors of 
industrial disability, I find that claimant sustained a 15 percent industrial disability as a 
result of the work injury of November 30, 2022. Such an award entitles claimant to 75 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, commencing at the termination of 
claimant’s healing period, October 20, 2023.  
 
The next issue for consideration is the rate of compensation. 
The basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the time of 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36 (2015).  Weekly earnings are the gross salary, wages, or 
earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  Id.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment.  Id. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by thirteen the earnings over the thirteen-week period 
immediately preceding the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36(6) (2015).  Any week that does 
not fairly reflect the employee’s customary earnings is excluded, however.  Id. 
The undersigned computed claimant’s total hours worked as 362.55 over the 13-
week period extending from the week ending August 28, 2022 through the week ending 
November 27, 2022. This computation excludes the weeks ending October 16, 2022, as 
inaccurate and November 20, 2022, as it includes zero earnings. I find both of these 
weeks to be unrepresentative of claimant’s earnings.  
I decline to exclude the other 4 weeks proposed by claimant as unrepresentative, 
simply because they reflect weeks with lower hours and/or holidays. Claimant seeks to 
exclude the weeks ending September 11, 2022 and November 27, 2022, as the weeks 
included holidays. However, claimant testified his hours varied greatly, from 14 to 40 
hours or more per week, and there is no evidence in the record regarding whether 
claimant missed work opportunities due to the holidays. The simple presence of a 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 20 
 
holiday during a work week does not warrant automatic exclusion of that week unless it 
is shown that claimant lost earnings due to the holiday.  
In two of the weeks excluded by claimant, he worked 11.95 hours. This number 
of hours is slightly below the testified 14 to 40-hour range, but given he performed 
approximately 12 hours of work during each of these two weeks, I find the weeks to be 
representative of his customary earnings. I similarly find a week of 14.83 hours is 
consistent with his demonstrated variable work hours and further, with the two weeks in 
which claimant worked only 12 hours. Finally, I find that the week in which claimant 
worked 22.38 hours is consistent with his history of variable work hours and is within the 
range testified to by claimant.  
I also note that in one identified week, that ending September 25, 2022, claimant 
was paid for 65.58 hours. The payments were made via two separate checks, covering 
two separate hour totals, dated September 22, 2022 and September 29, 2022; both 
checks referenced the week ending September 25, 2022. This number of hours is 
clearly outside of claimant’s typical range of hours worked per week. However, neither 
claimant nor defendants excluded that week from their computation. I therefore find that 
claimant’s hours varied widely, there is insufficient evidence to find that claimant lost 
earnings due to holidays, and the 4 weeks proposed by claimant should not be 
excluded as unrepresentative.    
Utilizing claimant’s hourly rate of $14.00, these 362.55 hours correspond to gross 
earnings of $5,075.70. Divided by the 13 weeks in which the sums were earned, it is 
found that claimant’s gross average weekly wage was $390.44. The parties stipulated 
claimant was married and entitled to 3 exemptions at the time of the work injury. 
Accordingly, claimant’s rate of compensation is $283.50. 
Having found claimant’s proper rate of compensation, further clarification can 
now be provided regarding claimant’s entitlement to indemnity benefits. As set forth 
supra, claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from December 28, 2022 through 
October 19, 2023. These benefits are payable at the weekly rate of $283.50. As also set 
forth supra, claimant was found to have sustained a 15 percent industrial disability as a 
result of the work injury. Such an award entitles claimant to 75 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing October 20, 2023 and payable at the weekly rate 
of $283.50. 
Additionally, claimant was found to have a potential entitlement to temporary 
partial disability benefits during the period he remained employed and working in a light 
duty capacity, due to imposed restrictions, for defendant-employer. Temporary partial 
disability benefits shall be 66 2/3 percent of the difference between the employee’s 
weekly earnings at the time of injury and the employee’s actual gross weekly income 
from employment during the period of temporary partial disability. Iowa Code section 
85.33(4)  
Claimant’s period of temporary partial disability benefits was found to extend 
from claimant’s injury through December 27, 2022. Claimant earned the following gross 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 21 
 
wages during these weeks worked post-injury: $205.10 during the week ending 
December 4, 2022; $71.68 during the week ending December 11, 2022; $510.72 during 
the week ending December 25, 2022; and $129.50 in the week ending January 1, 2023. 
In all but one of these weeks, that ending December 25, 2022, claimant’s gross 
earnings were less than his gross average weekly wage at the time of his injury, 
$390.44.  
 
Accordingly, claimant is entitled to temporary partial disability benefits in each of 
these three weeks. During the week ending December 4, 2022, claimant’s earnings 
were $140.34 less ($390.44 - $205.10), entitling claimant to $93.56 (66.67 percent x 
$140.34) in temporary partial disability benefits. During the week ending December 11, 
2022, claimant’s earnings were $318.76 less ($390.44 - $71.68), entitling claimant to 
$212.52 (66.67 percent x $318.76) in temporary partial disability benefits. During the 
week ending January 1, 2023, claimant’s earnings were $260.94 less ($390.44 - 
$129.50), entitling claimant to $173.97 (66.67 percent x $260.94) in temporary partial 
disability benefits. In total, claimant is entitled to $480.05 ($93.56 + $212.52 + $173.97) 
in temporary partial disability benefits for the period extending from his injury through 
December 27, 2022.  
 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of an independent medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee 
is being examined is determined to be compensable.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2017).  
“An employer is not liable for the cost of such examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to have a compensable injury. A 
determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 22 
 
an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.”  Iowa Code 
§ 85.39(2); Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023).   
Claimant sustained a compensable work-related injury. Defendants’ chosen 
physician, Dr. Smith, issued an opinion regarding the extent of claimant’s permanent 
impairment. This opinion triggered claimant’s right to an independent medical 
examination. Claimant procured the examination with Dr. Bansal, the cost of which was 
$4,373.00. (CE1, p. 19) Claimant is entitled to reimbursement for this expense.  
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
claimed medical expenses found in Claimant’s Exhibit 8. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Following defendants’ denial of care, claimant sought care from Primary Health 
Care relative to his ongoing back complaints on November 9, 2023. He incurred out-of-
pocket co-pay expenses as a result. (CE8, pp. 43-44) As these expenses were incurred 
in treatment of work-related conditions and following defendants’ denial of care, 
defendants should be held responsible for the cost associated with claimant’s care.  
 
Claimant incurred mileage expenses related to authorized care and the IME with 
Dr. Bansal. Defendants are held responsible for medical mileage expenses related to 
causally related and authorized medical care, as well as for transportation expenses 
related to claimant’s IME. (CE8, pp. 45-46) 
 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to an award of 
alternate medical care under section 85.27. 
 
Claimant has proven he sustained a compensable work-related injury. Despite 
initially offering care, defendants subsequently denied liability for his claim and ceased 
authorizing medical care. Claimant is entitled to ongoing medical care related to his 
injuries; accordingly, claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care and may 
choose his own provider to render care at defendants’ cost.  
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to an award of 
penalty benefits. 
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 10A.315(4) 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 23 
 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4) (2023); Robbennolt v. 
Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236-37 (Iowa 1996).  
“Benefits may be delayed, without penalty, during such time as an employer’s 
liability is “fairly debatable”. Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 
109, 111 (Iowa 1995).  A delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable 
investigation is not unreasonable.  Id.  
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  Rodda v. Vermeer Mfg., 734 N.W.2d 
480, 483 (Iowa 2007).  An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in 
favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993).  An issue of 
fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which would support a finding 
favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194, 199 (Iowa 
2001).  
“An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ does not make it 
so.”  Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  The 
employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner could reasonably find that the 
claim was “fairly debatable.”  Id.   
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 
254, 259 (Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the 
penalty include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available 
to the employer and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 
at 238. 
An employer may not unilaterally decide to deny, delay, or terminate benefits 
without adhering to section 10A.315. Iowa Code § 10A.315 (2023).  Section 
10A.315(4)(c) creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow, to show the 
employer met its burden of a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1)-(3).   First, the 
employer’s excuse must be preceded by a reasonable investigation and evaluation into 
whether the benefits were owed.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1); Baker v. 
Bridgestone/Firestone & Old Republic Inc., 872 N.W.2d 672, 678 (Iowa 2015).  Second, 
the results of the reasonable investigation were “the actual basis . . . 
contemporaneously” relied on by the employer for the denial, delay or termination of the 
benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(2).   Third, the employer “contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of their denial, delay or termination.”  Iowa Code § 
10A.315(4)(c)(3).  An employer cannot unilaterally decide to terminate benefits without 
adhering to section 10A.315.   Iowa Code § 10A.315.  
 
Following the work injury, claimant returned to work at defendant-employer until 
late December 2022. The record is largely devoid of evidence and argument regarding 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 24 
 
the work performed by claimant during this period, any offer of work by defendants, or 
any rejection of work by claimant. However, the record does demonstrate that claimant 
was laboring under work restrictions imposed by an authorized physician and that 
claimant’s earnings were less than his gross average weekly wage during three of the 
weeks that he worked post-injury. During these weeks, claimant was found entitled to 
$480.05 in temporary partial disability benefits. There is no evidence that claimant’s 
entitlement to such benefits was promptly investigated and defendants’ own rate 
calculation found a gross average weekly wage higher than that earned by claimant 
during these weeks in question. I find no fairly debatable basis for denial of temporary 
disability benefits during this period. 
 
By this decision, claimant was found entitled to healing period benefits from 
December 28, 2022 through October 19, 2023, payable at the rate of $283.50. 
Defendants commenced payment of healing period benefits promptly on December 28, 
2022. Benefits were regularly paid at a higher rate, typically $300.43 or $324.00, 
through August 16, 2023. As benefits were timely paid during this period, at a rate 
higher than that to which claimant was entitled, I find no basis for an award of penalty 
benefits on the healing period benefits paid from December 28, 2022 through August 
16, 2023. 
 
Relying upon Dr. Smith’s August 10, 2023 report, defendants terminated 
claimant’s healing period benefits effective August 16, 2023. While defendants argue 
claimant’s entitlement to benefits at this time was a fairly debatable issue, defendants 
failed to provide claimant with a 30-day notice of termination of his benefits and abruptly 
ceased payment. Defendants maintained this denial of benefits and do not appear to 
have reevaluated the denial, despite obvious inaccuracies in the basis of Dr. Smith’s 
report. Reliance upon a medical opinion that is based upon an obvious error in the 
physician’s opinion, in this case whether claimant had personally manipulated tires on a 
vehicle, does not render a claim fairly debatable. As benefits were denied without 
written notice, based upon a questionable medical report, and not later reevaluated, I 
find an award of penalty benefits is warranted for the period of August 17, 2023 through 
October 19, 2023. This period totals 9.143 weeks of benefits, payable at a weekly rate 
of $283.50. Accordingly, the value of benefits denied is $2,592.04.  
 
However, it should be noted that defendants overpaid claimant’s healing period 
benefits from December 28, 2022 through August 16, 2023. Claimant’s award of healing 
period benefits from December 28, 2022 through August 16, 2023 entitles claimant to 
healing period benefits for 33.143 weeks, totaling $9,396.04 (33.143 x $283.50). 
Defendants demonstrated payment of $9,766.33 in benefits. Defendants, therefore, 
overpaid such benefits in the amount of $370.29. 
 
Finally, claimant seeks penalty benefits for defendants’ failure to pay permanent 
partial disability benefits. Claimant relies upon Dr. Bansal’s rating of 5 percent 
permanent partial impairment and imposition of work restrictions. Defendants rely upon 
the reports of Dr. Smith, opining claimant did not sustain permanent impairment or 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 25 
 
require work restrictions. On this basis, defendants argue claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits was fairly debatable.  
 
Defendants performed a contemporaneous investigation into claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. Defendants obtained surveillance 
evidence of claimant’s activities and secured a medical opinion from Dr. Smith. While a 
medical opinion is often sufficient to support a denial of benefits and thus render a claim 
fairly debatable, I find Dr. Smith’s opinion insufficient in this case. Despite providing 
claimant ongoing care and having the personal opportunity to observe and evaluate 
claimant, Dr. Smith abruptly found claimant did not sustain permanent impairment or 
require permanent restrictions. His basis for the opinion was claimant’s purported 
performance of activities such as changing, moving, and carrying tires. However, none 
of these activities was specifically observable on video surveillance. When claimant’s 
counsel reviewed the video evidence personally with Dr. Smith, Dr. Smith admitted 
these activities were not visible. He then based his opinion upon claimant’s movement 
of a jack, stating jacks could weigh 60 to 100 pounds. Claimant provided evidence the 
jack used by claimant weighed approximately 30 pounds. Despite Dr. Smith’s 
inaccuracies and with full knowledge of the video contents and weight of the jack, 
defendants do not appear to have reevaluated the claim.  
 
I find that defendants did not have a fairly debatable basis to deny payment of 
permanent partial disability benefits. By this decision, claimant was found to have 
suffered a 15 percent industrial disability, entitling claimant to 75 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits. This award entitles claimant to $21,262.50 in permanent 
partial disability benefits (75 weeks x $283.50). Dr. Bansal’s unrebutted 5 percent whole 
person impairment rating alone would entitle claimant to $7,087.50 (25 weeks x 
$283.50).      
 
Following consideration of the above, I award claimant $4,000.00 in penalty 
benefits based upon defendants’ denial of temporary partial, healing period, and 
permanent partial disability benefits. Defendants investigated the claim, promptly began 
payment of healing period benefits, and overpaid such benefits. However, defendants 
did not pay temporary partial disability benefits, based their subsequent denial of the 
claim upon an inaccurate medical opinion, did not provide claimant written notice of the 
denial of further benefits, and failed to reevaluate the denial despite knowledge of the 
inaccuracies relied upon by Dr. Smith. On these facts, an award of penalty benefits is 
warranted. 
 
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are entitled to a credit for 
alleged overpayment of temporary total disability benefits. 
 
As set forth supra, claimant’s rate of compensation was determined to be 
$283.50. To the extent applicable, claimant is entitled to temporary partial disability 
benefits from November 30, 2022 through December 27, 2022. Claimant is also entitled 
to healing period benefits from December 28, 2022 through October 19, 2023. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for any temporary disability benefits paid as against 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 26 
 
this award. If further clarification is required, the parties may move for rehearing as to 
the extent of defendants’ credit.   
 
The final issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to a specific 
taxation of costs, as found in claimant’s exhibit 9. 
 
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commissioner.”  Iowa Code § 10A.328(2023).  Iowa Administrative 
Rule 876—4.33(86) outlines what costs may be assessed at hearing. It states as 
follows:  
Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and subpoenas 
shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party utilizing 
the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom 
the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa 
Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the 
workers’ compensation commissioner before costs are taxed. The party 
initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the 
cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the 
cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner 
hearing the case unless otherwise required by the Iowa Rules of Civil 
Procedure governing discovery.  
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.33(86). 
 
Claimant prevailed in his claim for benefits. Claimant seeks taxation of the costs 
of filing and convenience fee in the amount of $128.75. (CE9, p. 47) These are 
allowable costs and are taxed to defendants. Claimant also seeks taxation of the costs 
associated with a conference and report by Dr. Smith in response to Dr. Smith’s August 
10, 2023 report, totaling $350.00. (CE9, p. 48) Finally, claimant  seeks taxation of the 
cost associated with the addendum report of Dr. Bansal in the amount of $196.00. 
(CE9, p. 49) The cost of obtaining two practitioner’s reports are allowable costs and are 

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 27 
 
taxed to defendants. All requested costs set forth in claimant’s exhibit 9 are taxed to 
defendants. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant temporary partial disability benefits in the 
amount of four hundred eighty and 05/100 dollars ($480.05) for the period of November 
30, 2022 through December 27, 2022. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant healing period benefits at the weekly rate of 
two hundred eighty-three and 50/100 dollars ($283.50) for the period of December 28, 
2022 through October 19, 2023. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant seventy-five (75) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing October 20, 2023 at the weekly rate of two hundred 
eighty-three and 50/100 dollars ($283.50).  
Defendants shall pay claimant’s prior medical expenses submitted by claimant at 
the hearing as set forth in the decision.  
Defendants shall pay penalty benefits in the amount of four thousand and 00/100 
dollars($4,000.00). 
Defendants shall pay interest on the penalty benefits from the date of this 
decision.  See Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 339 (Iowa 2008). 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 
2018).  
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal’s independent medical 
examination as set forth in the decision. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33 as set forth in the 
decision.   

BRACAMONTES V. JUST-STAFFING, LLC 
Page 28 
 
Signed and filed this ___25th __ day of September, 2025. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
