Case Number: 23001758.01
Case Title:  BELL, DANIEL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bell Daniel-23001758.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
DANIEL BELL, 
No. 23001758.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
A TO Z DRYING, INC., 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ACCIDENT FUND GENERAL 
INSURANCE CO., 
Headnotes:  1108.50 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Daniel Bell seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the defendants, 
employer A to Z Drying, Inc. (A to Z) and insurance carrier Accident Fund General 
Insurance Co. (Accident Fund). The undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing 
on July 23, 2024. Bell participated personally and through attorney Nicholas L. Shaull. 
The defendants participated by and through attorney Andrew Portis. Alyssa Slaichert 
served as the representative for A to Z. After full submission of the case, Laura 
Ostrander appeared on behalf of the defendants and Portis withdrew. 
Bell alleges he developed testicular cancer in the form of pure seminoma due to 
exposure to insecticide while working at A to Z. Bell’s coworker Tracy Levendusky 
developed the same type of cancer close in time and has initiated his own case before 
the agency, Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner No. 23700547.01. The two 
men received care from some of the same doctors and expert witnesses considered 
both men’s conditions when opining on each case. While there is a degree of crossover 
between the two cases with respect to some facts, this decision is focused on Bell’s 
case. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Apr-30  10:44:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 2 
 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) Did Bell sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment 
with A to Z? 
2) Did Bell give timely notice of the alleged injury? 
3) Is Bell entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or healing period (HP) 
benefits? 
4) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
5) Is Bell entitled to payment of medical expenses? 
6) Is Bell entitled to alternate care? 
7) Is Bell entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical examination 
(IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
8) Is Bell entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Bell and A to Z at the 
time of the alleged injury. 
2) If Bell’s cancer is found to arise out of and in the course of his employment 
with A to Z, any permanent disability it is found to have caused is industrial in 
nature. 
3) If Bell’s cancer is found to arise out of and in the course of his employment 
with A to Z, the commencement date for permanency benefits, if any are 
awarded, is May 3, 2024. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Bell’s gross earnings were one thousand five hundred five and 40/100 
($1,505.40) per week. 
b) Bell was single. 
c) Bell was entitled to one exemption. 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 3 
 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of: 
 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 22; 
 
Defendants’ Exhibits B through D; 
 
Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE9; and 
 
Hearing testimony by Bell and Slaichert. 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs—
excluding any assertions based on documents or webpages not in evidence—the 
undersigned makes the following findings of fact. 
A .  
A t o  Z.  
A to Z is a company located in Osage, Iowa  (Hr’g Tr. p. 34) A to Z makes 
chemical compounds such as insecticides primarily for use in agriculture. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
32–33) During the time relevant to this case, A to Z had between 150 and 200 
employees, about 30 to 40 of which were women. (Hr’g Tr. p. 34) Among those 
employees were Bell and Levendusky. A to Z hired Levendusky in April 2014. 
(Levendusky Hr’g Tr. p. 41) And it hired Bell in November 2022. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) 
B . 
S a f e t y  D a t a  S h e e t s  ( S D S s ) .  
A to Z uses Safety Data Sheets (SDS) when determining what personal protective 
equipment (PPE) its employees wear when handling a specific chemical as well as the 
procedures to follow when handling and disposing of it. (Ex. D, p. 67, Levendusky Hr’g Tr. p. 73) 
At hearing, during direct examination on how A to Z uses an SDS in its operation, defense 
counsel (Q) and Nicholas Harbach (A) engaged in the following exchange: 
Q.     
And how influential is the SDS when designing a safety program or protocol or 
something like that? 
A.     
 It’s everything, really. We do extensive training on that, and so much of the 
worldwide, they call it global harmonized system, is based on what’s provided on the 
SDS, so it’s ultimately incredibly important. 
(Ex. D, p. 67, Levendusky Hr’g Tr. p. 73) 
Federal regulations promulgated by the federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) govern hazard communication. See 29 CFR § 1910.1200. 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 4 
 
OSHA promulgated these rules “to ensure that the hazards of all chemicals produced or 
imported are classified, and that information concerning the classified hazards is 
transmitted to employers and employees” with the intent to impose standards 
“consistent with the provisions of the United Nations Globally Harmonized System of 
Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS).” Id., at § 1910.1200(a)(1). “The 
transmittal of information is to be accomplished by means of comprehensive hazard 
communication programs, which are to include container labeling and other forms of 
warning, safety data sheets and employee training.” Id. The standard “is intended to 
address comprehensively the issue of classifying the potential hazards of chemicals, 
and communicating information concerning hazards and appropriate protective 
measures to employees, and to preempt any legislative or regulatory enactments of a 
state, or political subdivision of a state, pertaining to” hazard communication. Id., at § 
1910.1200(a)(2). 
The OSHA hazard communication standard “requires chemical manufacturers or 
importers to classify the hazards of chemicals which they produce or import, and all 
employers to provide information to their employees about the hazardous chemicals to 
which they are exposed, by means of a hazard communication program, labels and 
other forms of warning, safety data sheets, and information and training.” Id., § 
1910.1200(b)(1). As well, it “requires distributors to transmit the required information to 
employers.” Id. The hazard communication standard “applies to any chemical which is 
known to be present in the workplace in such a manner that employees may be 
exposed under normal conditions of use or in a foreseeable emergency.” Id., § 
1910.1200(b)(2). 
Under 29 CFR section 1910.1200(c)(iii), “Safety data sheet (SDS) means written 
or printed material concerning a hazardous chemical that is prepared in accordance 
with paragraph (g) of this section.” Section 1910.1200(g)(1) provides, “Chemical 
manufacturers and importers shall obtain or develop a safety data sheet for each 
hazardous chemical they produce or import. Employers shall have a safety data sheet 
in the workplace for each hazardous chemical which they use.” Each SDS must be in 
English.” Id., at § 1910.1200(g)(2). The regulations set forth the section titles and 
numbering that must be used in each SDS. Id., at §§ 1910.1200(g)(2)(i)–(xvi). 
The chemical manufacturer, importer or employer preparing the safety 
data sheet shall ensure that the information provided accurately reflects 
the scientific evidence used in making the hazard classification. If the 
chemical manufacturer, importer or employer preparing the safety data 
sheet becomes newly aware of any significant information regarding the 
hazards of a chemical, or ways to protect against the hazards, this new 
information shall be added to the safety data sheet within three months. If 
the chemical is not currently being produced or imported, the chemical 
manufacturer or importer shall add the information to the safety data sheet 
before the chemical is introduced into the workplace again. 
Id., at § 1910.1200(g)(5). 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Appendix D to section 1910.1200 identifies the mandatory contents of SDSs and 
states, “While each section of the SDS must contain all of the specified information, 
preparers of safety data sheets are not required to present the information in any 
particular order within each section. If no relevant information is found for any given 
subheading within a section, the SDS shall clearly indicate that no applicable 
information is available. Sections 12–15 may be included in the SDS, but are not 
mandatory.” 
Pertinent to this case are the portions of “Table D.1—Minimum Information for an 
SDS” that address carcinogens. Under the table, Section 11 must contain certain 
toxicological information. And section 11(f) must provide “[w]hether the hazardous 
chemical is listed in the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens 
(latest edition) or has been found to be a potential carcinogen in the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs (latest edition), or by OSHA.” 
C . 
M i m i c  &  Te b u f e n oz i d e .  
One of the products that Levendusky and Bell worked on during their time at A to 
Z was Mimic 2LV (Mimic). The primary active ingredient in Mimic is Tebufenozide. 
Mimic is an insecticide used primarily in forestry to target gypsy moths. Mimic kills gypsy 
moths by targeting the endocrine system. 
The SDS for Tebufenozide and the one for Mimic section 2.2 includes the hazard 
statement, “May cause damage to organs (Blood system, liver, kidney) through 
prolonged or repeated exposure,” and, “Very toxic to aquatic life with long lasting 
effects.” (Ex. 2, p. 4; Ex. 3, p. 17) The precautionary statement under section 2.3 of the 
Mimic SDS advises: 
Do not breathe mist/vapors/spray 
Wash hands and face thoroughly after handling 
Do not eat, drink or smoke when using this product 
Avoid release to the environment 
(Ex. 2, p. 4) The Tebufenozide SDS advises not to breathe dust and avoid release to the 
environment. (Ex. 3, p. 17) 
Section 11 of each SDS contains toxicological information in accordance with Table D.1 
of 29 CFR 1910.1200. Under the subheading “Carcinogenicity – Active Ingredient,” the Mimic 
SDS states: 
Negative (rat) 
Negative (mouse) 
NTP: not listed 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 6 
 
IARC Monograph: not listed 
ACGIH Regulated: not listed 
Tebufenozide and glycerin did not cause cancer in laboratory animals. 
(Ex. 2, p. 9) Similarly, the Tebufenozide SDS states under the subheading, “Carcinogenicity,” 
that it was negative for rat and mouse and not listed in the NTP, IARC Monograph, or ACGIH 
Regulated. (Ex. 3, p. 21) 
The weight of the evidence establishes that the SDSs for Tebufenozide and 
Mimic comply with applicable OSHA regulations and therefore the United Nations 
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS). There 
is no indication in the record that either Tebufenozide or Mimic have ever been listed as 
a potential carcinogen in the NTP Report on Carcinogens, the IARC Monograph, or by 
OSHA. Rather, the evidence shows it is more likely than not that neither Tebufenozide 
nor Mimic has been identified as a potential carcinogen by the NTP, IARC, or OSHA. 
This fact is compelling because it shows it is more likely than not that the international 
community has not discovered a link between cancer and Tebufenozide or Mimic that is 
strong enough to merit NTP, IARC, or OSHA identifying either as a potential 
carcinogen. 
D . 
B e l l .  
Bell was 29 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hr’g Tr. p. 24) He graduated 
from Iowa State University with a Bachelor of Science degree in chemical engineering in 
2018. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32; Ex. 20, p. 227) A to Z hired Bell shortly after he graduated from 
college and he was excited for the opportunity. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) 
A to Z hired Bell to work as a dryer supervisor. (Hr’g Tr. p. 35) Bell quickly 
worked his way up the corporate ladder with promotions to dryer manager and process 
engineer manager in April 2022. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 35–36) With this last promotion, Bell’s 
office moved to the ESD building, where A to Z formulated Mimic. (Hr’g Tr. p. 36) His 
job duties as process engineer manager included overseeing equipment, managing a 
team of employees, planning and scheduling production, standardizing procedures, and 
helping to determine how to formulate new products. (Hr’g Tr. p. 37)  
Bell participated in the formulation of Mimic on one occasion during his 
employment with A to Z. (Hr’g Tr. p. 40) A to Z typically formulated Mimic once annually, 
creating multiple batches over a period of about two weeks. (Hr’g Tr. p. 40) Because of 
Bell’s participation, he had firsthand knowledge of the personal protective equipment 
(PPE) A to Z workers wore while formulating the product: 
 Full body suits; 
 Gloves; 
 Anti-static booties over their footwear; and 
 Forced air respirators. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 40–41) 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Bell personally took the additional precaution of using tape to create a seal between his 
gloves and body suit as well as his anti-static booties and body suit. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 40–41) 
A to Z only required PPE during the formulation of Mimic. (Hr’g Tr. p. 41) Even 
though Tebufenozide stuck to surfaces throughout the formulation area, A to Z did not 
require PPE for workers in the ESD building. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 41–43; Ex. 20, p. 233 (Depo. 
Tr. pp. 33–34)) And A to Z did not require PPE for handling the final product of Mimic in 
its liquid form. (Hr’g Tr. p. 41)  
After the completion of Mimic formulation, A to Z cleaned the ESD building in 
May 2021. (Hr’g Tr. p. 43–44) As discussed above, Mimic and Tebufenozide pose a 
serious risk to aquatic life, which precludes simply washing the formulation process 
remnants down a drain. (Hr’g Tr. p. 45) Rather, A to Z workers washed off the 
equipment and sprayed the waste material into 50-gallon drums held beneath the floor. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 45)  The process took a couple of weeks. (Hr’g Tr. p. 47) The cleanup 
focused on the equipment and not on other places where the tacky Tebufenozide 
powder had stuck. 
During this post-production cleanup process, Bell worked in his ESD building 
office. (Hr’g Tr. p. 43–44) At one point, vapor from the cleanup seeped into his office, 
causing him to feel dizzy and nauseous. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 43–44) His symptoms were 
severe enough to necessitate steadying himself using his desk and a nearby wall. (Hr’g 
Tr. pp. 43–44)  
Bell later discussed the experience with Halbach and George Weber, a vice 
president at A to Z. (Hr’g Tr. p. 44) He requested that he be excused from formulating 
Mimic in the future. (Hr’g Tr. p. 44) A to Z granted his request. (Hr’g Tr. p. 44)  
There is no indication in the record that Bell experienced dizziness or nausea in 
his ESD building office during the formulation of Mimic. The weight of the evidence 
establishes that he did not experience such symptoms until the post-production 
cleanup. There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude that 
Tebufenozide or Mimic caused Bell’s symptoms as opposed to the compounds used to 
clean or a combination of those compounds and Mimic or one of its components. The 
timing of the onset of Bell’s symptoms suggests that the most likely cause was the 
equipment cleaning process. 
Bell described the storage arrangement for Mimic and its post-production waste. 
The post-production waste would stay in drums in the ESD building until A to Z had 
workers available to use a sump pump to move it into totes that are white plastic and 
square in shape. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 45, 47, 53; Ex. 5, p. 32) Then the totes would sit in the 
ESD building for weeks or months until they could be transported for incineration. (Hr’g 
Tr. pp. 45, 47) Bell’s testimony indicated that A to Z moved the totes of Mimic post-
production waste for storage within the ESD building but did not describe where this 
storage area was located relative to his office there. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 47–54) 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 8 
 
In or around October of 2022, Bell fainted at home. (Hr’g Tr. p. 55) He then 
scheduled an appointment to see his personal physician. (Hr’g Tr. p. 55) At the time, 
Bell was experiencing groin pain and his right testicle was unusually firm. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
55–56) After an ultrasound, Bell was diagnosed with testicular cancer and referred to 
Christopher Adams, M.D., an urologist. (Hr’g Tr. p. 56; Ex. JE 1, p. 3; Ex. JE2, p. 10) Dr. 
Adams performed surgery to remove Bell’s right testicle. (Hr’g Tr. p. 56; Ex. JE2, p. 10) 
After the surgery, Dr. Adams referred Bell to oncology. (Ex. JE6, pp. 88–89, 97) 
Bell had a port implanted in his chest for chemotherapy. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 56–57; Ex. JE 6, 
pp. 102–04) From February to April in 2023, Bell was off work while undergoing a nine-
week chemotherapy cycle. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 58–59; Ex. JE6, pp. 105–22) During the 
chemotherapy cycle, Bell experienced fatigue, nausea, vomiting, gastrointestinal issues, 
bone pain, ringing in his ears, and fever. (Hr’g Tr. p. 58) Chemotherapy also caused 
neuropathy in his hands and toes. (Hr’g Tr. p. 58) Bell gained approximately 50 pounds 
due to inactivity during the chemotherapy cycle. (Hr’g Tr. p. 60) 
Doctors ultimately found Bell to be cancer free. (Hr’g Tr. p. 59) Nonetheless, he 
must continue oncological care to ensure the cancer does not return. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 66–
68) His ongoing care consists of regular checkups, imaging, and testing that will 
gradually reduce in frequency if he remains cancer free. (Hr’g Tr. p. 67) 
After the conclusion of chemotherapy, he has continued to experience ringing in 
his ears, neuropathy, tinnitus, anxiety, and depression. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 59–60; Ex. JE8, p. 
154) Post-chemotherapy, Bell also experienced an exponential increase in symptoms in 
his right arm, which he fractured while wrestling in 2019. (Hr’g Tr. p. 60) Moreover, Bell 
developed back pain, the cause of which doctors identified as a bulging disc. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
60) 
After extended discussions regarding A to Z’s ability to accommodate Bell’s work 
restrictions, he returned to work on June 21, 2023. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 71) A to Z moved Bell’s 
office from the ESD building in order to accommodate the restriction that he not work in 
proximity to Mimic. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 71–72) Bell testified credibly that A to Z significantly 
changed his job duties after his return from leave—specifically, after Bell attempted to 
perform the job duties he had performed before his cancer diagnosis and treatment, 
Jason Penfold, A to Z president, instructed him “to stop right away and that there were 
many other people ahead of him to do the job.” (Ex. 20, p. 235, Depo. Tr. p. 41) This 
dynamic was the result of A to Z hiring three new engineers while Bell was on leave. 
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 72, 112–13) Bell had so little to do that he felt compelled to make work for 
himself. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 73–74; Ex. 20, p. 235, Depo. Tr. p. 41) In addition to limiting Bell’s 
job duties, A to Z also reassigned the on-call duties he had prior to his cancer diagnosis 
and treatment, which resulted in reduced pay. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 74–75) Ultimately, Bell 
submitted a letter of resignation on July 31, 2023, and his last day of employment with A 
to Z was August 11, 2023. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 73–74, 116–17; Ex. 15, p. 131) 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 9 
 
E . 
L e v e n d us k y.  
Levendusky was one of Bell’s coworkers at A to Z. (Hr’g Tr. p. 68) He worked in 
the formulation of pesticides, including Mimic. (Hr’g Tr. p. 68) Six months prior to Bell’s 
diagnosis of Pure Seminoma, Levendusky was diagnosed with the same testicular 
cancer. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 67–68)  
F .  
C a u s a t i o n .  
On March 6, 2023, claimant’s counsel conferenced with Rodrigo Erlick, M.D., an 
oncologist with MercyOne North Iowa Medical Center. (Ex. 9, p. 45) Claimant’s counsel 
sent Dr. Erlich a letter dated March 7, 2023, stating his understanding of Dr. Erlich’s 
opinions based on their conversation. (Ex. 9, p. 45) Dr. Erlich signed a letter indicating 
that he agreed with the following with respect to Bell’s cancer: 
Bell worked as a chemical engineer at A to Z Drying. You had also been 
provided with a copy of the Safety Data Sheet (SDS) for Mimic 2LV 
Insecticide. Having had the opportunity to review that SDS, you are aware 
that this chemical contains a Hazard Identification for “Specific Target 
Organ Toxicity (Repeated Exposure),” and that it is hazardous to aquatic 
life (Page 1 of 14). The SDS for the chemical also contains a Hazard 
Statement that it: “May cause damage to organs (Blood system, liver, 
kidney) through prolonged or repeated exposure” and further cautions to 
“not breath [sic] mist/vapors/spray” and “[a]void release to the 
environment.” (page 2 [o]f 14). Finally, the chemical’s active ingredient, 
Tebufenozide, is a known endocrine disrupting chemical. 
With further regard to the above, you are aware that studies have shown 
prevalence and risk in humans of developing testicular dysfunction or 
cancer in areas with distinct exposure to pesticides, which have endocrine 
disrupting properties. Moreover, occupational exposure to pesticides have 
been identified as a major trigger of the development of cancer, causing 
intoxication in the individuals who manipulate them through either 
inhalation, ingestion, or dermal contact. Stated plainly, you explained that 
the endocrine system is a system of glands; that testicles are glands; and 
that pesticides like Mimic can affect the health and function of the testicle 
(i.e., male gonads). 
Based on the foregoing, you believe it is more likely than not (51% or 
greater) that Mr. Bell’s exposure to Mimic 2LV Insecticide while working at 
A to Z Drying resulted in the development of his Stage IIC seminoma 
testicular cancer. 
(Ex. 9, p. 45)  
Claimant’s counsel then conferenced with Dr. Adams on April 12, 2023, and sent a letter 
dated that same day summarizing his understanding of the doctor’s opinions. (Ex. 10, p. 47) On 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 10 
 
April 15, 2023, Dr. Adams signed a letter authored by Bell’s attorney in which he expressed his 
agreement with the contents of the letter signed by Dr. Erlich. (Ex. 10, pp. 47–48) The letter also 
stated that two employees working for the same employer, which has between 150 and 200 
employees, developing the type of testicular cancer with which Bell and Levendusky were 
diagnosed would be “exceedingly rare.” (Ex. 10, p. 47) Based on Dr. Erlich’s opinion and the low 
probability of two coworkers developing the testicular cancer with which Bell and Levendusky 
were diagnosed so close in time, Dr. Adams opined it is more likely than not the work 
environment at A to Z was a cause of their cancer. (Ex. 10, pp. 47–48) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Bell to undergo an IME with Paul Conte, M.D., on May 
2, 2024. (Ex. 12, p. 52) The IME included a review of Bell’s medical records, a review of articles 
relating to pesticides causing cancer, a history with Bell, and in-person physical examination. 
(Ex. 12, pp. 52–55) On the question of causation, Dr. Conte opined: 
Mr. Bell had substantial exposure to Mimic 2LV insecticide for the gypsy 
moth larvae and while he did wear PPE while he was directly working with 
it, he had a continual exposure to it at other times just during his office 
work as his office was in the area and there was a persistent exposure 
that would be implicated as being a substantially causal factor in the 
development of his right testicular seminoma. While Mimic 2LV has not 
been shown to be a direct testicular cancer causing agent on the SDS, 
this data is incomplete and Mr. Bell’s testicular cancer is a very unusual 
cancer with the incidence of 5 cases in 100,000 population of men age 20-
40. Given that there have been 2 cases of testicular seminoma in 
employees exposed to the agent while working at A to Z Drying, the 
statistical probability of it occurring from simply random chance is unlikely 
and it is more likely a statistical and scientific basis to be related to his 
exposure to Mimic 2LV. Therefore, within a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty, his exposure while working at A to Z Drying to Mimic 2LV was a 
substantial causal contributing or aggravating factor to his development of 
testicular seminoma. 
(Ex. 12, p. 56) Dr. Conte further elaborated that “based on evaluation of the scientific 
literature that suggests that Mimic 2LV does have endocrine disrupting behaviors when 
organisms are exposed to it in animal studies.” (Ex. 12, p. 56)  
Dr. Conte’s opinion is based primarily on the low level of statistical probability 
that two coworkers would be diagnosed within six months of one another with testicular 
seminoma. He recognizes that Mimic “has not been shown to be a direct testicular 
cancer causing agent on the SDS” and then makes the conclusory assertion that “the 
data is incomplete” without elaborating as to why it is incomplete before further stating 
that Mimic has “endocrine disrupting behaviors when organisms are exposed to it in 
animal studies.” (Ex. 12, p. 56) Dr. Conte’s report reflects what the totality of the 
evidence in this case establishes: There is no scientific evidence establishing a link 
between Tebufenozide or Mimic and cancer in animals or humans. Showing that 
Tebufenozide and Mimic disrupt the endocrine system in some organisms is not enough 
to establish a causal link between either substance and the development of testicular 
seminoma in humans. 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 Defense counsel arranged for Paul Gellahus, M.D., to perform a review of Bell’s 
records and issue a report. (Ex. B, pp. 20–21) Dr. Gellhaus provided his opinion in a 
report dated May 17, 2023. (Ex. B, pp. 22–25) On causation, Dr. Gellhaus opined: 
To the nearest degree of medical certainty, the alleged employment 
related exposure to Mimic 2LV (Tebufenozide) Insecticide did not cause 
his testicular seminoma. This opinion is based on several factors: 
 Mimic 2LV is not a known testicular carcinogenic agent per SDS. 
 He appeared to wear proper protective equipment include PPE, 
respirator, etc. per nonmedical documentation. 
 No other symptoms/signs of exposure from pesticides per medical 
records. 
 Semen analysis AFTER orchiectomy had some lower values 
but normal overall counts and morphology and without 
significant ‘testicular endocrine dysfunction’. 
 Testicular cancer is uncommon in the general population, but its 
highest prevalence is in 20-40 year olds and white men, which I 
assume describes the place of employment. This assumes the 
majority of the employees are between 20-50 years old and has 
similar ethnical background to the general population in Iowa 
(~90% white). 
 While having two men develop this cancer in the same work place 
is unlikely it would not be described as “exceedingly rare” given the 
age, gender, race under the above mentioned assumptions. 
(Ex. B, pp. 24) 
Because Dr. Erlich, Dr. Adams, and Dr. Conte’s opinions do not address the fact 
that the SDSs for Tebufenozide and Mimic state they have not been identified as a 
possible carcinogen by NTP, IARC, or OSHA, or the lack of other signs or symptoms of 
pesticide exposure, their opinions are unpersuasive. Dr. Gellhaus’s opinion, which 
reflects a more complete understanding of the SDSs on whether Tebufenozide or Mimic 
is a possible carcinogen and Bell’s lack of signs or symptoms of pesticide exposure, is 
more persuasive.  Bell has failed to meet his burden of proof. There is an insufficient 
basis in the evidence from which to conclude Bell’s work at A to Z was a causal factor in 
his development of testicular cancer. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
The legislature enacted the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 85, for injuries arising out of and in the course of employment. It passed the 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Iowa Occupational Disease Law, Iowa Code chapter 85A, to govern occupational 
diseases. Both statutory schemes are enforced by the agency. See Iowa Code § 86.8. 
The laws present an either-or proposition for compensation. See IBP, Inc. v. 
Burress, 779 N.W.2d 210, 214 (Iowa 2010). The statutory definition of “injury” or 
“personal injury” under chapter 85 excludes occupational diseases under chapter 85A. 
Iowa Code § 85.61(4)(b). Section 85A.8 defines “occupational disease” as follows: 
Occupational diseases shall be only those diseases which arise out of and 
in the course of the employee’s employment. Such diseases shall have a 
direct causal connection with the employment and must have followed as 
a natural incident thereto from injurious exposure occasioned by the 
nature of the employment. Such disease must be incidental to the 
character of the business, occupation or process in which the employee 
was employed and not independent of the employment. Such disease 
need not have been foreseen or expected but after its contraction it must 
appear to have had its origin in a risk connected with the employment and 
to have resulted from that source as an incident and rational 
consequence. A disease which follows from a hazard to which an 
employee has or would have been equally exposed outside of said 
occupation is not compensable as an occupational disease. 
Iowa Code § 85A.8. 
With respect to this definition, the Iowa Supreme Court has held, “The term 
‘exposure’ indicates a passive relationship between the worker and his work 
environment rather than an event or occurrence, or series of occurrences, which 
constitute injury under the Worker's Compensation Act.” Burress, 779 N.W.2d at 215 
(quoting Noble v. Lamoni Prods., 512 N.W.2d 290, 295 (Iowa 1994). 
“[A]n ‘injury’ is distinguished from a ‘disease’ by virtue of the fact that an 
injury has its origin in a specific identifiable trauma or physical occurrence 
or, in the case of repetitive trauma, a series of such occurrences. A 
disease, on the other hand, originates from a source that is neither 
traumatic nor physical....” 
Id. at 215 (quoting Noble, 512 N.W.2d at 295). 
Despite the differences in applicability, both chapter 85 and 85A include the 
express textual requirement that, in order to be compensable under the law, an 
employee’s injury, condition, or disease must arise: 
1) Out of the claimant’s employment; and 
 
2) In the course of the claimant’s employment. Iowa Code §§ 85.3(1), 85A.8; 
see also St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); 
Burress, 779 N.W.2d at 214.  

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 “‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 
169, 174 (Iowa 2007) (quoting Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 
1996)). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an injury to be deemed 
compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this case, the parties 
dispute whether the injury arose out of employment. 
A disease arises out of employment if there is a causal connection between it 
and the employment. Iowa Code § 85A.8. “‘In other words, the injury must not have 
coincidentally occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to 
the working environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 
174. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). “When one speaks of an event “arising out 
of employment,” the initiative, the moving force, is something other than the 
employment; the employment is thought of more as a condition out of which the event 
arises than as the force producing the event in affirmative fashion.” Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 
710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s 
Workers’ Compensation Law (2005) § 3.06, at 3-7 to 3-8 (emphasis in original)). 
“Medical causation presents a question of fact.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. 
Pease, 807 N.W2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2011). The answer to this question lies “‘essentially 
within the domain of expert testimony.’” Id. at 845 (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire. & 
Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency may accept or reject an 
expert opinion in whole or in part. Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 
560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 752 
(Iowa 2002)). In doing so, the agency “has the duty to determine the credibility of the 
witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and 
circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
The agency determines the weight to give an expert opinion based on consideration of: 
1) “[T]he accuracy of the facts relied upon by the expert,” Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d 
at 560 (quoting Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752); 
 
2) “[T]he completeness of the premise given the expert,” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d 
at 853; and 
3) “[O]ther surrounding circumstances,” id. 
Medical causation disputes can take two forms under Iowa workers’ 
compensation law. One is whether the injury arises out of an actual risk of the 
claimant’s employment. See Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 85–86 (Iowa 
2018); see also Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173–74 (Iowa 2007); Meyer 
v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006); Almquist v. Shenandoah Nurseries, 254 
N.W. 35 (Iowa 1934). The other is whether the injury caused a compensable disability. 
See Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 560 (quoting Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752). In this 
case, the parties dispute medical causation—specifically, whether Bell’s testicular 
cancer arose out of his employment with A to Z. 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 “A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary.” Frye v. 
Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa App. 1997) (citing Schofield v. 
White, 250 Iowa 571, 95 N.W.2d 40 (Iowa 1959) and Holmes v. Bruce Motor Freight, 
Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). The claimant must prove by a preponderance 
of the evidence that the employment in question was a substantial factor in bringing 
about the injury or condition alleged in the petition. See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 64 (Iowa 1981). To be a substantial factor, employment need 
only be one cause—not the only cause—of the alleged injury or condition. See id. 
It is possible that Bell’s testicular cancer arose out of his employment with A to Z, 
but that is not the standard governing causation in this case. Bell has the burden to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that exposure during his employment with A 
to Z caused his cancer. As found above, he failed to meet this burden. There is an 
insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Bell’s cancer was caused by 
exposure during his employment with A to Z. 
Causation is a threshold question in workers’ compensation cases. The 
causation conclusion is dispositive on the other disputed issues in this case. Because 
Bell failed to meet his burden of proof on causation, this decision does not address 
those issues.  
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Bell shall take nothing more from this case. 
2) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this 30th day of April, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Nicholas Shaull, Attorney for Claimant 
Laura Ostrander, Attorney for Defendants 

BELL V. A TO Z DRYING, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compenation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Divisionwithin 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
