Case Number: 1652763.01
Case Title:  DAVIS, JAMIE V. GORDON FOOD - IOWA CHAIN
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Davis, Jamie-1652763.01.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 22-1944 
Filed February 21, 2024 
 
 
JAMIE L. DAVIS, 
 
Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
GORDON FOOD SERVICE, INC., and STANDARD FIRE INSURANCE CO., 
 
Respondents-Appellees. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Michael D. Huppert, 
Judge. 
 
 
A claimant appeals from judicial review following denial of his workers’ 
compensation claim.  AFFIRMED. 
 
 
Jacob M. Oeth of Dickey, Campbell & Sahag Law Firm, PLC, Des Moines, 
for appellant. 
 
Jean Z. Dickson of Betty, Neuman & McMahon, P.L.C., Davenport, for 
appellee. 
 
 
Considered by Tabor, P.J., Buller, J., and Mullins, S.J.* 
 
*Senior judge assigned by order pursuant to Iowa Code section 602.9206 
(2024). 
 

 
2
BULLER, Judge. 
 
Jamie Davis appeals from judicial review following the workers’ 
compensation commissioner’s denial of his claim due to a drug test positive for 
methamphetamine and amphetamines.  Davis asserts the commissioner and 
district court erred in their interpretation of Iowa’s private-employer drug-testing 
law and the presumptions afforded positive drug tests under the workers’ 
compensation statute.  We find the district court and commissioner correctly 
interpreted the relevant statutes and substantial evidence supports the 
commissioner’s factual determinations.   
I. 
Background Facts and Proceedings 
 
Davis was a truck driver for Gordon Food Service, Inc. (Gordon Foods), a 
food distributor.  His regular route took him from Des Moines to Sioux City and 
back, twice each week.  At the first stop of his route in Sioux City, Davis usually 
moved between 200 and 300 pounds of dry goods and frozen food up stairs using 
a handcart.  During one of those stops in August 2018, David was unloading when 
his back “gave out.”  He fell to the ground, was unable to stand for more than half 
an hour, and he required assistance to get back to his truck.  
 
Davis contacted his supervisor and an injury hotline, which directed him to 
a Sioux City clinic.  Doctors at the clinic evaluated Davis for his injury and 
administered a drug test as required by company policy for any employee injured 
on the job.  Davis tested positive for methamphetamine and amphetamines.  The 
test utilized a single urine sample, rather than a split sample.  Because the sample 
was not split, Davis could not pursue a second, independent confirmatory test.  

 
3
See Iowa Code § 730.5(7)(b) (2018).1  Davis signed a written consent form at the 
clinic, agreeing the sample had not been tampered with or altered and that it was 
sealed in his presence.  Despite relying on a single urine sample, the physician 
who analyzed the sample opined that the testing methodology eliminated the 
potential for false positives.  The same physician explained he had no concerns 
about collection methods or chain of custody, and he believed the test to be valid.  
After providing the sample, Davis drove himself back to Des Moines. 
 
In Davis’s sworn testimony, he admitted he “had problems” with 
methamphetamine and was not entirely surprised by the positive drug test.  He 
had served time in federal prison for drug-related charges and was on parole at 
the time of the injury.  As part of that parole, he submitted to drug testing twice a 
month.  And the drug-testing at issue in this case led to a federal court finding a 
parole violation that warranted additional incarceration.  In sworn testimony, Davis 
admitted to using methamphetamine three or four days before he got hurt.  He 
testified that a “meth high” usually lasts “six to eight hours” and affects his mental 
status, motor functions, coordination, and decision-making.  He maintained, 
however, that he was not “high on meth” the day he was injured, and no one made 
observations that would indicate otherwise.   
 
Davis filed a petition in arbitration with the Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation against Gordon Foods and its workers’ compensation insurance 
carrier.  Both organizations answered denying the claim.  The parties stipulated 
 
1 Although the arbitration petition and judicial review petition are governed by later 
versions of the Iowa Code, the relevant statutes did not substantively change 
between Davis’s injury and when they would apply.  Therefore, we limit our citation 
to the 2018 version of the Iowa Code for readability. 

 
4
that Davis was injured during the course of employment.  The fighting issues, as 
relevant to this appeal, were whether the testing procedures violated Iowa’s 
private-employer drug-testing law and whether Davis overcame the presumption 
of intoxication under the workers’ compensation statute. 
 
A deputy workers’ compensation commissioner found the drug-testing law 
did not bar admission of the drug tests and Davis did not overcome the 
presumption of intoxication.  Davis appealed to the commissioner, who affirmed 
that the private-employer drug-testing law “does not apply in workers’ 
compensation cases in Iowa” and that Davis “failed to overcome the 
section 85.16(2) presumption that [his] intoxication was a substantial factor in 
causing the work injury.” 
 
Davis petitioned for judicial review, challenging application of the private-
employer drug-testing statute and the commissioner’s decision on the intoxication 
presumption.  The district court affirmed the commissioner, finding that the private-
employer drug-testing statute does not apply to workers’ compensation cases and 
deferring to the credibility determinations and fact-finding of the commissioner on 
the intoxication issue.  Davis appeals. 
II. 
Standard of Review 
This case is before us under Iowa Code chapter 17A, the Iowa 
Administrative Procedure Act.  See Iowa Code § 86.26; Chavez v. MS Tech. 
LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 666 (Iowa 2022).  Under chapter 17A, we may only interfere 
with an agency decision if it is erroneous under one of the grounds enumerated in 
the statute and a party’s substantial rights have been prejudiced.  Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10).  For example, we must reverse if the agency’s decision was 

 
5
“unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.”  Id. 
§ 17A.19(10)(n). 
 
To the extent our review turns on interpretation of the workers’ 
compensation statute, interpretation has not been vested with the agency and we 
do not defer to the agency’s legal conclusions.  See id. § 17A.19(10)(c), (11)(b); 
Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 666; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016).  Instead, we correct errors at law.  Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10)(c); Green v. N. Cent. Iowa Reg’l Solid Waste Auth., 989 
N.W.2d 144, 147 (Iowa 2023). 
 
Our review of the facts is limited to review for substantial evidence.  See 
Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f); Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 666; Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  “Substantial evidence” is “the quantity and quality 
of evidence that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and 
reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the consequences resulting 
from the establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of great 
importance.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(1).  In conducting this review, “we give 
due regard to the commissioner’s discretion to accept or reject testimony based 
on his [or her] assessment of witness credibility.”  Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care 
Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 558 (Iowa 2010); accord ConAgra Foods, Inc. v. Moore, 
No. 21-0339, 2022 WL 1658707, at *3 (Iowa Ct. App. May 25, 2022) (“[T]he 
reviewing court only determines whether substantial evidence supports a finding 
according to those witnesses whom the commissioner believed.”) 

 
6
III. 
Discussion 
 
Davis challenges whether Iowa Code section 730.5’s regulation of private-
employer drug-testing applies to workers’ compensation proceedings and, if so, 
whether he was able to rebut the statutory presumption in section 85.16 that he 
was intoxicated at the time of the injury.  We affirm on both issues. 
A.  Drug Testing Under Section 730.5 
 
Iowa Code section 730.5 is titled: “Private sector drug-free workplaces.”  
The section regulates drug-testing in private workplaces and specifically exempts 
“the state, a political subdivision of the state, including a city, county, or school 
district, the United States, the United States postal service, or a Native American 
tribe.”  Iowa Code § 730.5(1)(e).  One of the requirements imposed by the section 
is that test administrators must obtain a “split sample” at the time of testing, such 
that there is sufficient quantity for both the employer’s testing sample and a 
“second, independent confirmatory test” if the employee requests independent 
testing.  Id. § 730.5(7)(b).  We must decide whether this provision applies to 
workers’ compensation proceedings; the district court and commissioner held it 
does not. 
 
Davis argues that section 730.5 applies here based on legislative history, 
emphasizing the repeal of a provision exempting testing for workers’ compensation 
benefits in 1998 and the silence of the 2017 re-write of chapter 85 on how to drug-
test, while simultaneously adding a presumption of disqualification based on test 
results.  See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23, § 1; 1998 Iowa Acts, ch. 1011, § 1; 1987 Iowa 
Acts ch. 208, § 1; see also Iowa Code § 4.6(3) (noting that we may look to 
legislative history if we find a statute ambiguous).  Davis also points to case law 

 
7
applying section 730.5 in unemployment proceedings before the Employment 
Appeal Board (EAB), which is housed along with the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner in the Iowa Department of Workforce Development (IWD).  See 
Iowa Code § 84A.1 (describing the department of workforce development’s 
director and divisions); Harrison v. Emp’t Appeal Bd., 659 N.W.2d 581, 589 
(Iowa 2003) (applying section 730.5 to prohibit denial of unemployment claim 
based on drug test that did not comply with statute); Eaton v. Iowa Emp’t Appeal 
Bd., 602 N.W.2d 553, 556–57 (Iowa 1999) (same). 
 
Gordon Foods, like Davis, also points to legislative history—but urges the 
opposite conclusion.  Gordon Foods argues the General Assembly was aware of 
section 730.5 when it added the presumption regarding testing and intoxication in 
2017 and maintains the lack of incorporation or cross-reference reflects a 
deliberate legislative omission.  Gordon Foods also contends the interpretation 
advanced by Davis could not have been intended by the General Assembly, as 
section 730.5 only applies to private employers and applying the statute in workers’ 
compensation cases would lead to disparate results between private and public 
employees.  In short, Gordon Foods argues, “Iowa Code section 730.5 is a 
separate and distinct employment statute,” with no remedy in the realm of workers’ 
compensation. 
 
We, like the district court and the commissioner, think Gordon Foods has 
the better argument.  The 2017 amendments to the workers’ compensation statute 
were significant and overhauled many aspects of the chapter.  See Brewer-Strong 
v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 249 (Iowa 2018) (noting that “[l]ast year, the 
legislature made significant changes to much of the workers’ compensation 

 
8
scheme set forth in Iowa Code chapter 85” and recognizing the presumption that 
the General Assembly was aware of existing law when amending the statute).  We 
consider both what the General Assembly said and what it did not say.  Eaton, 602 
N.W.2d at 556 (describing “the rule that legislative intent is expressed by omission 
as well as by inclusion” (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
 
The elected branches spoke expressly by codifying that intoxication proven 
by a “positive test result” is presumed to establish “the employee was intoxicated 
at the time of the injury and that intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the 
injury.”  Iowa Code § 85.16(2)(b)(1).  They did not include any reference to 
regulations for drug-testing, whether by cross-reference to section 730.5 or 
otherwise.  See State v. Lopez, 907 N.W.2d 112, 120 (Iowa 2018) (“In interpreting 
[a] statute, we also consider the overall structure and context of the statute, not 
just specific words or phrases in a vacuum.”); see also Marx v. Gen. Revenue 
Corp., 568 U.S. 371, 381 (2013) (“The force of any negative implication, however, 
depends on context.”).  We presume this omission deliberate.  Also, while not 
dispositive to our analysis, we recognize the potential constitutional difficulties that 
would arise if the commissioner applied section 730.5 to private employers and not 
public employers, despite both being otherwise similarly situated under the 
workers’ compensation statute.  See Simmons v. State Pub. Def., 791 
N.W.2d 69, 74 (Iowa 2010) (“If fairly possible, a statute will be construed to avoid 
doubt as to constitutionality.”).  Likewise, the cases cited by Davis for the contrary 
proposition both contained an analysis of section 730.5 in unemployment, rather 
than workers’ compensation, cases. 

 
9
 
Although Davis’s arguments have some appeal, we are not persuaded.  For 
example, we are not convinced the repeal of the workers’ compensation drug-
testing exemption in the 1990s tells us much about how to interpret a statutory 
provision added as part of a comprehensive workers’ compensation overhaul 
in 2017.  We also put little stock in the structural argument about how the Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner and EAB are both divisions of IWD, given each 
agency draws on a different statute for their authority.  See Iowa Code § 10A.601 
(EAB); id. ch. 85 (workers’ compensation).  All agencies are ultimately subunits of 
“the State,” and we would give little credence to the notion that one subunit of the 
State cannot be affected by laws differently than another, particularly when each 
has their own chapter in the Code. 
 
Perhaps the most compelling argument Davis puts forth is that, because 
workplace injuries are discussed in section 730.5(8)(f), allowing private employers 
to violate the statute and still use the test results under section 85.16 is arguably 
“inconsistent” or renders part of the statute superfluous.  But we do not think our 
interpretation renders section 730.5 a nullity.  While there are no restrictions placed 
on drug-test use in workers’ compensation proceedings, section 730.5 places 
restrictions on other employer uses of drug-test results—like in unemployment 
proceedings—and affords a private civil right of action and potential injunctive 
relief.  Iowa Code § 730.5(15)(a)(1).  The section also provides limited 
enforcement authority to the attorney general or her designee, as well as a county 
attorney and his or her designee.  Id. § 730.5(14)(a), (15)(a)(2).  The statute is not, 
as Davis suggests, toothless; it applies to circumstances other than workers’ 
compensation cases. 

 
10 
 
Based on our construction of the statute, we affirm the district court and 
commissioner’s conclusions that section 730.5’s drug-testing restrictions do not 
apply to workers’ compensation cases. 
B.  Evidence Rebutting the Intoxication Presumption 
 
Davis also argues in the alternative that, if section 730.5 does not apply, he 
overcame the presumption of intoxication.  The workers’ compensation statute 
provides: 
 
Once the employer has made a showing [of a positive test 
result] as provided in subparagraph (1), the burden of proof shall be 
on the employee to overcome the presumption by establishing that 
the employee was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, or that 
intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing the injury. 
 
Id. § 85.16(2)(b)(2).  Davis points to his own testimony claiming  he was not 
intoxicated, his experience that a “meth high” would last hours rather than days, 
and that he drove and otherwise behaved without incident around the time of the 
injury.  The deputy commissioner rejected this testimony, which she described as 
“self-serving,” and noted the absence of any expert testimony or independent 
witnesses.  This is a credibility finding, implicit or otherwise, and we defer to it.  See 
Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 558.  The ruling is supported by substantial evidence and 
Davis’s mere disagreement with the conclusion is no basis for reversal. 
 
Last, we note both parties point us to agency orders from other workers’ 
compensation cases, seemingly comparing the facts or outcomes of those cases 
to this one.  We are skeptical we can take judicial notice of other workers’ 
compensation case files.  Cf. 7 Laurie Kratky Doré, Iowa Practice Series: Evidence 
§ 5.201:5 (West 2023) (“[R]ecords in a proceeding before a different court 
ordinarily cannot be judicially noticed.”); see also Empower Pharmacy v. Iowa Bd. 

 
11 
of Pharmacy, No. 22-0052, 2023 WL 1814272, at *8 n.9 (Iowa Ct. App. Feb. 8, 
2023) (noting other cases before administrative agency “are not part of the record 
before us”).  But even assuming we could take judicial notice of orders from other 
cases, we decline to do so here, mindful that a dispositional order from each case 
does not “tell the full story” leading up to that order.  Cf. State v. Washington, 832 
N.W.2d 650, 656 (Iowa 2013) (refusing to take judicial notice of other sentencing 
orders, as they did not “tell the full story” leading up to judgment).  And even if 
these orders were properly before us, unpublished dispositions are never 
controlling and these would not change our analysis of the facts and law in this 
case given the applicable standards of review; even if the commissioner issued 
conflicting decisions on identical facts, we would be bound to affirm in both 
divergent rulings, so long as they were supported by substantial evidence.  See 
Gits Mfg. Co. v. Frank, 855 N.W.2d 195, 197 (Iowa 2014) (“Substantial evidence 
supports an agency’s decision even if the interpretation of the evidence may be 
open to a fair difference of opinion.”). 
IV. 
Disposition 
 
We affirm the district court’s decision on judicial review, finding 
section 730.5 does not apply to workers’ compensation proceedings and 
substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s determination that Davis did not 
rebut the presumption of intoxication. 
 
AFFIRMED. 
 
 
 
 
 
