Case Number: 1659804.03
Case Title:  MARTINEZ MALDONADO, EVA V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Martinez Maldonado Eva-1659804.03d.PDF
========================================================================

 
 
BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
EVA MARTINEZ-MALDONADO, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
File No. 1659804.03 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
     ARBITRATION 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          DECISION 
TYSON FRESH MEATS, 
  : 
 
       
 
 
  :                         
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
   Head Note No(s):1402.20, 1803, 
 
            2502, 3400 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Eva Martinez-Maldonado, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers' 
compensation benefits against defendant, Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc. The hearing 
occurred before the undersigned on December 5, 2024, via Zoom. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. In the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. All of those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 5; Claimant's Exhibits 
1 through 14, and Defendant's Exhibits A through O. Claimant testified on her own 
behalf. Raul Burgos-Rojas also testified on claimant’s behalf. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. Whether claimant has carried her burden of proving a mental health sequela 
injury as a result of the February 2, 2019, work injury;  
 
2. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits;  
 
3. Indemnification; and  
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
examination fee pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-26  16:15:40     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Having considered all of the testimony and evidence in the record, the 
undersigned finds: 
 
On the date of hearing, Eva Martinez-Maldonado was a 43-year-old individual 
living in Storm Lake, Iowa. (Hearing Transcript, pages 14, 18)  Born in Mexico, Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado moved to the United States at the age of 18.  While she can 
understand some spoken English, she has difficulty speaking the English language. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 50-51)  Her primary language is Spanish. 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado seeks an award of workers’ compensation benefits 
resulting from an injury she suffered while in the course of her employment on February 
2, 2019.  On February 2, 2019, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado sustained injuries while 
walking from Tyson Fresh Meats’ employee parking lot to the entrance of the plant to 
begin her work shift.  As she and a group of other employees proceeded along their 
usual route, a truck exited a private parking lot located near Tyson’s security office.  The 
driver of the truck lost control of the vehicle, crashing first into a utility pole and fence.  
Following that initial impact, the driver accelerated the vehicle into the group of 
pedestrians, striking Ms. Martinez-Maldonado and one other individual.  Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado was dragged several feet by the vehicle before it came to a stop after hitting 
a metal parking barricade.  It was later determined that the driver of the truck was under 
the influence of alcohol at the time of the incident. (Claimant’s Exhibit 7, page 70) 
 
Ms. Martinez Maldonado was promptly transported to Buena Vista Regional 
Medical Center. Timothy Taylor, D.O. assessed Ms. Martinez-Maldonado with multiple 
thoracic vertebral fractures, right pneumothorax, and multiple right-sided rib fractures. 
(Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-6)  The decision was made to transfer her to Mercy Medical 
Center in Sioux City. (JE1, p. 13)  At Mercy, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado was further 
assessed with a grade 3 liver laceration. (JE2, p. 86) 
 
Sandra Shumaker, ARNP, conducted a consultation with Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado on February 4, 2019. (JE3, p. 88)  She denied experiencing any 
paresthesias in her lower extremities.  She also denied headaches, neck pain, and 
upper extremity numbness or tingling. (Id.)  Ms. Shumaker prescribed TLSO bracing to 
address the thoracic spine fractures. (JE2, p. 90)  Ms. Shumaker recommended 
continued bed rest for neurologic precautions and opined Ms. Martinez-Maldonado 
would likely require inpatient rehabilitation prior to discharge. (Id.)  It was ultimately 
recommended that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado undergo three hours of physical and 
occupational therapy five days per week. (JE2, p. 93) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado was transferred to inpatient rehabilitation on February 
8, 2019, where she received treatment until February 15, 2019. (Id.) 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Grant Shumaker, M.D., conducted an initial evaluation of Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado on March 1, 2019. (JE3, p. 124)  At the time of the evaluation, Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado was participating in physical therapy and utilizing a TLSO brace.  Dr. 
Shumaker assessed her with adequate pain control with thoracolumbar bracing. (JE4, 
p. 125)   
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado underwent a functional capacity evaluation on 
September 5, 2019. (Ex. 4, p. 38)  The evaluation was deemed consistent and valid. 
(Id.)  She demonstrated the ability to lift and carry 35 pounds on an occasional basis, 
and 20 pounds on a frequent basis. (Id.)  Based on these findings, she demonstrated 
the ability to perform work activities within the light to medium physical demand level.  
She did not display restrictions in nonmaterial handling activities. (Id.)   
 
Dr. Shumaker placed Ms. Martinez-Maldonado at maximum medical 
improvement on November 15, 2019. (JE4, p. 146)  Three days later, Dr. Shumaker 
assigned 10 percent whole person impairment based on the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Defendant’s Exhibit H, page 87) 
 
Defendant issued weekly benefits pursuant to the impairment rating of Dr. 
Shumaker on November 20, 2019. (See Ex. K, p. 91) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado returned to full-time work for Tyson. When Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado returned to work in November 2019, she was “scraping bones and 
using a smaller version of the electric knife.” (Hr. Tr., p. 38)  She estimated that the 
bones she had to pick up weighed between one and two pounds. (Hr. Tr., p. 39)  Tyson 
terminated Ms. Martinez-Maldonado on January 20, 2023, for accumulating excessive 
attendance points.  She asserts that the absences which led to her attendance points 
were due to symptoms from her work injury.  She has not worked for any employer 
since January 2023. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)   
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado returned to Dr. Shumaker on January 22, 2021, with 
complaints of right lower rib and lumbar pain. (JE4, p. 150)  Dr. Shumaker 
recommended an MRI of the lumbar spine and a bone scan. (Id.) 
 
The February 4, 2021, MRI revealed a very small generalized disc bulge 
accompanied by mild ligamentous and facet joint hypertrophy causing mild central 
spinal stenosis and mild bilateral neural foraminal compromise at L3-L4. (JE1, p. 71)  
The MRI also revealed mild disc degeneration with a small generalized disc bulge and 
superimposed small focal left posterolateral disc protrusion accompanied by 
ligamentous and facet joint hypertrophy causing mild central spinal stenosis as well as 
moderate right and severe left neural foraminal compromise with the exiting left L4 
nerve root directly touching the left foraminal focal disc protrusion at L4-L5. (Id.) 
 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Dr. Shumaker reviewed the MRI and opined the mid lumbar pain did not appear 
to be directly related to the disc herniation at L4-L5. (JE4, p. 154)  Dr. Shumaker 
ordered physical therapy and prescribed tramadol on February 19, 2021. (Id.) 
 
An MRI of the thoracic spine, dated April 20, 2021, revealed a small focal left 
posterolateral disc protrusion at T2-T3, and a small focal right para midline disc 
protrusion at T8-T9. (JE1, p. 73) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado returned to Dr. Shumaker on May 7, 2021, for a 
recheck of her mid-back pain. (JE4, p. 160)  She reported a significant decrease in her 
pain from her use of Cymbalta. (Id.)  Dr. Shumaker released Ms. Martinez-Maldonado to 
return to work per her FCE limitations. (JE4, p. 161; Ex. I, p. 89)  On May 17, 2021, Dr. 
Shumaker reaffirmed his opinion that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado had sustained 10 
percent whole person impairment a result of the work injury. (Ex. J, p. 90) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has not presented for any medical treatment related to 
her physical work injuries since May 7, 2021. (See Exhibit A, Deposition Transcript p. 
38) 
 
Sunil Bansal, M.D. conducted an independent medical evaluation of Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado. (Exhibit 1, p. 1)  He reviewed the pertinent medical records and 
conducted a physical examination of Ms. Martinez-Maldonado on February 14, 2023. 
(Id.)  On examination, she complained of low back pain, with radiating pain into both of 
her legs. (Ex. 1, p. 11)  She also reported discomfort in her right rib and lung area that 
followed a path all the way down to her right foot. (Id.)   
 
With respect to the back, Dr. Bansal diagnosed Ms. Martinez-Maldonado with 
mildly displaced spinous process fractures from T4 through T10, right transverse 
process fractures of T1, T2, T4, and T5, a T10 vertebral body fracture, disc bulging at 
L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1, and aggravation of thoracic and lumbar facet arthropathy. (Ex. 
1, p. 13)  Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Shumaker that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado reached 
MMI for her spinal fractures on November 15, 2019. (Id.)  However, he felt that Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado did not reach MMI for her chest and abdomen injuries until 
February 2, 2020. (Id.)  Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal assigned 20 percent whole person impairment for 
the 10 thoracic process fractures, and 5 percent whole person impairment for radicular 
pain, a loss of range of motion, and guarding within the lumbar spine. (Ex. 1, p. 14)  The 
only additional medical treatment recommended by Dr. Bansal was intermittent epidural 
injections to the lumbar spine. (Id.) 
 
Defendant asserts that Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating is inconsistent with the 
evidentiary record as a whole.  To this end, the defendant asserts Dr. Bansal’s 
impairment rating to the lumbar spine is not credible as there is no evidence to 
corroborate Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s allegations of lumbar radiculopathy.  

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Presumably, the defendant means the medical records in evidence do not support Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado’s claim of radiating pain.  Indeed, Dr. Bansal is the only physician 
to document radiating pain.  However, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has described radiating 
pain through her testimony.  Defendant deposed Ms. Martinez-Maldonado on December 
19, 2023. (Ex. B)  She testified that she experiences pain from her lower back all the 
way down the right side of her body. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 10)  Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s 
testimony is consistent with her reports to Dr. Bansal 10 months earlier.  I found Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado to be a credible witness and have no reason to doubt the veracity 
of her low back complaints. 
 
Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating accounts for Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s current 
condition.  I accept Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating as accurate and find that Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado has a 24 percent permanent impairment of the body as a whole as 
a result of the February 2, 2019, work injury.   
 
With respect to permanent work restrictions, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado underwent 
a functional capacity evaluation on September 5, 2019.  Dr. Bansal agreed with the 
restrictions as recommended by the valid functional capacity evaluation. (Ex. 1, p. 14)  
In addition, he recommended against frequent bending or twisting, and prolonged sitting 
or standing greater than 30 minutes at a time. (Id.)  I do not find the additional 
restrictions assigned by Dr. Bansal to be convincing or necessary based on the 
evidentiary record as a whole.  Instead, I find the restrictions imposed by the FCE and 
accepted by Dr. Shumaker accurately reflect Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s functional 
limitations. 
 
In addition to her physical injuries, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado asserts she 
sustained a mental health sequela injury as a result of the February 2, 2019, work 
injury.  She takes medication for anxiety/panic and relates the same to her work injury. 
(Ex. B, Depo. pp. 26-27)  She experiences anxiety/panic when she hears the sound of a 
car. (See Ex. B, Depo. pp. 27-28) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado amended her petition to include a mental health injury 
in November 2020.  In response, defendant scheduled her for an independent 
neuropsychological evaluation with Robert Arias, Ph.D.  The neuropsychological 
evaluation occurred on February 11, 2021. (Exhibit C)  The results of the evaluation 
revealed failures on multiple performance validity indices, with extreme over-
endorsement of psychological symptomatology. (Ex. C, p. 40)  Dr. Arias opined Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado did not meet diagnostic criteria for PTSD or any other emotional 
disorder, and she did not display signs of significant cognitive impairment. (Id.)  
Following receipt of Dr. Arias’ report, defendant denied liability for the alleged mental 
health sequela injury. (See Ex. L, p. 92)  
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado next sought mental health treatment in June 2023 
through Plains Area Mental Health Center. (JE5, p. 163; see Ex. 5 pp. 48, 57)  She 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
reported fatigue, disrupted sleep, increased anxiety, flashbacks, and fear that 
something bad will happen. (JE5, p. 172)  She was treated for major depressive 
disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and chronic pain. (Ex.. 5, p. 49)  She was 
prescribed trazodone and Cymbalta. (Ex. 5, p. 54) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado returned to Plains Area Mental Health Center on July 
26, 2023. (Ex. 5, p. 55)  She reported that she was feeling a little better and her mood 
had improved with Cymbalta. (Id.)  She further reported that she had a little anxiety, and 
she was sleeping and eating okay. (Id.) 
 
Charles Tilley, PA-C, completed a mental residual functional capacity 
questionnaire for claimant’s counsel on August 14, 2024. (Ex. 5, pp. 57, 61)  Mr. Tilley 
documented that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has no understanding or memory limitations.  
She is not limited with the ability to remember locations, work-like procedures, or very 
short and simple instructions. (Ex. 5, p. 57)  However, she is moderately limited in her 
ability to understand and remember detailed instructions. (Ex. 5, p. 58)  Mr. Tilley 
opined that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s mental health and cognitive issues are affecting 
her decision-making. (Id.)   
 
Mr. Tilley further opined that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has sustained 
concentration and persistence limitations. (Id.)  With respect to the sustained 
concentration and persistence limitations, Mr. Tilley opined that Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado is moderately limited in her ability to carry out very short and simple 
instructions, and her ability to sustain an ordinary routine without special supervision. 
(Id.)  He opined she had significant limitations carrying out detailed instructions, 
maintaining attention and concentration for extended periods, performing activities 
within a schedule, working in coordination with or in proximity to others without being 
distracted by them, and the ability to complete a normal workday and workweek without 
interruptions from psychologically based symptoms and to perform at a consistent pace 
without an unreasonable number and length of rest periods. (Ex. 5, pp. 58-59)  Mr. 
Tilley opined Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has medical issues that affect all areas of her 
daily living and limit her ability to maintain full concentration. (Ex. 5, p. 59)   
 
Mr. Tilley next opined Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has social interaction limitations.  
Specifically, he opined that she is moderately limited in her ability to interact 
appropriately with the general public, her ability to accept instructions and respond 
appropriately to criticism from supervisors, and her ability to get along with coworkers or 
peers without distracting them or exhibiting behavioral extremes. (Ex. 5, pp. 59-60) 
 
Next, Mr. Tilley addressed Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s adaption limitations. (Ex. 5, 
p. 60)  He opined she was moderately limited in her ability to respond appropriately to 
changes in the work setting, and her ability to travel in unfamiliar places or use public 
transportation. (Id.) 
 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Mr. Tilley did not address causation. (See Ex. 5, pp. 57-61) 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado returned to Plains Area Mental Health Center on 
August 15, 2023, reporting that she felt much calmer. (Ex. 5, p. 62)  She reported no 
stressors or problems. (Ex. 5, pp. 62-63)  She reported that she had recently went on a 
three-day retreat with her church. (Ex. 5, p. 63)  She further reported that she feels quite 
fatigued after performing minor home tasks, like sweeping. (Id.) 
 
The first issue to be addressed is whether claimant sustained a mental health 
sequela injury as a result of the February 2, 2019, work injury.  Defendant’s post-
hearing brief correctly points out that no physician has causally related Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado’s mental health condition to the February 2, 2019, work injury.  Additionally, 
the claimant’s post-hearing brief does not address the alleged mental health sequela 
injury.  For these reasons, I find Ms. Martinez-Maldonado failed to carry her burden of 
proving she sustained a mental health sequela injury as a result of the February 2, 
2019, work injury.   
 
The next issue to be addressed is the extent of Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
Defendant scheduled Ms. Martinez-Maldonado for vocational rehabilitation 
beginning in June 2024. (Ex. 9, p. 83)  Jess Miller, MA, CRC, set Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado up with Indeed and ZipRecruiter accounts. (Ex. 9, p. 83)  Following their 
initial meeting, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado inquired about employment with Walmart, Dairy 
Queen, and The Cafeteria.  Ms. Miller relayed that she would complete applications to 
the various employers on Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s behalf. (Id.)  Ms. Miller then 
identified five local restaurants for Ms. Martinez-Maldonado to present to and apply in-
person. (Ex. 9, p. 84)  Lastly, the two discussed enrolling in an English as a Second 
Language (ESL) course through Iowa Central Community College. (Id.)  At the time of 
the evidentiary hearing, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado had participated in approximately one 
month of the recommended ESL course. (Hr. Tr., pp. 44-45) 
 
Through her testimony and discovery responses, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has 
asserted that she spoke to numerous employers within the Storm Lake area but has not 
interviewed or received any job offers.  Ms. Martinez-Maldonado submitted several 
records into evidence to demonstrate her job search. (Ex. 10)  According to the work 
search records submitted into evidence, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado contacted several 
employers throughout 2023 and the beginning of 2024.  However, a serious job search 
requires something more than simply contacting a large number of prospective 
employers.   
 
Despite contacting a number of prospective employers, Ms. Martinez-Maldonado 
testified she did not submit applications until approximately one month prior to the 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., pp. 54-55)  It is difficult to accept applications submitted in 
the weeks leading up to the evidentiary hearing as evidence of a legitimate work search. 
 
Defendant contacted a number of the potential employers Ms. Martinez-
Maldonado listed in her job search records.  Representatives from Taco Bell, Fareway, 
Sugar Bowl Gift Shop, Goodwill, Grand Central Coffee Station, The Daily Apple, Storm 
Lake Community School District, McDonald’s, Burger King, and Hard Rock Hotel & 
Casino reported no records of Ms. Martinez-Maldonado applying for work through their 
companies. (Ex. G, pp. 74-85)  It is worth mentioning that defendant only inquired as to 
whether “Eva Maldonado” had applied for work with the various employers.  It is 
unknown whether the respective employers had applications from “Eva Martinez” or 
“Eva Martinez-Maldonado.”  
 
Given the FCE results and her demonstrated ability to continue working at Tyson 
for over 18 months following placement at MMI, it would be difficult to find that Ms. 
Martinez-Maldonado’s functional limitations have prevented her from returning to gainful 
employment since January 2023.  Although I believe that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has 
presented to numerous employers and inquired as to whether they were hiring, she only 
recently started submitting applications to prospective employers.  It would be difficult to 
conclude that she has legitimately tested the labor market at this time. 
 
Defendant asserts Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s industrial disability is minimal given 
her demonstrated ability to return to full-time work for the defendant employer following 
her release from Dr. Shumaker.  While she did return to work, she did not return to her 
pre-injury job duties.  Additionally, although she was earning higher wages, she was not 
working overtime and had to take time off due to her ongoing symptoms.   
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has not been employed since her termination from 
Tyson in January 2023.  She does not believe that she could return to work for any of 
her past employers due to pain and fatigue. (Ex. B, Depo. pp. 10-12)  She does not 
believe that she can work in any capacity at this time. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 15) 
 
It is clear to the undersigned that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has sustained a 
reduction in her future earning capacity as a result of the work injury.  She has 
permanent restrictions that limit her to light to medium job duties.  She has a limited 
employment history that mainly consists of assembly line work.  Her education level is 
below average and her language barrier limits the employment opportunities available 
to her.  That being said, she was able to return to full-time work with minimal issues 
following her work injury.  Additionally, she has not legitimately tested the labor market 
since her termination from Tyson in January 2023.   
 
Considering Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s age, educational background, 
employment history, residual symptoms, permanent impairment ratings, permanent 
work restrictions, her demonstrated ability to return to work, her motivation level, her 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
language barrier, as well as all other factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I find that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado has proven she sustained a 40 
percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the February 2, 2019, back injury. 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado entered into a settlement agreement with the third-party 
tortfeasor that caused the June 2, 2019, motor vehicle accident that injured her. The 
driver of the vehicle that hit Ms. Martinez-Maldonado had $50,000.00 in liability policy 
limits. (Ex. M, p. 94)  Ms. Martinez-Maldonado accepted the $50,000.00 liability policy 
limits to settle her third-party claim.   
 
I find that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado did not secure authorization of the employer 
and insurance carrier in this proceeding before entering into the third-party settlement. 
Nevertheless, the evidence is clear that Ms. Martinez-Maldonado recovered the liability 
policy limits of the third-party tortfeasor in her third-party settlement. To the extent that 
defendant may now refuse to give consent to the third-party settlement, I find that the 
settlement was reasonable and should be approved and be effective under the facts 
and circumstances of this case. 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado listed medical expenses as a disputed issue on the 
hearing report; however, she did not brief the issue.  I did not receive notification from 
either party that the issue had been resolved.  In any event, defendant shall pay for all 
causally related medical treatment.  Defendant is not liable for medical expenses related 
to the alleged mental health sequela injury. 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado’s claim for costs and reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s 
IME will be addressed in the conclusions of law section.   
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The parties stipulated that claimant sustained a work-related injury on February 
2, 2019. The parties have further stipulated that the injury resulted in permanent 
disability. As such, the main dispute between the parties is the extent of permanent 
disability sustained as a result of the February 2, 2019, work injury. 
 
The parties appropriately stipulate that this injury involves an unscheduled injury 
that should be compensated industrially pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability has 
been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows; “It is therefore plain that the legislature 
intended the term ‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere ‘functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man.” 
 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v, 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
There are no weighting guidelines that indicate how each of the factors is to be 
considered. Neither does a rating of functional impairment directly correlate to a degree 
of industrial disability to the body as a whole. In other words, there are no formulae 
which can be applied and then added up to determine the degree of industrial disability. 
It therefore becomes necessary for the deputy or commissioner to draw upon prior 
experience as well as general and specialized knowledge to make the finding with 
regard to degree of industrial disability. See Christensen v. Hagen, Inc., Vol. 1 No. 3 
Industrial Commissioner Decisions, 529 (App. March 26, 1985); Peterson v. Truck 
Haven Cafe, Inc., Vol. 1 No. 3 Industrial Commissioner Decisions, 654 (App. February 
28, 1985). 
 
Claimant sustained a non-surgical work-related injury to her thoracic and lumbar 
spine.  Dr. Bansal provided an impairment rating of 20 percent to the body as a whole 
for the thoracic spine injury.  He added an additional 5 percent whole person impairment 
rating for the lumbar spine injury.  The combined values resulted in an assessment of 
24 percent whole person impairment. 
 
Claimant was 43 years old on the date of the evidentiary hearing.  She attended 
seven (7) years of schooling in Mexico.  She was attending an ESL course at the time of 
the evidentiary hearing; however, she is not fluent in the English language.  The primary 
focus of her employment history, including her time spent with the defendant employer, 
has been manual labor assembly work. Currently, this line of work best suits claimant's 
aptitudes and interests. This line of work maximizes claimant's earning potential.  
Unfortunately, she has not been gainfully employed since her termination from 
defendant in January 2023.  I found she has not performed a legitimate job search.  She 
does not appear motivated to return to the workforce at this time. 
 
Having considered claimant's age, the situs and severity of the injury, permanent 
impairment, permanent restrictions, ability to return to gainful employment, motivation 
level, educational background, employment history, language barriers, and all other 
industrial disability factors identified by the Iowa Supreme Court, I found that claimant 
sustained a 40 percent industrial disability as a result of the work-related injury of 
February 2, 2019. This entitles claimant to two hundred (200) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on the stipulated date of November 16, 2019. 
 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
Defendant asserts a claim for indemnification from the proceeds of the third-party 
settlement pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.22(1).  Defendant further asserts that the 
claimant did not secure defendant’s authorization of consent to the third-party 
settlement. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.22(3) provides: 
 
Before a settlement shall become effective between an employee or an employer 
and such third party who is liable for the injury, it must be with the written consent 
of the employee, in case the settlement is between the employer or insurer and 
such third person; and the consent of the employer or insurer, in case the 
settlement is between the employee and such third party; or on refusal of consent, 
in either case, then upon the written approval of the workers' compensation 
commissioner. 
 
In this situation, I found that claimant did not secure the consent of the employer 
before entering into the third-party settlement agreement. Therefore, defendant may 
refuse consent to the settlement. Nevertheless, I found that claimant received a 
$50,000.00 settlement, which was equal to the full limits of the third-party tortfeasor's 
liability policy. I find that the proposed settlement, even if consent is refused, is 
reasonable. I conclude that the third-party settlement should be approved and is 
effective. Iowa Code section 85.22(3).  
 
Having determined that the third-party settlement is fair and should be approved 
and be effective, I must also determine the respective rights arising from or flowing from 
the third-party settlement. Iowa Code section 85.22(1) provides: 
 
If compensation is paid the employee ... under this chapter, the employer by whom 
the same was paid, or the employer's insurer which paid it, shall be indemnified 
out of the recovery of damages to the extent of the payment so made, with legal 
interest, except for such attorney fees as may be allowed... and shall have a lien 
on the claim for such recovery and the judgment thereon for the compensation for 
which the employer or insurer is liable. In order to continue and preserve the lien, 
the employer or insurer shall, within thirty days after receiving notice of such suit 
from the employee, file, in the office of the clerk of the court where the action is 
brought, notice of the lien. 
 
Pursuant to the plain language of Iowa Code section 85.22(1), defendant 
possessed an automatic statutory lien against the proceeds of a third-party settlement.  
Defendant is entitled to indemnification from claimant for any amounts owed or paid to 
claimant under Chapter 85 of the Iowa Code up to the full amount of the $50,000.00 
third-party settlement. Iowa Code section 85.22(1) 
 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Ms. Martinez-Maldonado next asserts a claim for reimbursement of her 
independent medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Specifically, 
claimant requests reimbursement of Dr. Bansal's $4,452.00 charge. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
 
Claimant must establish the pre-requisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 to 
establish entitlement to reimbursement. “An employer ... is not obligated to pay for an 
evaluation obtained by an employee outside the statutory process.” Des Moines Area 
Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). 
 
In this case, defendant obtained an impairment assessment from Dr. Shumaker, 
an authorized treating physician, on November 18, 2019.  Claimant sought an IME 
report from Dr. Bansal in February 2023, well after the assessment of Dr. Shumaker.  I 
conclude that the prerequisites of section 85.39 were met, and defendant shall 
reimburse claimant for the reasonable costs of Dr. Bansal's IME in the amount of 
$4,452.00. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendant shall pay unto claimant two hundred (200) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on November 16, 2019, at the weekly rate of five 
hundred twenty-seven and 34/100 dollars ($527.34). 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent, as required by Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 
Defendant shall receive credit for benefits previously paid. 
 
Defendant is entitled to a statutory lien against and to indemnification from the 
third party settlement up to the amount of any medical expenses or weekly benefits paid 
to claimant to date or into the future. 
 

MARTINEZ-MALDONADO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal's independent medical 
evaluation in the amount of four thousand four hundred fifty-two and 00/100 dollars 
($4,452.00). 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this 26th day of June, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
MICHAEL J. LUNN  
 
 
 
               
 
DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Steve Hamilton (via WCES) 
Charles W. Showalter (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
