Case Number: 5063207
Case Title:  GRUGAN, EUNICE M V. WAL-MART STORES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Grugan, Eunice-5063207.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
 
EUNICE GRUGAN, 
 
Petitioner/Claimant, 
 
v. 
 
WAL-MART STORES,  
 
                   Respondent/Employer, and 
 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INS. CO., 
 
               Respondent/Insurance Carrier. 
 
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
 
 
               Case No. CVCV060028 
 
 
 
 
  
ORDER ON JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
 
Telephonic oral argument in this judicial review of final agency action by the Iowa 
workers’ compensation commissioner was held on July 17, 2020.  Appearing for Petitioner was 
attorney Richard Schmidt.  Appearing for Respondents was attorney Valerie Foote for attorney 
Lindsey Mills.  Oral argument was not reported. 
 
Upon consideration of the Petition, the court file, and the respective statements of 
counsel, the court enters the following Order. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Petitioner Eunice Grugan (Claimant) sustained injuries to her back and right hip on 
January 19, 2017, while at work for Wal-Mart, Inc. She filed a workers’ compensation claim 
against Wal-Mart, Inc. and their insurer, New Hampshire Ins. Co. (Respondents). Deputy 
commissioner James Elliott (the deputy) awarded Claimant a seventy percent industrial disability 
as a result of her work injury.  Respondents sought intra-agency review by the commissioner. 
The commissioner’s March 16, 2020, appeal decision modified the deputy’s decision 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
regarding Claimant’s industrial disability. The commissioner found the deputy’s industrial 
disability determination was excessive, and the evidence instead supported a reduced finding of 
thirty-five percent industrial disability.  The sole issue presented on judicial review is whether 
the commissioner’s decision reducing Claimant’s industrial disability from seventy percent to 
thirty-five percent is supported by substantial evidence and agency precedent. 
 
Claimant was sixty-two years old at the time of hearing.  (Hr. Tr. p. 11).1  She is a high 
school graduate.  (Hr. T. p. 13).  She went to a two-year commercial art design school after high 
school, where she earned a certificate.  (Hr. T. p. 13).   Claimant worked briefly in ad design, but 
the bulk of her work experience is in customer service.  (Id.).   
 
While working for different print shops, Claimant discovered that she was exceptionally 
good at math.  (Hr. T. p. 13).  She started taking orders and creating quotes.  (Ex. A, pp. 5-6).  
Claimant also has experience in data entry, working for approximately one year processing life 
insurance policies.  (Hr. Tr. p. 15).  Claimant worked for Anthony & Hill, a refrigeration 
company, for nine years, beginning with processing shelf orders and eventually becoming the 
assistant manager.  (Ex. A, pp. 10-11).  When that company closed, Claimant went to work for 
Menard’s distribution, where she would check in trucks and process orders using a computer.  
(Ex. A, pp. 13-14).  Claimant worked for Menard’s for approximately four months before 
leaving to find a job closer to her home.  (Ex. A, p. 14).  She was then hired at Wal-Mart.  (Ex. 
A, p. 15).   
 
Claimant’s first job position at Wal-Mart was as a stocker.  (Ex. A, p. 15).  She worked as 
                                                 
1 Several documents within the certified agency record carry multiple page identifiers on each 
page of the affected documents.  The court’s citations to these documents are generally within a 
range of one or two pages, depending upon which page number the reader believes is correct. 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
a stocker for approximately six months before becoming the department manager of infants and 
shoes.  (Id.).  On January 19, 2017, Claimant was working in the warehouse in bins that 
merchandise is pulled from.  (Ex. A, p. 25).  There were two large boxes, one on top of the other, 
weighing around forty pounds.  (Ex. A, p. 26).  When Claimant went to pull the top box off, it 
started sliding. (Id.). She was still holding in to it when it slipped and fell to the ground.   
Claimant alleges that it “kind of whipped” her back and “it snapped.”  (Id.).  Claimant said she 
experienced an immediate onset of pain in her low back and right hip.  (Id.).  She finished her 
shift for the day and went home.  (Ex. A, p. 27).  The next day, Claimant came to work and 
reported her injury.  (Id.).   
 
Claimant’s medical history is relevant to her industrial disability claim.  She had ongoing 
neck and back issues for years prior to the work injury alleged here.  Claimant damaged her neck 
and upper back in a motor vehicle accident in 1990.  She still experiences pain secondary to that 
accident.  (Ex. A, p. 52).  In 2000, Claimant was involved in another automobile accident and 
received chiropractic care.  (Ex. A, p. 56).  In February 2008, Claimant injured her back after 
falling on ice.  (JE1, pp. 1-2).  She had another slip and fall injury on ice in December 2009.   
(JE2, p. 2).  Lumbar and thoracic x-rays demonstrated multilevel hypertrophic osteoarthritis of 
the lower lumbar spine.  (JE2, p. 1).  Claimant was referred for a course of physical therapy from 
January 13, 2010, to February 5, 2010.  (JE2, p. 5).    
 
On October 7, 2011, Claimant underwent a “physical capacity profile,” which was 
essentially a functional capacity evaluation (FCE), at Cass County Memorial Hospital.2  (JE3).  
                                                                                                                                                             
 
2 The court will refer to this evaluation as FCE I, and a subsequent FCE discussed later in this 
Order as FCE II for consistent ease of reference herein. 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
Claimant’s results indicated she was capable of performing in the medium vocational duty work 
category, exerting up to ten to twenty-five pounds of force frequently.  (JE3, p. 1).  FCE I also 
indicated Claimant had a history of prior episodes of back pain in her physical capacity profile. 
(JE3, p. 2).   
About four years before the instant work injury, Claimant fell over some boxes in her 
garage and injured her back.  (Ex. A, pp. 55-56).  She received chiropractic treatment after that 
injury.  (Ex. A, p. 56).  Claimant admitted she had chronic back pain associated with that fall, as 
well as aches and pains from old age.  (Ex. A, p. 26).  Prior to the work injury, Claimant was 
regularly seeing a chiropractor for monthly adjustments of her neck and back.  (Ex. A, p. 51).   
On January 20, 2017, the day after the work injury, Claimant presented to Atlantic 
Medical Center with complaints of low back pain with radiation into her lower leg.  (JE1, p. 3).  
Physician Assistant Scott Hixson (PA Hixson) diagnosed Claimant with low back pain and 
recommended Claimant apply heat and ice to her back and take over-the-counter ibuprofen as 
needed.  (JE1, p. 4).  PA Hixson gave Claimant a light duty work restriction of no lifting more 
than five pounds and no kneeling, squatting, bending, stooping, pushing, pulling, climbing and 
overhead reaching.  (JE1, pp. 5, 6).   
On January 23, 2017, Claimant returned to PA Hixson for follow up. (JE1, p. 6).  
Claimant reported worsening pain including a cold sensation in her back and inability to stand 
for long periods of time. (Id.).  X-ray imaging of Claimant’s lumbar spine demonstrated 
degenerative changes of the lumbar spine.  (JE1, p. 8).  PA Hixson prescribed Flexeril and 
Tramadol, referred Claimant to physical therapy, and took Claimant off work.  (JE1, p. 7).   
Claimant reported continued symptoms with no improvement at her return appointment 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
with PA Hixson on January 25, 2017.  (JE1, p. 11).  PA Hixson instructed Claimant to use ice 
and heat and remain off work.  (JE1, p. 12).   
Claimant initiated physical therapy on January 30, 2017, at Cass County Memorial 
Hospital.  (JE4, p. 3).  Physical Therapist Laura Hickman (PT Hickman) recommended that 
Claimant participate in therapy two times a week for three weeks.  (JE4, p. 4).   
On February 1, 2017, Claimant returned to PA Hixson.  She was exhibiting improvement 
in her symptoms.  (JE1, p. 16).  PA Hixson provided Claimant with light duty work restrictions 
to begin February 6, 2017, including a maximum lift of five pounds for four hour work days.  
(JE1, p. 17).  He also indicated Claimant should be allowed to stand as needed, with no overhead 
reaching, no above shoulder work, no squatting, bending, stooping, twisting or pushing and 
pulling.  (Id.).  
At Claimant’s follow up appointment on February 17, 2017, PA Hixon noted Claimant 
reported (1) continued moderate to severe pain in her low back, and (2) physical therapy was 
only helping minimally. (JE1, pp. 23-24).  PA Hixson referred Claimant for a lumbar spine MRI 
and provided light duty work restrictions.  These restrictions included 50/50 stand and sit with a 
maximum of six hour days. (Id.).   
Claimant underwent an MRI of her lumbar spine at Alliance Radiology on March 6, 
2017.  (JE5, p. 1).  Claimant’s MRI demonstrated multilevel, mild degenerative spondylosis and 
a small right, paracentral disc herniation at L1-L2.  (JE5, p. 2).   
 
Dr. David Boarini examined Claimant for a neurosurgical consultation on April 12, 2017, 
at the Iowa Clinic.  (JE6, pp. 1-7).  Dr. Boarini reviewed Claimant’s MRI imaging and observed 
that she had “significant underlying degenerative changes in her spine.”  (JE6, p. 5).  Dr. Boarini 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
recommended an epidural steroid injection, nonsteroidal medication and aggressive physical 
therapy.  (Id.).  He did not recommend surgical intervention. (Id.).  He imposed a ten-pound 
lifting restriction and encouraged Claimant to follow up.  (JE6, p. 7).   
 
Dr. Hansen provided Claimant a L4-L5 epidural and bilateral L4-L5 facet joint injections 
on April 27, 2017.  (JE6, pp. 11-13).   
 
Claimant returned to the Iowa Clinic on May 18, 2017, for follow up.  (JE6, pp. 15-17).  
ARNP Karla Stapes noted Claimant reported the injections resulted in a fifty percent relief of 
symptoms.  (Id. at 15).   
 
On May 24, 2017, Claimant returned to Dr. Boarini for follow up of her back pain with 
degenerative changes and scoliosis.  (JE6, pp. 20-21).  Claimant said she felt work aggravated 
her back symptoms too much to continue with her present work level.  (Id. at 21).  Dr. Boarini 
suggested Claimant undergo an FCE to get an objective suggestion for limitations on her work 
activities.3  (Id.).   
On June 1, 2017, Claimant underwent FCE II at ARC Physical Therapy.  (JE8).  Physical 
Therapist John Kruzich (PT Kruzich) opined Claimant provided a valid effort and demonstrated 
the physical capability of working in a medium demand vocation.  (JE8, p. 1).  PT Kruzich 
recommended Claimant lift up to twenty-five pounds waist to floor occasionally, twenty pounds 
above shoulder lifting occasionally and up to twenty-five pounds carrying occasionally.  (Id.).   
 
On June 6, 2017, Claimant returned to Dr. Boarini for follow up, reporting that FCE II 
had flared up her back pain.  (JE6, p. 22).  Dr. Boarini noted Claimant’s back pain was isolated 
                                                 
3 It is unclear whether Dr. Boarini was aware of FCE I. 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
with no radicular component and she was not an operative candidate.  (JE6, p. 23).  He gave 
Claimant a fluoroscopy facet block at the lumbar and sacral level.  (Id.).   
 
Claimant obtained a pre-written opinion letter from Dr. Hansen on June 26, 2017.  (CL 1, 
pp. 1-2).  Dr. Hansen checked ‘yes’ in response to whether he believed the work incident of 
January 19, 2017, at Wal-Mart was a substantial causal, contributing, or aggravating factor of 
Claimant’s back condition.  (Id. at p. 1).  He also agreed Claimant’s need for medical care and 
treatment is related to that incident.  (Id. at p. 2).  As additional medical care, Dr. Hansen 
recommended that Claimant continue her medications.  (Id.).   
 
On August 4, 2017, Claimant underwent right lumbar denervation and radiofrequency 
ablation with Dr. Hansen.  (JE9).  On August 16, 2017, Claimant returned to the Iowa Clinic for 
follow up.  Repeat injections were recommended.  (JE6, p. 31).   
 
Claimant returned to the Iowa Clinic on September 8, 2017, requesting a repeat injection.  
(JE6, p. 32).  Medical notes from that date indicate Claimant had improved since her radio 
frequency ablation over the prior month.  (JE6, p. 33).  Claimant’s epidural and facet block 
injections were repeated.  It was noted that if she did not improve, denervation could be repeated.  
(Id.).  Dr. Hansen gave Claimant a note detailing work restrictions.  These restrictions included a 
twenty pound lifting limit, avoiding repetitive forward flexion, and alternating sitting and 
standing every thirty minutes.  (JE6, p. 35).  Claimant wrote on the note that these were 
“permanent restrictions from Dr. Thomas Hansen.”  (Id.)  However, there is no indication from 
Dr. Hansen on the note detailing the restrictions or in the notes from Claimant’s visit that these 
were intended to be permanent restrictions by Dr. Hansen.   
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
Claimant underwent an independent medical examination (IME) by Dr. Todd Harbach at 
Iowa Ortho on October 13, 2017.  (Ex. B).  Dr. Harbach diagnosed Claimant with degenerative 
lumbar scoliosis, multilevel degenerative disc disease and right lower extremity radiculitis.   
(Ex. B, pp. 4-6).  Dr. Harbach opined that all of Claimant’s diagnoses pre-existed her work 
injury except for her back pain, which he believed aggravated or lit up her degenerative 
conditions.  (Id. at p. 5).  Dr. Harbach assigned Claimant a five percent permanent impairment of 
the whole person and recommended that she follow the permanent restrictions outlined in FCE 
II.  (Id.).  Because Claimant insisted she had worsening right lower extremity pain and weakness, 
Dr. Harbach recommended an EMG/nerve conduction study.  (Id.) 
 
Claimant underwent the EMG/nerve conduction study on November 27, 2017.  (JE10).  
All examined muscles revealed no evidence of electrical instability. (Id.).  There were no 
findings to suggest lumbar radiculopathy involving the right lower limb.  (Id.).  However, the 
right peroneal motor and sural sensory nerve potentials were not recorded.  This suggested a 
sensorimotor neuropathy involving the right lower limb to some extent.  However, these findings 
were of questionable current significance given Claimant’s clinical presentation.  (Id.).   
Claimant underwent a second IME with Dr. Robin Sassman on December 20, 2017.   
(CL 2).  Dr. Sassman diagnosed Claimant with low back pain with radiculopathy with MRI 
evidence of an L1-2 disc herniation.  (CL 2, p. 9).  She assigned a thirteen percent whole person 
impairment secondary to Claimant’s low back injury, and recommended restrictions including 
limiting lifting, pushing, pulling and carrying to twenty pounds rarely from floor to waist, twenty 
pounds occasionally from floor to shoulder, and twenty pounds rarely above shoulder height.  
(JE2, p. 10).  Additionally, Dr. Sassman recommended limiting standing and walking to an 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
occasional basis and frequent changing of positions.  (JE2, p. 10).   
 
On December 29, 2017, Claimant presented to Dr. Angela Weppler with right sided back 
and leg pain.  (JE11, p. 1).  Dr. Weppler noted Claimant was struggling with pain control.  Dr. 
Weppler recommended an evaluation and an MRI.  (JE11, p. 2).  She made no mention of 
Claimant’s prior MRI or prior medical records, so it appears unlikely that she was aware of 
Claimant’s prior imaging or prior medical treatment in making her recommendations.  
 
Claimant is currently back at Wal-Mart, working full time.  (Hr. Tr. pp. 41-42).  While 
Claimant was treating for her work injury and was working light duty, Wal-Mart needed to fill 
her prior job position.  Claimant therefore relinquished that position.  (Ex. A, p. 16).  While on 
light duty, Claimant gradually increased her hours back at work, per her physician’s restrictions, 
until she was back at her regular forty hours again.  (Ex. A, p. 23).   
Since the work injury, Claimant has earned a pay raise, from $12.75 per hour to $13.00 
per hour.  (Hr. Tr. p. 53).  Claimant has worked in the fitting room and in the lawn and garden 
department.  (Hr. Tr. pp. 42-43).  She has considered transferring to other departments within 
Wal-Mart, working as either a door greeter or a back-up cashier.  (Hr. Tr. pp. 49-50).  She 
testified she intends to continue working for Wal-Mart into the foreseeable future.  (Hr. Tr. p. 
49).    
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
In reviewing workers' compensation decisions, the court must apply the standards of 
judicial review set forth in the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act (IAPA), Iowa Code Chapter 
17A.  Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 199 (Iowa 2010).  
Under the IAPA, the court “may only interfere with the commissioner's decision if it is erroneous 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
under one of the grounds enumerated in the statute, and a party's substantial rights have been 
prejudiced.”  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).   
If the claim of error lies with the agency's findings of fact, the proper question on review 
is whether substantial evidence supports those findings of fact when the record is viewed as a 
whole. Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.  The commissioner's fact findings must be supported by 
substantial evidence in the record as a whole. Id. at 218.  Substantial evidence is defined as 
evidence of the quality and quantity “that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and 
reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the consequences resulting from the 
establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of great importance.”  
Iowa Code § 17A.19(f)(1); Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 457, 464-65 (Iowa 2004).   Put 
another way, evidence is substantial when a reasonable person could accept it as adequate to 
reach the same finding.  Asmus v. Waterloo Cmty. Sch. Dist., 722 N.W.2d 653, 657 (Iowa 2006).  
“[The] question is not whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant a decision the 
commissioner did not make, but rather whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant the 
decision he did make.”  Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 154 N.W.2d 128, 130 (Iowa 1967).   
In reviewing an agency’s finding of fact for substantial evidence, courts must engage in a 
“fairly intensive review of the record to ensure that the fact finding is itself reasonable.”  Neal v. 
Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012) (citing Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. 
Caselman, 567 N.W.2d 493, 499 (Iowa 2003)).  In this fairly intensive review, the court is to 
view the record as a whole, which includes considering evidence supporting the challenged 
finding as well as evidence detracting from it.  Id. (citing Iowa Code § 17A.19(f)(3)); Dawson v. 
Iowa Bd. of Med. Exam’rs, 654 N.W.2d 514, 518 (Iowa 2002)).  “The question on appeal is not 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
whether the evidence supports a different finding than the finding made by the commissioner, 
but whether the evidence supports the findings actually made.”  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218.   
Where an issue is raised regarding the application of the law to the facts, the must reverse 
if the commissioner's application is “irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.”   
Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(l); Mycogen Seeds, 686 N.W.2d at 465.  The court gives some 
deference to the commissioner's determination, but less deference than is given to the 
commissioner's findings of fact.  Larson Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 850 (Iowa 
2009).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
A. 
Whether the Commissioner Erred in Reducing Claimant’s Industrial 
Disability from Seventy Percent to Thirty-Five Percent.  Claimant argues there is not 
substantial evidence to support the commissioner’s appeal decision awarding Claimant thirty-
five percent industrial disability.  She believes the deputy’s decision awarding her seventy 
percent industrial disability is the proper determination.  Respondents argue the commissioner’s 
appeal decision is supported by the substantial weight of the evidence when the agency record is 
viewed as a whole and should therefore be affirmed.  
In assessing the extent of a claimant’s industrial disability, the factors considered include 
the extent of the claimant’s functional impairment, the claimant’s age, intelligence, education, 
qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in employment for which the claimant is suited.  
Diaz v. CRST Int’l., Inc., File No. 5018314, p. 14 (Arb. Dec. 07/28/08) (citing Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W 2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994)).  Stated another way, loss of earning 
capacity is determined by considering the employee's functional impairment, age, education, 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
work experience, qualifications, ability to engage in similar employment, and adaptability to 
retraining to the extent any of these factors affect the employee's prospects for relocation in the 
job market.  Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 1998).   
Industrial disability is similar to tort damages in that both compare what an injured 
person can earn before and after an injury.  Diaz, File No. 5018314 at *14 (citing Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 265-66 (Iowa 1995)).  Assessing the loss of earning 
capacity is “not measured in a vacuum.” Id. (citing Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 
(Iowa 1976)).  A claimant’s industriousness and manner of living are other factors to be 
considered.  Id.  A claimant’s industrial disability does not increase because a poor economy 
affects the claimant’s ability to obtain employment.  Webb v. Lovejoy Constr. Co., 2 Iowa Indus. 
Comm’s Rep. 430 (App. Dec. 1991); Felderman v. Teledyne Inc./CB Co., File No. 1003227 
(App. Dec. 07/27/94); U.S. West Commc’n v. Overholser, 566 N.W.2d 873, 877 (Iowa 1997). 
The certified agency record contains two opinions regarding Claimant’s degree of 
permanent impairment as a result of her January 19, 2017, work injury.  These opinions come 
from Claimant’s expert Dr. Sassman and Respondents’ expert Dr. Harbach. While both 
physicians agree Claimant sustained permanent impairment as a result of the work injury, they 
disagree as to what lumbar category Claimant properly falls under according to the AMA 
Guides, 5th Edition.   
Based upon her conclusion that Claimant’s work injury places her in DRE Lumbar 
Category III, Dr. Sassman assigns Claimant a thirteen percent permanent impairment.  (JE2, p. 
10).  Conversely, Dr. Harbach places Claimant in DRE Lumbar Category II and assigns 
Claimant a five percent permanent impairment.  (Ex. B, p. 5).  Prior to her examination, Dr. 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

13 
 
Sassman had the opportunity to review Dr. Harbach’s report and conclusions, and therefore 
includes an explanation as to why her conclusions differed from Dr. Harbach’s.  She indicates 
she believes Claimant has “significant signs of radiculopathy and has a history of a herniated 
disc,” and that “the Category II definition does not accurately describe Claimant’s current 
situation.”  (CL 2, p. 10).   
 
Dr. Harbach also had the opportunity to review Dr. Sassman’s conclusions, and respond 
as to whether his conclusions would change in light of her opinions and findings.  (Ex. B, pp. 9-
10).  Dr. Harbach noted he was puzzled as to why Dr. Sassman would conclude Claimant 
exhibited “significant signs of radiculopathy” when she also had the opportunity to review 
Claimant’s EMG findings—which were negative for objective evidence of radiculopathy.   
(Ex. B, p. 10).  Specifically, there were “no findings to suggest lumbar radiculopathy” on 
Claimant’s EMG.  (JE10, p. 2).  Dr. Harbach opined that, based upon this reasoning, Dr. 
Sassman’s conclusions were “completely incorrect.”  (Ex. B, p. 10).  Dr. Harbach further opined 
that Dr. Sassman’s clinical diagnosis was not supported by the medical records, and that her 
opinion regarding impairment was erroneous due to the fact that it was not supported by the 
objective medical evidence.  (Id.).   
Generally, the commissioner may accept or reject expert testimony in whole or in 
part. Lithcote Co. v. Ballenger, 471 N.W.2d 64, 66 (Iowa Ct. App. 1991).  The commissioner 
may not arbitrarily or totally reject such testimony, but must weigh the evidence and assess the 
credibility of the witness.  Catalfo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 213 N.W.2d 506, 509 (Iowa 
1973).  In the arbitration decision, the deputy did not offer an opinion as to which expert’s 
opinion he found more reliable in this case.   
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

14 
 
Administrative findings of fact must be sufficiently certain to permit a reviewing court to 
ascertain with reasonable certainty the factual basis upon which the administrative officer or 
body acted.  Cedar Rapids Steel Transp., Inc. v. Iowa State Commerce Comm’n, 160 N.W.2d 
825, 837 (Iowa 1968), cert. denied, 394 N.W.2d 918, 89 S.Ct. 1189, 22 L.Ed. 2d 451 (1969). The 
commissioner made clear his assessment of the dueling expert opinions in his intra-agency 
review decision.  He found Dr. Harbach’s opinion to be more reliable under this record.  (Appeal 
Decision, p. 2).  The commissioner stated he “agree[s] with defendants’ expert, Todd Harbach, 
M.D., that the FCE is the best tool to obtain ‘objective conclusions’ pertaining to Claimant’s 
functional limitations.” (Appeal Decision, p. 2).  That means the commissioner found Dr. 
Sassman’s clinical diagnosis not supported by the medical records in this case, as Dr. Harbach 
points out.  (Ex. B, p. 10).   
Functional capability is one of the factors to be considered in an industrial disability 
analysis. The commissioner clearly considered both FCE I and FCE II in reaching his conclusion 
that Claimant’s “functional limitations and restrictions did not significantly change after the July 
19, 2017, (sic) work injury.”4  (Appeal Decision, p. 2). 
Claimant argues the commissioner adopting “the opinion of a one-time evaluating doctor 
over a treating physician” is “contrary to agency precedent.”  This is not entirely correct.  The 
weight to be given any expert opinion is for the agency as fact finder.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., 
Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  The Iowa Supreme Court (the Court) has 
rejected the argument that a treating physician’s testimony should be, as a matter of law, given 
                                                 
4 It is clear that the commissioner’s reference in his Order to July 19, 2017, as Claimant’s work 
injury date is a scrivener’s error.  The record establishes that Claimant’s work injury date was 
January 19, 2017.  (Appeal Decision, p. 1). 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

15 
 
more weight than that of a later physician who examines the patient in anticipation of litigation. 
Id.   
Claimant argues the commissioner should have given greater weight to the opinion of Dr. 
Hansen, Claimant’s treating physician, over Dr. Harbach, an expert.  However, as noted above, 
the weight given to an expert’s opinion is for the agency to decide.  Lithcote, 471 N.W.2d at 66.  
Therefore, it was both appropriate and compliant with agency precedent for the commissioner to 
assign greater weight to Dr. Harbach’s opinion in this case, agreeing with Dr. Harbach by doing 
so that Claimant’s FCEs are the best objective tool for determining Claimant’s functional 
limitations.  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).   
The FCE is commonly used in workers’ compensation cases to determine a claimant’s 
limitations following a work injury.  The agency routinely relies upon the results of FCE testing 
in making industrial disability determinations because the nature of such testing is objective.  
Claimant’s authorized treating physician, Dr. Boarini, recommended that Claimant undergo an 
FCE (FCE II) to get an objective determination of the limitations on Claimant’s work activities.  
(JE6, p. 21).   Dr. Harbach agreed the FCE is the best tool to obtain objective conclusions 
pertaining to functional limitations.  (Ex. B, p. 10).  The commissioner appropriately adopted the 
limitations set forth in FCE II as Claimant’s functional capabilities.  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).   
It is undisputed that Claimant had issues with her neck and back prior to the January 19, 
2017, work injury.  As noted above, Claimant underwent FCE I on October 7, 2011.  (JE3).   
FCE I results indicated Claimant was capable of performing in the medium vocational duty work 
category, exerting up to ten to twenty-five pounds of force frequently.  (JE3, p. 1).  FCE I also 
indicated Claimant had a history of prior non-work related episodes of back pain in her physical 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

16 
 
capacity profile. (JE3, p. 2).   
As noted above, about four years prior to the arbitration hearing, Claimant fell over some 
boxes in her garage and injured her back.  (Ex. A, pp. 55-56).  She received chiropractic 
treatment after that injury.  (Ex. A, p. 56).  Claimant admitted she had chronic back pain 
associated with that fall, as well as aches and pains from old age.  (Ex. A, p. 26).  Prior to the 
work injury, Claimant was regularly seeing a chiropractor for monthly adjustments of her neck 
and back.  (Ex. A, p. 51).  This pre-work-injury history establishes a baseline from which 
Claimant’s industrial disability can be determined, because industrial disability compensates a 
claimant for loss of earning capacity following a work injury.   
The instant matter is somewhat unique because of claimant’s 2011 evaluation resulting in 
FCE I.  FCE I clearly delineates Claimant’s pre-work-injury physical capabilities.  And, FCE I in 
conjunction with FCE II permits a direct comparison between Claimant’s physical capabilities 
before and after the January 2017 work injury.  Although this information was available to the 
deputy, he did not address Claimant’s pre-injury capabilities in comparison with her post-injury 
restrictions in his decision.   
On intra-agency appeal, the commissioner appropriately compared FCE I with FCE II, 
ultimately finding “claimant’s functional limitations and restrictions did not significantly change 
after the July 19, 2017, (sic) work injury.”  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).  While Claimant argue FCE 
II aggravated her symptoms, the commissioner identified and considered this fact by specifically 
noting: “I recognize claimant reported an increase in her symptoms after the FCE [meaning FEC 
II].”  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).    
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

17 
 
The commissioner appropriately determined the best way under this record to ascertain 
Claimant’s physical capabilities prior to and after the work injury is by comparing Claimant’s 
October 2011 FCE I results with her June 2017 FCE II results.  (JE3; JE8).  Claimant’s physical 
strength abilities were measured in FCE I. (JE3, p. 4).  The results of Claimant’s 2011 
examination placed her in the medium duty vocational category of work, restricting her from 
lifting greater than ten to twenty-five pounds of force.  (JE3, p. 1).   
FCE II conducted after Claimant’s work injury also placed her in the medium duty 
vocational category, restricting her from lifting greater than twenty-five pounds of force.  (JE8, 
p. 1).  From an objective viewpoint, Claimant started in the medium duty vocational category 
prior to the work injury, and demonstrated through undisputed testing that she remained in the 
medium duty vocational category after the work injury.  The commissioner therefore rationally 
concluded Claimant’s “functional limitations and restrictions did not significantly change after 
the July 19, 2017, (sic) work injury.”  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).   
Industrial disability within the meaning of the worker's compensation statute means 
reduced earning capacity.  Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 103 (Iowa 1985).  The 
factors the court considers are noted above on page 11. There are no guidelines establishing the 
weight to be given to each of these factors.  So it is necessary for the commissioner to draw upon 
prior experience and general and specialized knowledge to make a finding in regard to the degree 
of industrial disability.  Lithcote, 471 NW.2d at 68.   
Applying that expertise, the commissioner reasoned in this case that although Claimant’s 
functional limitations did not significantly change after the January 19, 2017, work injury, (1) 
her symptoms worsened, (2) she did not return to the job she held at the time of her injury, and 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

18 
 
(3) some of the job duties in the position she held at the time of hearing were difficult for her.  
(Appeal Decision, p. 2).  “Even so, claimant was working full-time and continued to earn her 
pre-injury pay at the time of hearing.”  (Id.).  Claimant’s continued employment with Wal-Mart 
in multiple departments is a testament to her ability to continue to engage in similar employment. 
In assessing Claimant’s ultimate industrial disability, the commissioner referenced the relevant 
factors he considered and concluded: 
Claimant, who was 62 years old at the time of hearing, has worked primarily in 
customer service positions.  (See Tr., pp. 13-16)  While claimant’s subjective 
complaints may limit her ability to perform some of those jobs, claimant’s 
ongoing work with defendant-employer indicates she continues to have the skills 
and physical ability to engage in the employment for which she is fitted.  For 
these reasons, I find claimant sustained 35 percent industrial disability.”   
 
(Appeal Decision, p. 2).   
 
 
This determination by the commissioner is supported by the substantial weight of the 
evidence in this case when the agency record is considered as a whole.  Claimant testified at the 
arbitration hearing that she has many transferable skills and varied work experience, and would 
be physically capable of returning to multiple jobs similar to those that she has held in the past.  
(Ex. A, pp. 46-48).  Claimant has proven her continued employability by continuing to work for 
Wal-Mart in multiple departments.  Additionally, Claimant admitted she would be physically 
capable of returning to jobs similar to her previous employment, including taking and processing 
shelf orders for a distribution company, working as an assistant manager, working on a 
computer, and performing data entry.  (Ex. A, pp. 46-48).  Because Claimant is capable of 
returning to work that she was accustomed to performing, continues to work presently, and is 
currently earning wages comparable to her pre-injury wages (albeit slightly higher, given her 
raise in April 2017), the commissioner’s determination of thirty-five percent industrial disability 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

19 
 
is supported by the substantial weight of the evidence in the instant record.  
 
Claimant also argues the commissioner erred in not giving appropriate deference to the 
deputy’s credibility findings regarding her testimony.  However, there is no evidence that the 
commissioner called Claimant’s credibility into question or indicated that he disagreed with the 
deputy’s assessment of Claimant’s credibility.  The commissioner’s findings and conclusions are 
directly contrary to that assertion because he cites Claimant’s testimony to support his 
conclusions.  The commissioner specifically recognized Claimant’s symptoms that worsened 
after the work injury and did not question the credibility of her testimony regarding these 
symptoms.  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).   
Claimant also alleges the commissioner failed to review her testimony.  However, as 
already noted, the Appeal Decision includes multiple direct citations to the transcript of 
Claimant’s testimony.  (Appeal Decision, p. 2).  There is no evidence the commissioner called 
Claimant’s credibility into question in his intra-agency review.  Instead, he applied his expertise 
in analyzing all of the evidence, made a finding of thirty-five percent industrial disability, and 
detailed his rationale behind that conclusion.  
 
Further, the commissioner’s finding of thirty-five percent industrial disability is not 
insignificant.  This award is well beyond the impairment ratings assigned by the experts for both 
Claimant and Respondents.  It appropriately contemplates Claimant’s loss of access to the labor 
market despite the fact that Claimant’s earnings were not actually reduced after the January 2017 
work injury.   
The contested assignment of industrial disability awards Claimant 175 weeks of benefits. 
This is substantial given that (1) Claimant continues to work at Wal-Mart full time, (2) Claimant 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

20 
 
is earning more than she did prior to the work injury, and (3) Claimant’s functional capabilities 
were not significantly reduced by the January 2017 work injury.  Claimant argues the 
commissioner’s decision is “against” her.  She contends it goes against the purpose of workers’ 
compensation statutes, which is to benefit the worker.  The commissioner’s award of thirty-five 
percent industrial disability to Claimant still serves to benefit her significantly by providing 175 
weeks of benefits for an injury that had little overall impact upon her ability to earn.  Claimant’s 
disagreement with the commissioner’s decision does not mean his decision is wrong or 
unsupported by substantial evidence.  
The review required for substantial evidence challenges is well-settled.  The issue is not 
whether the record contains evidence that might support a different finding, but whether the 
record contains evidence supporting the finding actually made by the agency.  Henry v. Iowa 
Dep’t of Job Serv., 391 N.W.2d 731, 734 (Iowa Ct. App. 1986).  The possibility that two 
inconsistent conclusions can be drawn from the evidence does not mean that one of those 
conclusions is unsupported by substantial evidence.  Id.  Further, the requirement that a 
reviewing court take all record evidence into account in reviewing administrative findings does 
not detract from the court’s duty to grant appropriate deference to the agency's expertise.  Cerro 
Gordo Cty. Care Facility v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 401 N.W.2d 192, 195–96 (Iowa 1987).  
While Claimant presented various arguments as to evidence supporting her position, this does 
not mean the commissioner’s findings are unsupported by substantial evidence in the agency 
record when that record is considered as a whole.   
CONCLUSION 
 
The sole question presented here is whether the March 16, 2020, appeal decision of the 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

21 
 
Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner is supported by substantial evidence.  It is.  In 
coming to his ultimate conclusion, the commissioner considered the agency record as a whole.  
The appeal decision was direct, thorough, well-reasoned, and relies upon established precedent 
consistent with prior agency action.  The substantial weight of the evidence supports the 
commissioner’s conclusion that Claimant sustained thirty-five percent industrial disability as a 
result of her January 2017 work injury.   
The appeal decision should be affirmed in its entirety and costs should be assessed to 
Claimant.   
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the final 
agency ruling entered by the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner assessing Claimant a 
thirty-five percent industrial disability for her January 2017 work injury is affirmed in its 
entirety.  
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that costs are assessed 
to Claimant (Petitioner). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV060028
GRUGAN V WALMART AND NEW HAMPSHIRE INS CO
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-09-15 20:55:05     page 22 of 22
E-FILED  2020 SEP 15 8:55 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
