Case Number: 5067352
Case Title:  HARRIS, KIRSTIE V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Harris Kirstie-5067352D 2.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KIRSTIE HARRIS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5067352 
PRK WILLIAMS, INC., d/b/a TO 
  : 
THE RESCUE, 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
UNITED WISCONSIN INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :            Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1403.30, 
 
Defendants. 
  :            1802, 1803, 2907, 3003, 4000.2 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Kirstie Harris, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against PRK Williams d/b/a 
To the Rescue, as the employer and United Wisconsin Insurance Company as the 
insurance carrier.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
June 4, 2020.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, all in-person hearings were precluded as of the date of this hearing due 
to the pandemic currently affecting the state of Iowa.  Accordingly, this case was 
scheduled to be heard via videoconference using CourtCall.  Unfortunately, the video 
platform for CourtCall failed on the date of hearing.  With the consent of all parties, this 
case proceeded via telephone conference call only through CourtCall. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 18, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 3, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through F.  Defendants objected to Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1, page 34, which is a supplemental report from claimant’s independent medical 
evaluator, Farid Manshadi, M.D.  The undersigned overruled the objection, but 
permitted defendants to file a supplemental exhibit (Defendants’ Exhibit F) after the live 
evidentiary hearing.  Defendants filed Exhibit F on June 8, 2020.  That exhibit is 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jul-09  14:37:59     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 2 
 
 
received and the evidentiary record closed on June 8, 2020, upon receipt of defendants’ 
supplemental exhibit. 
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at trial.   
Counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  This 
request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on June 19, 2020.  The 
case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from April 20, 2018 to 
May 3, 2018, September 27, 2018 to October 3, 2018, and/or from July 7, 
2019 through March 18, 2020. 
2. Whether the April 24, 2018 work injury caused permanent disability and, if so, 
the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
3. Whether claimant was married on the date of injury and entitled to a weekly 
rate using a married with two exemption status, including a claim by 
defendants that claimant’s spouse abandoned her prior to the date of injury. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of the full independent medical 
evaluation fee of Dr. Manshadi pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, 
including an assertion by defendants that claimant failed to prove Dr. 
Manshadi’s fee is consistent with the average cost to obtain an impairment 
rating in the locale where the rating was provided. 
5. Whether penalty benefits should be awarded for an alleged unreasonable 
denial of permanent disability and/or an unreasonable calculation and 
underpayment of the weekly rate. 
6. Whether claimant’s costs should be assessed. 
The hearing report also includes disputes about whether claimant gave timely 
notice of her injury and a dispute about whether the injury involved an unscheduled 
injury to be compensated with industrial disability.  At the commencement of hearing, 
claimant withdrew any potential claims for mental health injuries and stipulated that the 
injury involved the right wrist and right ankle only.  Based on these stipulations, the 
injury is to be compensated as a scheduled member injury and defendants withdrew 
any notice defense.  These issues will not be discussed further and no findings or 
conclusions will be entered on these issues. 
In her post-hearing brief, claimant withdrew her claim and conceded that she is 
not entitled to additional healing period benefits beyond January 27, 2020.  Claimant 
also stipulated in her post-hearing brief that defendants accurately asserted the 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 3 
 
 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits should be January 28, 
2020.  Both of those concessions are accepted as stipulations and no healing period 
benefit claim will be considered after January 27, 2020 and permanent partial disability 
benefits will be ordered to commence on January 28, 2020. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Kirstie Harris is a 50-year-old woman, who worked for To the Rescue assisting 
clients with mental disabilities in their places of residence.  (Claimant’s testimony; Joint 
Exhibit 16, page 1)  In that capacity, Ms. Harris passed medications, assisted with 
activities of daily living, transported clients to doctor appointments, and assisted with 
grocery shopping.  On April 24, 2018, while working for To the Rescue, one of her 
clients went into a manic phase and began threatening claimant with physical violence.  
As she tried to escape the situation, Ms. Harris fell down a flight of stairs in the client’s 
home.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
As a result of the fall, Ms. Harris sustained injuries to her right wrist and right 
ankle.  (Hearing Report; Claimant’s testimony)  Claimant sought treatment at the 
emergency room on the evening of the fall.  Defendants admitted the injury and 
provided initial care through St. Luke’s Work Well Clinic.  (Joint Ex. 16)  Ann McKinstry, 
M.D. at Work Well Clinic recommended a right wrist MRI and was suspicious that 
clamant sustained a scaphoid fracture.  (Joint Ex. 16, p. 2) 
Claimant returned to Work Well Clinic on May 8, 2018.  At that time, Cindy L. 
Hanawalt, M.D. noted an abnormality on claimant’s right wrist MRI and made a referral 
to an orthopaedic surgeon.  (Joint Ex. 16, p. 5)  Defendants directed claimant for care at 
the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  On June 25, 2018, Lindsey Caldwell, M.D., 
evaluated Ms. Harris. 
Dr. Caldwell diagnosed claimant with a scapholunate ligament strain but 
identified no evidence of instability in the wrist.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 3)  Dr. Caldwell 
recommended and performed an injection in claimant’s right wrist.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 3) 
Upon re-evaluating claimant on July 23, 2018, Dr. Caldwell added a diagnosis of 
de Quervain’s tenosynovitis and performed another injection into the right wrist.  (Joint 
Ex. 18, p. 7)  Unfortunately, that injection provided symptomatic relief for only two 
weeks and then claimant’s symptoms returned.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 10)  Dr. Caldwell 
recommended surgical intervention.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 14) 
On October 9, 2018, defendants had Steven Adelman, D.O. perform an 
independent medical evaluation.  Dr. Adelman is a neurologist.  He opined that claimant 
had no spasticity present in either the right hand or right ankle prior to the work injury.  
However, he opined that claimant did not sustain a permanent exacerbation of her 
spastic hemiparesis because he identified no spasticity on his evaluation.  He further 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 4 
 
 
opined that claimant did not sustain any permanent impairment because she did not 
sustain a permanent aggravation of any underlying or pre-existing condition as a result 
of her work fall.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 3) 
Dr. Caldwell evaluated Ms. Harris again on October 10, 2018, noting that she 
performed a first dorsal compartment release in claimant’s right wrist to address the de 
Quervain’s syndrome.  Dr. Caldwell indicated that the surgery was successful and 
allowed claimant to return to light duty work at that time.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 24) 
On November 7, 2018, claimant reported worsening pain in her right wrist, as she 
attempted to increase her activity and use of the right hand and wrist.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 
26)   
Matthew D. Karam, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics, evaluated claimant’s right ankle on January 8, 2019.  Dr. Karam 
noted significant stiffness in the right ankle and indicated that her condition was likely 
due to an underlying prior stroke but also the result of “some contribution from her work-
related injury.”  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 32)  Dr. Karam noted right ankle weakness and 
spasticity.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 32)  However, Dr. Karam permitted light duty work activities 
following his January 8, 2019 evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 35)   
When asked by defendants to clarify his causation opinions, Dr. Karam repeated 
that he believed his diagnosis and claimant’s right ankle condition resulted from a work 
injury that “continues to manifest with pain and disability.”  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 36)  Dr. 
Karam opined that claimant was not yet at maximum medical improvement for her right 
ankle as of January 11, 2019, but also opined that she did not sustain any permanent 
disability as a result of the right ankle injury.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 37) 
Defendants elected to have an independent medical evaluation (IME) performed 
on claimant’s right wrist by an orthopaedic surgeon, Michael A. Gainer, M.D., on 
March 7, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 5)  Dr. Gainer diagnosed claimant with right wrist de 
Quervain’s tenosynovitis post release with resulting stiffness of the radiocarpal joint.  
Dr. Gainer concluded that claimant’s “stiffness is related to her fall and subsequent 
surgery.”  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 4)  He specifically opined that claimant’s ongoing right wrist 
condition was not related to her pre-existing stroke that occurred in 2011.  (Joint Ex. 5, 
p. 4)  Dr. Gainer opined that claimant had not yet achieved maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) for her right wrist as of March 7, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 5)  However, 
he did permit claimant to return to light duty work.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 5) 
On March 18, 2019, Dr. Caldwell re-evaluated claimant after the IME performed 
by Dr. Gainer.  Dr. Caldwell had no other treatment recommendations at that time and 
indicated that MMI would occur six weeks later.  (Joint Ex. 18, pp. 44-45)  Claimant 
never returned for further evaluation by Dr. Caldwell. 
Instead, claimant moved from Iowa to South Carolina.  Ms. Harris established 
care with another orthopaedic surgeon, John Hibbitts, M.D. on July 2, 2019.  Dr. Hibbitts 
evaluated claimant’s right wrist and her right ankle.  He diagnosed claimant with a 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 5 
 
 
potential ligament tear in the right wrist as well as an equinus contracture of the right 
ankle.  He recommended an EMG test for the right upper extremity.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 1)  
Dr. Hibbitts removed claimant from work on July 2, 2019.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 3) 
Upon re-evaluation, Dr. Hibbitts noted that claimant’s right hand examination was 
worse and different than the IME findings recited by Dr. Gainer.  Dr. Hibbitts 
recommended an MRI of claimant’s brain to determine if she had an intervening brain 
bleed.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 4)  Fortunately, the subsequent EMG testing was normal.  (Joint 
Ex. 8, p. 5)  The brain MRI fortunately also demonstrated no brain bleed or intracranial 
mass.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 7) 
Defendants followed up with Dr. Hibbitts to inquire about whether claimant’s right 
hand and wrist symptoms were related to the work injury.  Dr. Hibbitts noted the change 
in claimant’s right hand and wrist evaluations between Dr. Gainer’s evaluation in March 
2019 and Dr. Hibbitts’ evaluations.  Dr. Hibbitts opined that the right wrist condition was 
“not related to work injury.  This is to be addressed by private insurance.”  (Joint Ex. 8, 
p. 9) 
On the other hand, Dr. Hibbitts concluded and opined that the right ankle 
condition “probably was not present prior to her injury, this would have to be causally 
related.”  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 8)  Dr. Hibbitts recommended surgical intervention for the right 
ankle to address the contracture issues claimant experienced.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 8)  Dr. 
Hibbitts took claimant to surgery and performed a VY lengthening procedure on her 
right ankle to address her contracture and loss of range of motion in the right ankle.  By 
January 7, 2020, Dr. Hibbitts opined that claimant could return to regular duty work.  
(Joint Ex. 8, p. 14)  He assigned a zero percent permanent impairment rating pursuant 
to the sixth edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.  
(Joint Ex. 8, p. 15) 
Ms. Harris obtained an independent medical evaluation with Farid Manshadi, 
M.D., on March 29, 2020.  Dr. Manshadi noted reduced ranges of motion in claimant’s 
right wrist and right ankle.  He diagnosed claimant with right ankle pain with reduced 
range of motion, post VY lengthening of the right gastrocnemius.  Dr. Manshadi also 
diagnosed claimant as status-post first dorsal compartment release for de Quervain’s 
tenosynovitis with pain and reduced range of motion of the right wrist.  (Claimant’s Ex. 
1, p. 20)  Dr. Manshadi also opined that claimant likely also sustained a partial-
thickness tear of the scapholunate ligament in the right wrist.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 20)  
Dr. Manshadi did not address causation in any great detail, but it appears that he 
causally related the right wrist and right ankle conditions to the work injury. 
Dr. Manshadi opined that claimant had achieved maximum medical improvement 
by the date of his evaluation for both the right wrist and the right ankle.  He identified 8 
percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper extremity pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  He also 
identified 11 percent permanent functional impairment of the right lower extremity using 
the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 20)  Dr. Manshadi also 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 6 
 
 
recommended permanent work restrictions for both the right wrist and the right ankle 
injuries. 
Considering all of the medical opinions in this record, I find the opinions of Dr. 
Hibbitts to be most credible.  Realistically, I accept the causation opinion of Dr. Gainer 
with respect to the right wrist and find that claimant proved her right wrist condition was 
causally related to the work injury through the date of Dr. Gainer’s evaluation.  However, 
Dr. Hibbitts documents thereafter that claimant developed contractures of the right 
small, ring, and index fingers.  He explained that claimant had supple motion of the 
fingers during Dr. Gainer’s evaluation.  Therefore, Dr. Gainer’s opinions and Dr. Hibbitts’ 
opinions can be read as consistent. 
At the time claimant was evaluated by Dr. Gainer, her right wrist condition 
remained causally related.  Thereafter, Ms. Harris developed some finger contractures 
diagnosed by Dr. Hibbitts.  Claimant’s condition worsened after Dr. Gainer evaluated 
her and Dr. Adelman also documented no spasticity during his evaluation in October 
2018.  Therefore, I find claimant proved causal connection of the right wrist through 
March 7, 2019.  Dr. Manshadi seems to assume causation of the right wrist and hand 
but provides no analysis of the issue.  His opinion is not as convincing as the other 
physician’s opinions.   
I find Dr. Hibbitts’ causation opinion most convincing and find that claimant failed 
to prove the ongoing right wrist and hand condition as of August 2019 were related to 
the initial work injury.  (Joint Ex. 8, pp. 4, 9)  Having found that claimant failed to prove 
her current right wrist condition is causally related to the initial injury, I do not find Dr. 
Manshadi’s permanent impairment rating of the right wrist and arm to be causally 
related.  I find that claimant failed to prove permanent functional impairment of the right 
wrist and arm that is causally related to the work injury. 
With respect to the right ankle, I acknowledge the opinion of Dr. Adelman that 
indicates claimant did not aggravate her pre-existing right ankle condition as a result of 
the work injury.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 3)  However, I find the opinion of Dr. Hibbitts to be more 
convincing.  He opines that claimant’s ankle contracture “probably was not present prior 
to her injury.  This would have to be causally related.”  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 8)  Similarly, Dr. 
Karam at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics opined that there was likely some 
contribution from the work injury to the right ankle condition in addition to the pre-
existing and underlying condition resulting from claimant’s 2011 stroke.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 
32)  I find both of these causation opinions to be realistic, consistent with claimant’s 
testimony about her pre-existing condition, and convincing.  Therefore, I find that 
claimant has proven her ongoing and current right ankle condition is causally related to 
the work injury, or at least materially aggravated by the work injury. 
I note that Dr. Karam opines claimant sustained no permanent disability of the 
right ankle.  (Joint Ex. 18, p. 38)  I also acknowledge Dr. Adelman’s opinion that 
claimant did not sustain permanent impairment of the right ankle because she did not 
prove an aggravation of her pre-existing condition.  Finally, I acknowledge Dr. Hibbitts’ 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 7 
 
 
impairment rating of zero percent, using the sixth edition of the AMA Guides.  However, 
this agency has not adopted the sixth edition of the AMA Guides.   
Moreover, having found that claimant did prove an aggravation of the underlying 
right ankle condition, I also find that claimant has ongoing symptoms that include loss of 
range of motion.  Given the loss of range of motion in claimant’s right ankle, I do not find 
it credible or convincing to assign her a zero percent permanent functional impairment 
for this work injury.  The only physician that assigned a permanent impairment rating for 
the right ankle (other than a zero percent rating) is Dr. Manshadi.  I find Dr. Manshadi’s 
permanent impairment rating for the right ankle to be convincing and accurate.  
Therefore, I find that claimant proved she sustained an 11 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the right leg as a result of the work injury. 
Defendants also dispute whether claimant is entitled to all of the healing period 
claimant seeks.  Claimant seeks healing period from April 20, 2018 through May 3, 
2018, from September 27, 2018 through October 3, 2018, and from July 7, 2019 
through March 18, 2020.  Claimant revised this request in her post-hearing brief, 
conceding that she is not entitled to healing period benefits beyond January 27, 2020. 
Defendants contend that Ms. Harris voluntarily resigned her employment with To 
the Rescue and, in doing so, she forfeited any future right to healing period benefits.  
Defendants introduced a letter from their Human Resources Director to claimant in 
January 2019, setting forth an offer of light duty, or modified duty, work.  Ms. Harris 
signed the letter, indicating that she declined the modified duty work assignment.  The 
letter specifically notified claimant that “my workers [sic] compensation benefits will be in 
a period of suspension pursuant to §85.33(3) during my time off for FMLA leave.”  
(Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 3) 
Defendants also introduce a letter or note from Ms. Harris dated April 9, 2019, 
indicating that she was voluntarily resigning her position with To the Rescue as of that 
date.  In the letter, claimant acknowledges that modified duty work continued to be 
offered to her by the employer and that such work was within her restrictions for her 
work injury.  Ms. Harris acknowledged that she was resigning and refusing suitable 
modified duty work.  (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 7)  Claimant did not dispute this fact and I 
find that she voluntarily resigned her position with To the Rescue effective April 9, 2019. 
The parties also submitted a dispute to the undersigned about claimant’s marital 
status and entitlement to exemptions on the date of injury.  While the parties stipulated 
that Ms. Harris’s average gross earnings were $458.57 per week on the date of injury, 
defendants challenged Ms. Harris’s marital status and entitlement to two exemptions.  
Specifically, defendants asserted that claimant’s spouse abandoned her prior to the 
date of injury. 
At hearing, Ms. Harris testified that she was married at the time of her injury and 
at the present time.  She acknowledged that she is now living apart from her spouse, 
but testified that there had not been a legal separation or divorce.  Claimant testified 
that she stopped living with her spouse in November 2018, after the injury date.  

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 8 
 
 
Ms. Harris produced tax returns from 2017 that demonstrated claimant was married and 
filed joint tax returns for the calendar year immediately preceding this injury.  
Defendants contend that claimant failed to produce her 2018 tax returns to 
document her ongoing marital status.  Ms. Harris explained that she physically 
separated from her spouse in 2018.  However, she testified that they filed a joint tax 
return in 2018.  She explained that she did not produce a copy of the return because 
she does not possess a copy of the return.  I accept Ms. Harris’ trial testimony on this 
issue and find that she convincingly proved she was married on the date of injury.  
Defendants produced no convincing evidence to demonstrate spousal 
abandonment prior to the date of injury or that Ms. Harris was not married on the date of 
injury.  Claimant produced convincing evidence, including her 2017 tax return and her 
unrebutted trial testimony, that she was married on the date of injury.  I find that Ms. 
Harris proved she was married on the date of injury and that she is entitled to two 
exemptions for purposes of calculating her weekly workers’ compensation rate. 
Claimant seeks an award of her independent medical evaluation fees.  With 
respect to her independent medical evaluation, it appears that defendants concede 
liability for at least a portion of the independent medical evaluation fees.  However, 
defendants challenge whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of the entirety of 
the fees charged.  Specifically, defendants contend that the fees charged by Dr. 
Manshadi exceed the average cost of obtaining an impairment rating evaluation in the 
locale where Dr. Manshadi provides services. 
Claimant sought and obtained a late report from Dr. Manshadi confirming the 
reasonableness of his fees in his locale.  Defendants objected to that report.  Although I 
overruled the objection, I permitted defendants to file a supplemental exhibit on the 
issue of Dr. Manshadi’s fees.  Defendants did file a supplemental exhibit and produced 
invoices from other impairment ratings presumably obtained by defendants in other 
claims.   
Those invoices provide no context as to whether the medical provider rendering 
those ratings was a treating physician or acted exclusively as an independent medical 
evaluator.  There is not necessarily an explanation in those invoices as to the amount of 
time spent by each physician to render the impairment rating, or the condition evaluated 
or rated.  There is no explanation of the amount of records reviewed for each evaluation 
produced by defendants. 
Certainly, a treating physician that only needs to write a report for an impairment 
rating is likely to charge significantly less than a physician that must review all prior 
records, interview and evaluate the claimant, and then prepare a report.  Claimant also 
points out that defendants did not introduce the invoice for their own independent 
medical evaluator (Dr. Gainer) in this case, which is an interesting fact but essentially 
requests that I speculate about evidence not actually in the record.  I decline to 
speculate about the amount of Dr. Gainer’s charges or the reason that his invoice was 
not submitted into the evidentiary record. 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 9 
 
 
At the end of my analysis of this issue, I find that claimant proved the charges 
performed by Dr. Manshadi for an independent medical evaluation for purposes of 
rendering a permanent impairment rating are reasonable for the locale where Dr. 
Manshadi provided those services.  While defendants produced competing evidence, it 
lacks context or explanation and would require some conjecture or speculation on the 
undersigned’s part to find that the average cost of an impairment rating in Dr. 
Manshadi’s locale is less than he charged.  Instead, I specifically find that Dr. 
Manshadi’s charges are reasonable and representative of the average charges for an 
independent medical evaluation for purposes of rendering an impairment rating in his 
locale. 
Finally, Ms. Harris asserted a claim for penalty benefits.  Claimant urged penalty 
benefits under two theories.  First, claimant asserted that defendants unreasonably 
underpaid weekly benefits while challenging claimant’s marital status and entitlement to 
exemptions.  Ultimately, I concur with claimant.  Defendants likely had an initial basis to 
challenge the claimant’s marital status and pursue further investigation through 
discovery.  Realistically, however, when discovery closed and the case was ready for 
trial, defendants had not generated a reasonable basis for denial of claimant’s marital 
status or entitlement to exemptions. 
Defendants urge that claimant did not produce her 2018 tax returns to prove her 
marital status.  Yet, all of the credible evidence in this record established that claimant 
was married on the date of injury and entitled to two exemptions.  Claimant produced a 
2017 tax return establishing her marital status.  Claimant testified to her marital status 
and referenced it during a record statement early in the investigation.  While defendants 
may have been suspicious about claimant’s marital status, they failed to generate a 
reasonable basis for their continued denial of her marital status before trial.   
Realistically, as the case proceeded to trial, defendants did not have a 
reasonable basis for denial or a realistic chance at prevailing on the issue.  In short, 
they generated almost no evidence to support their theory of spousal abandonment.  
Ms. Harris answered their questions and concerns with straight-forward information that 
rebutted any such defense.  I find that defendants did not have a reasonable basis for 
continued denial of claimant’s marital status or payment of weekly benefits for 
something less than married with two exemption status prior to the date of trial.   
Ms. Harris also asserted that defendants should be penalized because they 
unreasonably denied payment of permanent partial disability benefits.  With respect to 
this argument, I do not agree with claimant’s assertion.  Defendants possessed medical 
opinions that challenged current causal connection of either the right wrist condition or 
the right ankle condition.  They possessed medical opinions that suggested claimant 
had no work restrictions and that claimant had no permanent impairment for the right 
ankle.  Ultimately, defendants prevailed on the right wrist and owe no permanent 
disability for that condition.  With respect to the right ankle, Dr. Adelman, Dr. Karam, 
and Dr. Hibbitts all suggested that claimant had no permanent impairment.  I find that 
defendants had reasonable bases to challenge causal connection of either the right 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 10 
 
 
ankle or the right wrist and a reasonable basis to challenge whether claimant sustained 
permanent impairment related to the right ankle. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
In this case, I found that claimant failed to prove her alleged permanent 
functional impairment in the right wrist is causally related to the work injury.  
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof with respect to 
the right wrist and is not entitled to an award of permanent disability for the right wrist 
condition. 
With respect to the right ankle injury, I found that claimant did prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the right ankle sustained permanent functional 
impairment and that the impairment was causally related to the work injury.  
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant has carried her burden of proof with respect to the 
right ankle injury and is entitled to an award of permanent disability benefits in some 
amount.   

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 11 
 
 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) (2017) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v).  The extent of a scheduled member disability is determined by 
using the functional method.  Functional disability “is limited to the loss of the 
physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature modified Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  Pursuant 
to the revised statutory language, scheduled member injuries are to be compensated 
pursuant to the functional method and lay testimony or agency expertise is not to be 
utilized in determining the loss or permanent impairment.  The relevant governing 
statutory language for this claim provides: “the extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical association 
[sic], as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to 
chapter 17A.”  The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has enacted an 
administrative rule that adopts the fifth edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment.  876 IAC 2.4. 
Having found the impairment rating offered by Dr. Manshadi convincing and 
noting that it was offered pursuant to the fifth edition of the AMA Guides, I conclude that 
claimant has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that she is entitled to an 
award commensurate to 11 percent of the right lower extremity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p) (2017) provides that the leg is compensated on a 
220-week schedule.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w) permanent partial 
disability benefits should be awarded commensurate with the loss of the scheduled 
member.  In this instance, an 11 percent permanent functional loss of the right leg is 
equivalent to 24.2 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(p), (w) (2017).  I conclude claimant is entitled to an award of 24.2 weeks of 
permanent disability benefits for her right ankle injury with permanent disability benefits 
to commence on the stipulated commencement date of January 28, 2020. 
The next disputed issue was claimant’s claim for healing period benefits.  There 
appears to be no dispute that claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from April 
20, 2018 through May 3, 2018 or from September 27, 2018 through October 3, 2018.  
Those benefits will be awarded. 
Defendants dispute the claim for healing period benefits from July 7, 2019 
through March 18, 2020.  The relevant statutory provision is Iowa Code section 
85.33(3)(a) (2017).  This statute was also amended in 2017 and now provides: 
If an employee is temporarily, partially disabled and the employer for 
whom the employee was working at the time of injury offers to the 
employee suitable work consistent with the employee’s disability the 
employee shall accept the suitable work, and be compensated with 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 12 
 
 
temporary partial benefits.  If the employer offers the employee suitable 
work and the employee refuses to accept the suitable work offered by the 
employer, the employee shall not be compensated with temporary partial, 
temporary total, or healing period benefits during the period of the refusal. 
In this case, claimant refused suitable modified work when offered by the 
employer in January 2019.  Claimant subsequently voluntarily terminated her 
employment with To the Rescue.  In resigning her employment, claimant again 
acknowledged that suitable modified work was being offered and she declined that work 
offer.  Claimant has not urged that she subsequently withdrew her refusal.  Accordingly, 
I found that claimant refused suitable work and conclude that she forfeited any claim for 
healing period or temporary disability benefits after her refusal in January 2019.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant cannot prove entitlement to healing period benefits 
from July 7, 2019 through March 18, 2020.  Iowa Code section 85.33(3)(a). 
The parties also disputed the applicable weekly rate at which benefits should be 
awarded.  The dispute revolves around claimant’s marital status.  Ms. Harris produced 
2017 tax returns demonstrating she was married and testified that she remained 
married on the date of injury and at the time of hearing.  Claimant did concede that her 
spouse physically (though not legally) separated from her in November 2018, after the 
injury date. 
Defendants asserted that claimant was not entitled to claim married status or two 
exemptions.  Defendants asserted the defense of spousal abandonment disqualified 
claimant from claiming married status or two exemptions.  Defendants did not identify 
any governing law that necessarily disqualified claimant from her marital status or claim 
for exemptions.  More importantly, I found that the convincing evidence in the record 
established claimant was married at the time of the work injury.  Therefore, I conclude 
that claimant has proven she was married and entitled to two exemptions on the date of 
injury.  To the extent defendants may have raised a viable defense of spousal 
abandonment, I conclude they failed to prove that defense.  Claimant should be 
compensated as a married individual entitled to two exemptions on the date of injury.  
Given her stipulated weekly gross earnings of $458.57, her applicable weekly rate of 
compensation is $316.72. 
Finally, claimant asserts a claim for penalty benefits, alleging that defendants 
acted unreasonably in denying benefits in two respects.  First, claimant asserts that 
defendants unreasonably underpaid the weekly rate in asserting or challenging 
claimant’s marital status and entitlement to two exemptions.  I found that defendants did 
not have a reasonable basis by the date of trial to continue to assert the spousal 
abandonment defense or challenge claimant’s marital status or entitlement to two 
exemptions for purposes of calculating her weekly rate.  
Defendants did not cite any applicable statutory language that supported or 
establishes a spousal abandonment defense.  Defendants did not cite any agency or 
appellate case law that supports or establishes such a defense.  Most importantly, 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 13 
 
 
defendants did not produce viable, credible, or convincing evidence to establish a claim 
of spousal abandonment prior to the date of injury. 
Defendants paid weekly benefits at the rate of $292.89.  They owed benefits at 
the rate of $316.72 per week.  This results in an underpayment of $23.83 per week for 
which defendants did not have a reasonable basis to challenge the rate by the date of 
trial.  The parties stipulate that defendants paid 32.571 weeks of benefits prior to 
hearing, resulting in an underpayment of the weekly rate totaling approximately 
$776.17.   
Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a.       If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that 
were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse. 
b.       The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award 
benefits under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the 
following facts: 
(1)                 The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2)                 The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 14 
 
 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 
1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 
554 N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own 
medical report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 15 
 
 
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
Weekly compensation payments are due at the end of the compensation week.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 229, 235. 
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Davidson v. Bruce, 
593 N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999).  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 
757 N.W.2d 330, 338 (Iowa 2008).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
In this case, I found that defendants did not offer a reasonable excuse for the 
underpayment of weekly benefits based on the marital status dispute.  Iowa Code 
section 86.13(4)(b)(2).  Defendants bore the burden to establish a reasonable basis, or 
excuse.  Defendants failed to carry their burden of proof on the penalty issues, and a 
penalty award is appropriate.  Iowa Code section 86.13. 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237.  In this 
regard, the Commission is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty 
imposed with a maximum penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, 
benefits.  Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).  
In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 
the employee’s injury and wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  Having considered the 
relevant factors and the purposes of the penalty statute, I conclude that a section 86.13 
penalty in the amount of $350.00 is sufficient to penalize defendants and consistent with 
the principles and objectives of Iowa Code section 86.13’s penalty provisions. 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 16 
 
 
Claimant’s second asserted basis for her claim of penalty benefits is that 
defendants did not have a reasonable basis for denial of permanent partial disability 
benefits.  I do not agree with claimant’s assertion on this issue.  Defendants had 
medical causation opinions that challenged the current causal connection of both 
claimant’s right wrist and right ankle conditions.  Claimant ultimately did not prove the 
current right wrist condition or permanent impairment were related to the injury date.  
Claimant did not recover permanent disability for the right wrist.  Defendants clearly had 
a reasonable basis to deny permanent disability for the right wrist.  
The medical causation opinions challenging causation of the right ankle are 
sufficient bases for defendants to deny the right ankle injury caused permanent 
disability.  Defendants also possessed medical opinions suggesting that claimant 
sustained no permanent disability as a result of the right ankle injury.  Therefore, I 
conclude that defendants had a reasonable basis to challenge permanent disability for 
the right ankle.  I find no basis for award of penalty benefits for the defendants’ failure to 
pay permanent disability benefits for either the right wrist or right ankle. 
Ms. Harris also seeks reimbursement of her independent medical evaluation 
fees.  Defendants appear to acknowledge liability for reimbursement in some amount.  
However, defendants challenged the reasonableness of Dr. Manshadi’s fees pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.39.  The relevant statutory language was modified in 2017 and 
now reads, “A determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made 
pursuant to this subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical 
provider to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.”  Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
Claimant introduced a late report from Dr. Manshadi opining that his fees were 
reasonable for his locale.  Defendants introduced a supplemental exhibit to challenge 
the reasonableness of Dr. Manshadi’s fees.  I found defendants’ evidence would require 
speculation on my part to determine whether those charges included an examination 
and whether the examination was performed by a treating physician.  Ultimately, I found 
the fees charged by Dr. Manshadi were reasonable and in line with other examination 
fees for permanent impairment ratings within his locale.  I conclude claimant is entitled 
to reimbursement of Dr. Manshadi’s independent medical evaluation fee totaling 
$2,200.00.  Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
In addition, claimant seeks transportation costs for a flight she took from South 
Carolina to Iowa to attend the independent medical evaluation with Dr. Manshadi.  I find 
and conclude that there were likely many physicians that could have conducted a 
similar examination in South Carolina or many states between South Carolina and Iowa.  
I find and conclude that claimant’s flight expense is not a reasonable expense pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  I conclude that claimant failed to prove entitlement to 
reimbursement for her flight expenses to attend the evaluation with Dr. Manshadi. 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of her costs.  Costs are assessed at the 
discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40. 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 17 
 
 
Claimant prevailed on her claims to some extent.  I conclude it is reasonable to 
assess costs in some amount.  Claimant seeks costs that include her filing fee 
($100.00) and the cost of serving her original notice and petition upon defendants 
(13.34)  Both requests are reasonable and permitted by agency rule 876 IAC 4.33.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant’s costs totaling $113.34 should be assessed against 
defendants. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant twenty-four point two (24.2) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on January 28, 2020. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the weekly rate of three hundred sixteen 
and 72/100 dollars ($316.72) per week. 
Defendants shall be entitled to the stipulated credit on the hearing report. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 
2018). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the expense of Dr. Manshadi’s 
independent medical evaluation in the amount of two thousand two hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($2,200.00). 
Defendants shall pay penalty benefits to claimant in the amount of two hundred 
fifty and 00/100 dollars ($250.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred 
thirteen and 34/100 dollars ($113.34). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this        9th       day of July, 2020. 
 
 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

HARRIS V. PRK WILLIAMS, INC., D/B/A TO THE RESCUE 
Page 18 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Gary B. Nelson (via WCES) 
Laura Ostrander (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
