Case Number: 1640710.02
Case Title:  STRINGER, ANDREW V. TYSON FOODS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stringer Andrew-1640710.02D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ANDREW STRINGER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 1640710.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                          
TYSON FOODS, INC. 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
          Head Notes:  1108; 1402.60;  
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
     1403.10; 2501; 2701 
 
Defendant. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Andrew Stringer filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Tyson Foods, Inc., self-insured employer, for an 
accepted work injury date of December 4, 2017.  The case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on September 7, 2021. This case was scheduled 
to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines. However, due to the ongoing 
COVID-19 pandemic, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all 
hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall. Accordingly, this case proceeded to 
a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter appearing 
remotely. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through J.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Alberto Olguin was present via audio 
connection on behalf of defendant but did not testify. The evidentiary record closed at 
the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on September 7, 2021. The parties submitted 
post-hearing briefs on October 26, 2021, and the case was considered fully submitted 
on that date. 
 
ISSUES1 
                                                                 
1 At hearing, the parties also disputed the proper rate of compensation. However, defendant has since 
conceded the rate and stipulate to claimant’s proposed rate of $691.18. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-16  13:51:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to ongoing medical care under Iowa Code 
section 85.27; 
 
2. 
Payment of medical expenses; 
 
3. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 33-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
13) He is married and has four children. He graduated from high school, after which he 
attended Des Moines Area Community College (DMACC) for a short time. He then 
worked at a variety of jobs, including convenience stores and fast-food establishments. 
(Defendant’s Exhibit H, pp. 4-5) In 2012, claimant began working at Tyson Fresh Meats 
in Perry, performing general maintenance. (Def. Ex. H, p. 5; Tr., p. 14) The Perry plant 
specializes in pork production. Claimant testified that his maintenance job at Tyson 
involved fixing machinery on the floors, changing motors, and working with electricity 
and hydraulics, among other things. (Tr., p. 14) 
 
On December 4, 2017, claimant was injured while performing his work duties. On 
that day, claimant offered to help his coworker Aaron with a machine that needed repair 
in the rendering department. (Tr., p. 15) He described the rendering machine as a 
“pressure cooker,” which takes the hair that has come off the hogs and uses steam to 
break it down into a “paste” that Tyson then ships out. (Tr., p. 16) Claimant explained 
that while he does not know the entire process involved with the rendering machine, he 
knows that steam is formed at 212 degrees, and that the machine creates hydrogen 
sulfide as a byproduct. (Tr., pp. 16, 18) Employees are therefore required to wear a 
special monitor when entering the rendering room that will alert them if there is a 
dangerous level of chemical in the air. (Tr., p. 18) 
 
When claimant and Aaron entered the rendering room on December 4, 2017, 
they completed the process of locking out the electrical and steam lines. (Tr., p. 15) 
However, as they began to work on the machine, there was an uncontrolled release of 
steam that blew directly into claimant’s face. (Tr., pp. 15-16) As claimant turned away 
from the steam, he slipped and fell in the contents of the hydrolyzer that had dumped 
onto the ground. (Tr., pp. 16-17) The chemical “goo” that he fell into “instantly” started to 
peel the skin off of his hands and also covered his legs. (Tr., p. 17) At that point he 
could not see his coworkers in the room any longer due to the amount of steam that had 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
filled the room. He called for help but believes he was alone in the room by that point. 
He testified that he found a corner of the room and hid there until the exhaust fans 
cleared the steam. (Tr., p. 18) He felt “sheer just panic” and was terrified while waiting, 
as his hydrogen sulfide sensor was going off continuously. He was “absolutely terrified 
[he] wouldn’t come out of that room.” (Tr., p. 18) 
 
As the steam started to clear, claimant was able to locate the exit and made his 
way toward it. Around the same time his supervisor and the first responder team had 
made their way to the rending department, and helped claimant to Tyson’s health 
services department. There claimant’s clothing was removed and the Perry hospital was 
called. (Tr., p. 19) The Perry hospital was not able to accommodate claimant’s burns, so 
he and his coworker Aaron, who was also burned, were taken via Life Flight to Iowa 
City. (Tr., p. 19) 
 
Claimant testified that he was in pain the entire time following the steam release, 
and could not escape the burning. He was hospitalized for eight days, and stated that 
his pain was very difficult to control during that time. (Tr., p. 20) His burns were treated 
at University of Iowa Hospitals, and once he was released he had in-home care for a 
period of time. (Tr., p. 20; Def. Ex. A, p. 4; Deposition Transcript, p. 16) He remained off 
work for about three months, after which he returned sporadically, in order to ease back 
into a work schedule. (Tr., p. 21) Claimant testified that he had hoped to eventually 
return to his job as a mechanic, but due to his injuries it was very difficult for him to 
resume that job. (Tr., p. 22) As such, he was initially accommodated with a supply clerk 
position. Eventually he was able to bid into that position permanently, and at the time of 
hearing he continued to work for Tyson as a supply clerk. (Tr., p. 15)  
 
Claimant testified that at some point shortly after the accident, Sandy Larson, the 
workers’ compensation case manager at Tyson, suggested that both he and Aaron start 
seeing a mental health counselor. (Tr., p. 22) At the time of hearing, claimant continued 
with mental health counseling. (Tr., p. 23) The records in evidence indicate claimant’s 
first visit was January 26, 2018, with Cal Seda, Ph.D. (Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-2) At that 
appointment, claimant still had a great deal of physical discomfort, but was also 
experiencing mental difficulties as his mind would often wander back to the accident, 
especially at night. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) He reported that the longer he was awake at night, 
the greater the chance for night terrors while asleep. As such, his sleep had been 
consistently interrupted. Claimant reported that he wanted to return to work at Tyson, 
and had gone into the plant a few weeks prior to sign insurance forms. He reported that 
he had to sit in the parking lot for about 30 minutes prior to entry due to anxiety, but was 
able to enter eventually.  
 
Claimant and Dr. Seda discussed some personal traumas that predated the 
accident. Claimant reported that his brother-in-law had died in January 2017; his wife’s 
grandfather in June of 2017; his grandfather in August 2017; and his wife had a 
miscarriage in September 2017. He also reported that another brother-in-law had died 
in 2013. He also reported a concussion with brief unconsciousness in high school. 
Claimant reported poor sleep since getting home from the hospital, only about 4 hours 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
per night. He would toss and turn, reliving the accident, and was having dreams in 
which his children were getting burned and their hands degloved. He also expressed 
concern about his friend and coworker Aaron who was also burned in the accident. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 2) 
 
Claimant reported that while his pain was lower when taking medications, his 
anxiety was higher. He was also experiencing some passive suicidal ideation at that 
time, but no active thoughts or plans. He explained triggers for heightened anxiety 
included anything that emits steam, such as humidifiers or hot showers, and that 
sometimes a thermostat kicking on would startle him. Dr. Seda offered psychotherapy in 
order to help claimant work on desensitization strategies and active coping. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
3) 
 
Claimant next saw Dr. Seda on February 20, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) At that time 
he had been medically cleared for his burn injuries, and noted he had gone back to the 
plant a couple of times to see coworkers. He related that while at the plant he felt fairly 
relaxed, but upon leaving the thoughts of the accident would return and increase his 
anxiety. They discussed gradual desensitization. Claimant continued to see Dr. Seda for 
a few more sessions, but was not experiencing much improvement. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3; Def. 
Ex. A, p. 5, Dep. Tr., pp. 18-19) As such, his mental health treatment was transitioned to 
Michael Huston, Ph.D., at Counseling Associates of Central Iowa. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) 
 
Claimant first saw Dr. Huston on June 7, 2018. At that time, he presented with 
anxiety related to the work accident, panic attacks, sleep problems, depression, and 
pain. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) He was also experiencing intrusive thoughts, and decreased 
attention and concentration due to fatigue. With respect to past mental health treatment, 
he noted being on an antidepressant for about two months at age 18 following a break-
up. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 2) He also noted the stresses and personal traumas prior to the 
accident with multiple family deaths in 2017. Dr. Huston’s initial diagnostic impression 
was post-traumatic stress disorder. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 3) Dr. Huston’s “behavioral objectives 
of treatment” included reducing intrusive thoughts or dreams, reducing avoidance 
behaviors, reducing irritability, improving energy, and stopping suicidal ideation.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Huston again on June 19, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) At that time, he 
reported continued persistent nightmares and sleep problems, intrusive thoughts about 
the accident, low stress tolerance, general anxiety and irritability, and avoidance of 
triggers such as loud noises and anything that looks like steam. At his next visit on July 
16, 2018, he continued to discuss his PTSD triggers, such as the pain he feels from his 
burns when he bumps something, or being near a source of steam. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) He 
continued to report increased irritability, lowered tolerances for frustration, and the 
issues of ongoing physical pain from his injuries at his next several appointments. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, pp. 6-8) He also noted uncertainty about his future given his reduced income 
since the injuries. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8)  
 
At his appointment with Dr. Huston on August 23, 2018, claimant discussed his 
consistently high stress level over the past 2-years due to the multiple family deaths that 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
occurred just prior to the work accident. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9) Dr. Huston noted, however, that 
claimant appeared less frustrated and his efforts to cope were improving over time. 
Unfortunately at his next appointment on September 9, 2018, claimant reported feeling 
depressed for the past two weeks, with a lack of interest, motivation, and energy to 
engage in activities he normally enjoys. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) On September 28, 2018, he 
reported recent stresses in his marriage that have increased his personal stress and 
interfered with his mental health recovery. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) He also discussed the 
uncertainty regarding his job and family financial issues, as well as feeling discouraged 
that he has permanent nerve damage in his legs that will likely cause chronic pain. 
 
By his next appointment on October 30, 2018, claimant reported symptoms of 
intrusive thoughts, strong negative reactions, and avoidance behaviors related to his 
accident. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) He continued to have persistent leg pain, but had returned to 
a 48-hour workweek, which was helpful for the family finances. At his next appointment 
on November 8, 2018, he reported recent conflicts with his wife that involved his inability 
to get up in the morning, resulting in his inability to help with the children in the morning. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 13) However, by his next appointment on November 14, 2018, his home 
stress had decreased after changing his schedule. He also discussed stress related to 
his job, but noted he felt the company had been working with him to help him cope and 
recover from the accident so he wanted to stay with the company if possible. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 14) 
 
On November 29, 2018, claimant reported to Dr. Huston that he was making 
progress at work and felt grateful he would not need to return to maintenance as other 
work opportunities at the plant may open soon. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) Over the next few 
appointments, claimant discussed varying levels of stress at work and home, as well as 
increased pain levels due to the cold weather. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 16-18) On January 24, 
2019, he talked again about the permanent nerve damage in his legs, and how this took 
away his sense of hope from returning to many of his previous activities, including his 
previous job assignment. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 19) He discussed stress related to his current job 
situation. His next couple of appointments focused primarily on his work-related 
stressors, and coping mechanisms to use when triggered by stimuli related to his 
accident. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 20-22)  
 
On April 22, 2019, claimant advised Dr. Huston that he was feeling some relief as 
he had accepted a permanent position at work in the supply area. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 23) He 
expressed feeling grateful that the company raised the pay for the position in order to 
accommodate him. Dr. Huston noted he appeared tired but calmer and more relaxed. 
Over his next couple of appointments he continued to show improvement. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
24-25) However, he still experienced anxiety reactions in certain work situations, and 
Dr. Huston and claimant agreed he should continue with occasional counseling 
sessions. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) Claimant’s last visit with Dr. Huston was June 11, 2019, as 
Dr. Huston relocated his practice. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 26) As such, claimant was transitioned to 
a new therapist, Thomas “TJ” Sunderman, MA, LMHC. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 1) 
 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Claimant first saw Sunderman on July 1, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 1-4) Claimant noted 
he continued to completely avoid the triggers of steam and loud noises, but his current 
job in an office setting had been helpful to him. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 3) He also reported ongoing 
anxiety, sleep difficulties, night terrors, and being “easily agitated,” although the night 
terrors had lessened in frequency. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4) Sunderman noted goals of utilizing 
positive coping strategies to manage his symptoms of ongoing anxiety and depression. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4) At his next visit on July 22, 2019, claimant reported “constant pain” due 
to the nerve damage from his physical injuries. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 5) He also reported 
questioning whether he wanted to stay in his new position at Tyson long term. He noted 
having to go near the rendering department on a daily basis to retrieve pallet jacks, 
which caused him to feel “increased adrenaline” and like he wanted to “run away.” (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 5) 
 
Claimant continued to report increased stress at work, along with increased sleep 
struggles and ongoing chronic pain issues, over his next several appointments with 
Sunderman. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 6-10) At his appointment on December 18, 2019, he noted 
feeling increased agitation and anxiety as he was feeling less patient at work and at 
home. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11) He also noted the holidays as being a difficult time due to 
several family members who had passed, and the holidays reminding him of them. By 
January 15, 2020, claimant reported he was getting more accustomed to his new job 
and it was not that bad. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 12) He reported feeling “anger and resentment” 
some days toward his employer due to the accident. 
 
On January 8, 2020, the senior case management specialist at Tyson wrote to 
Mr. Sunderman with questions regarding his ongoing care. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 13) Sunderman 
responded to the letter on February 12, 2020. The case manager noted that the “Official 
Disability Guide” suggests that for work-related psychological therapy to continue, 
progress should be noted. As such, Sunderman was asked whether claimant had made 
objective progress from the therapy, to which he responded, “yes.” The next question 
was when a release from treatment or decrease in frequency of therapy would be 
expected. Sunderman replied that claimant would be seen every 6 weeks. The final 
question stated that due to the “frequency that we see personal issues being addressed 
in therapy,” whether claimant’s therapy at that time was directly related to the work 
issue from December 4, 2017, to which Sunderman replied, “yes,” and directed the 
reader to his most recent progress note. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 13) 
 
 The February 12, 2020 progress note indicates that claimant continued to 
complain of ongoing neuropathy symptoms in his legs, especially in cold weather. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 14) As a result, claimant stated his “mental capacity” is affected, as the pain is 
a constant reminder of the accident. He also stated, however, that his symptoms were 
not as bad as they used to be, although he does continue to have bad dreams about the 
accident, which in turn caused increased anxiety and depression and ongoing sleep 
issues. They further discussed claimant’s “ongoing reminder of the accident” every time 
he looks at his legs, and that he feels very self-conscious about his scars. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
14) 
 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
At claimant’s next appointment with Sunderman on March 25, 2020, claimant 
noted that he had a neuropsychological evaluation scheduled for April 1, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 15) They discussed his ongoing PTSD triggers of pain in his legs, and how foggy 
days remind him of the steam from the accident which increases stress and makes it 
difficult to drive to work. They also discussed increased stress from COVID-19 and his 
concern about it spreading within the plant. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 15-16) 
 
On April 1, 2020, claimant was seen at defendant’s request by Bruce Jasper, 
Ph.D., for an independent neuropsychological evaluation. (Def. Ex. E) Dr. Jasper’s 
report is dated April 21, 2020. Dr. Jasper indicated that claimant self-reported physical 
symptoms including bilateral lower extremity pain, cognitive symptoms including 
memory loss, and emotional symptoms including anxiety, depression, and PTSD 
symptoms. (Def. Ex. E, p. 1) However, Dr. Jasper noted that throughout the interview 
and testing he did not observe claimant to show signs of pain, such as grimacing or 
atypical adjusting or shifting. He also stated that claimant described that most days he 
was in a good mood, and described a wide variety of consistent enjoyments and 
pleasures in his work, family, and social life. He also observed that claimant’s “daily 
functioning and interview behaviors are inconsistent with his having significant memory 
impairments.” (Def. Ex. E, p. 1) 
 
Regarding leg pain, claimant told Dr. Jasper that his biggest issue was 
neuropathy, and he experienced constant numbness and tingling in his legs below his 
knees. He also noted that temperature changes further aggravate his symptoms. 
Regarding his memory loss, claimant stated “I feel like my memory is fried! I one 
hundred percent believe that my memory is shot!” (Def. Ex. E, p. 1) He reported having 
trouble remembering names and could not remember what he did the day before. With 
respect to his emotional symptoms, claimant stated that he was continuing to 
experience “terrible dreams” about twice per month, essentially replaying the accident. 
He also less frequently experienced “replacement dreams,” in which the person being 
injured is a family member rather than himself. (Def. Ex. E, p. 1) 
 
Claimant further reported to Dr. Jasper that he continued to emotionally respond 
to reminders of the accident, such as the sight of steam or fog, and he becomes angry 
faster both at home and at work since the accident. (Def. Ex. E, p. 2) When asked about 
his typical day, claimant related that he enjoys his work and has a good relationship with 
his current boss. He had also recently purchased an aquarium for his children to grow 
tadpoles, which he found rewarding, and in recent months had started getting together 
with friends on weekends to play Dungeons & Dragons and publish their sessions on a 
podcast.  
 
Dr. Jasper reviewed medical records and noted that prior to the December 4, 
2017 work accident, claimant had several non-work-related life stressors and traumas, 
specifically the series of family deaths in 2017 and resulting struggles over estates and 
property. (Def. Ex. E, p. 3) He noted several medical records related to claimant’s 
treatment for his burns in which the providers noted mental distress resulting from the 
accident, and that he would benefit from counseling and mental health evaluation. In 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
one record it is noted that claimant had discontinued a medication because he had 
forgotten he had it. (Def. Ex. E, p. 4) In reviewing Dr. Huston’s records, Dr. Jasper noted 
that claimant appeared to have had a good working relationship with Dr. Huston. (Def. 
Ex. E, p. 5) However, in reviewing the records of TJ Sunderman, Dr. Jasper noted that 
no symptom validity testing or “repeated quantitative measurement of subjective 
symptom complaints” had been performed. He noted such information would “greatly 
aid in determining validity of self-report and would allow for a more reliable measure of 
change in symptoms over time.”  
 
In reviewing his history, Dr. Jasper noted “significant” depression in high school 
that was treated by medication. Claimant also reported to Dr. Jasper that at the time of 
his accident, his marriage “wasn’t real great,” and he had experienced some emotional 
distress prior to the work incident due to the deaths in the family and communication 
issues with his wife.  
 
Dr. Jasper administered approximately 13 different neuropsychological tests, 
some designed to provide information regarding claimant’s physical pain and 
psychological condition, and some designed to test claimant’s cognitive, motor, and 
sensory condition. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 7-8) On each of the physical/pain/psychological 
tests, claimant’s scores were in the invalid/noncredible range consistent with 
malingering and/or somatoform presentation, or provided evidence of over-
reporting/exaggeration of symptoms. (Def. Ex. E, p. 7) With respect to the cognitive, 
motor, and sensory testing, Dr. Jasper noted that claimant failed four stand-alone 
performance validity tests, which is consistent with invalid/implausible performance and 
malingering. (Def. Ex. E, p. 8) 
 
In his summary and conclusion, Dr. Jasper stated that the neuropsychological 
evaluation findings included “strong objective evidence of both invalid/implausible 
symptom reporting and invalid/implausible performance deficits most consistent with 
claimant attempting to malinger.” (Def. Ex. E, p. 9) He explained that malingering is not 
a medical condition, but “intentionally feigning or exaggerating symptoms of illness or 
injury for external gain.” As a result, Dr. Jasper indicated that assessment of claimant’s 
reported conditions “must be done with careful scrutiny.” He then notes that claimant’s 
most emphasized PTSD symptom is nightmares, but that he described a “highly 
atypical” nightmare presentation. He also noted that claimant described the work 
accident in great detail without showing any signs of distress or psychological 
avoidance, which is inconsistent with his having PTSD associated with the event being 
described. Finally, he noted claimant’s intact daily functioning, including full-time work, 
engaged participation at home, and extended consistent maintaining of social activities 
and relationships outside of work and home. He stated that this “breadth and depth” of 
intact daily functioning is “highly inconsistent” with the distress or dysfunction necessary 
to be diagnosed with PTSD or major depressive disorder. (Def. Ex. E, p. 9) In 
conclusion, Dr. Jasper opined that claimant does not have any permanent 
psychological, cognitive, or pain-related impairment from the work injury; any treatment 
he may need going forward is not related to the work incident; and that claimant does 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
not have any permanent work or activity restrictions caused by the work incident. (Def. 
Ex. E, p. 9) 
 
Following Dr. Jasper’s report, defendant withdrew authorization of claimant’s 
ongoing mental health treatment with Sunderman. (Tr., p. 28) Claimant filed an 
application for alternate medical care with this agency, however the application was 
dismissed after defendant filed an answer denying liability for ongoing treatment related 
to claimant’s mental health condition. (Tr., p. 31) Claimant continued to see Sunderman 
at his own expense following the denial, as he believes the counseling continues to help 
his condition. (Tr., p. 26)  
 
At his appointment with Sunderman on June 10, 2020, claimant related that his 
workers’ compensation had been “cancelled” after the neuropsychological evaluation. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) They discussed claimant’s ongoing issues with PTSD and his need for 
additional treatment due to the ongoing effects of the accident. At that time, claimant 
reported he was still thinking about the accident 3 to 4 times per day, especially when 
he experienced physical discomfort related to the burns. He also stated he continued to 
have dreams about the accident once or twice per month, and seeing any type of steam 
still caused panic, although not as bad as it had been in the past. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) 
Sunderman completed a form indicating the various indicators for PTSD, and noted that 
claimant still demonstrated at least one of each category of symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
For example, he still felt fearful when looking into the rendering department. He 
continued to re-experience the accident through distressing recollections and dreams. 
He continued to avoid thoughts, conversations, places, and people associated with the 
accident, especially his coworker Aaron who was also injured. Finally, he still 
experienced irritability and outbursts of anger, as well as an exaggerated startle 
response when exposed to certain triggers. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) Based on those symptoms, 
Sunderman maintained the diagnosis of PTSD related to the work accident. 
 
Sunderman provided a letter on July 20, 2020, further explaining his diagnosis. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) He noted that due to the significant nature of the accident 
and claimant’s ongoing psychological effects, withholding coverage for future therapy 
sessions could have “catastrophic consequences” for his mental and emotional 
wellbeing. He set forth the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, and noted which criteria applied 
to claimant. Those criteria included the stressor of actual or threatened serious injury, 
through direct exposure and witnessing the trauma; intrusion symptoms including 
unwanted upsetting memories, flashbacks, and emotional distress and physical activity 
after exposure to traumatic reminders; avoidance of trauma-related stimuli; negative 
alterations in cognitions and mood, including exaggerated blame of self or others for 
causing the trauma, negative affect, decreased interest in activities, and difficulty 
experiencing positive affect; alterations in arousal and reactivity including irritability 
and/or aggression, heightened startle reaction, difficulty concentrating, and difficulty 
sleeping; symptoms lasting more than one month; and symptoms creating distress or 
functional impairment. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-3)  
 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
Sunderman then provided a summary of topics that had been discussed with 
claimant in therapy over the prior year, including foggy days triggering claimant’s PTSD; 
the constant neuropathic pain in his legs serving as a constant reminder of the accident; 
claimant trying to avoid thinking about it; ongoing bad dreams, which cause sleep 
issues along with increased anxiety and depression; “fight or flight” response to 
situations that might cause increased pain in his legs; feelings of anger and resentment; 
and feeling like he wanted to run away when having to go near the rendering 
department where the accident occurred. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) In conclusion, Sunderman 
requested that claimant’s psychotherapy continue to be covered, as he needed to 
continue working through the trauma related to the accident. He further noted that “the 
very nature of PTSD can create intense emotional reactions by seeing and/or hearing 
work-related circumstances that remind him of the accident.” As a result, he opined that 
claimant’s wellbeing depends on continued coverage for psychotherapy. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3)  
 
At claimant’s next appointment with Sunderman on July 22, 2020, he discussed 
concern about his injury being “life-long.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23) He also noted his anxiety was 
“spiked” all the time, and he was not sure why. He recognized that COVID and work 
restrictions, along with the hot weather aggravating his leg pain causing him to limit his 
outdoor activities, were all contributing to his increased anxiety. He continued with 
therapy sessions for the remainder of 2020, discussing his stressors both at work and 
home, and learning additional coping strategies to deal with his PTSD related issues. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 24-32) At his appointment on January 27, 2021, claimant reported still 
having pain in his legs where he was burned. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 35) At his next several 
appointments, he continued to express the same symptoms of irritability, shame, and 
depression related to the work accident. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 36-46) His last appointment prior 
to hearing took place on August 4, 2021, at which time he reported feeling anger about 
Tyson’s mandatory COVID vaccination requirement, and feeling “stressed and jittery.” 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 47) With respect to the vaccination issue, claimant testified at hearing that 
he had since been vaccinated, and no longer had any issues with Tyson about the 
policy. (Tr., p. 46) 
 
Claimant also testified that at his August 4, 2021 appointment, Sunderman told 
him he could see him being discharged from therapy within the next year. (Tr., p. 26) 
Claimant stated that they have had a lot of success working together. (Tr., p. 26) He 
also stated that he would like to see Sunderman every three to four weeks, but cannot 
financially do so, and as a result sees him about every six weeks. (Tr., pp. 25, 41) 
Claimant also testified that he disagrees with Dr. Jasper’s conclusions that he does not 
have any permanent impairments related to the work injury, does not need any 
additional mental health treatment related to the injury, and is malingering. (Tr., p. 29) 
He testified that none of the other mental health professionals he has treated with have 
ever questioned the validity of his symptoms or his truthfulness. (Tr., pp. 29-30) He 
further noted that he is not “gaining anything” from the injury, and the only benefits he 
has received other than medical is the temporary benefits he received while off work. 
(Tr., p. 30) It is noted that in 2019, he also received payment for a 2 percent whole body 
impairment rating related to his physical injuries, which amounted to $6,848.41 with 
interest. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1)  

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
With respect to the prior stresses claimant experienced in his personal life in 
2017, he testified that while upsetting, he did not consider seeking mental health 
treatment prior to the work injury related to the deaths in the family. (Tr., pp. 38; 46-47) 
He further stated that the stress and sadness he experienced following the family 
deaths was not as long lasting as the pain and depression he has experienced following 
the work accident and diagnosis of PTSD. (Tr., p. 47) He continues to find benefit from 
his sessions with Sunderman, including improvement in his ability to handle some levels 
of steam such as boiling water. (Tr., p. 42) He testified that he discusses various coping 
strategies in his sessions with Sunderman, and then implements those strategies in his 
daily life. (Tr., p. 43)  
 
When considering the evidence as a whole, I find the opinion of Mr. Sunderman 
more convincing and reliable than that of Dr. Jasper. Mr. Sunderman has been 
providing mental health treatment to claimant since July of 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 1) He is 
intimately familiar with claimant’s ongoing symptoms, as well as the progress he has 
made over the years. Dr. Jasper evaluated claimant one time, and a great deal of that 
time was spent conducting approximately 13 different neuropsychological tests. 
Claimant testified that he was at Dr. Jasper’s office for roughly 5 hours, and just one of 
the 13 tests, the MMPI, took about an hour and a half to complete. (Tr., p. 29) Dr. 
Jasper appears to base all of his opinions on the results of those tests, with little 
consideration given to the mental health treatment claimant received from Dr. Huston 
and Mr. Sunderman or their diagnoses regarding his condition. Claimant was diagnosed 
with PTSD as early as June 7, 2018, although it appears that his health care providers 
were questioning his mental health state almost immediately following the accident. 
(See Def. Ex. E, p. 3) No treating mental health provider has questioned or changed 
that diagnosis. Dr. Jasper’s opinion is narrowly focused on test results, and in stark 
contrast to all of the other evidence in the record. 
 
Additionally, there is simply no valid reason for claimant to malinger in this case. 
The only thing he seeks in this proceeding is ongoing mental health care. He is not 
seeking additional temporary or permanency benefits at this time. He simply wishes to 
continue with the treatment he has been receiving for years, for as long as Sunderman 
believes he will continue to benefit. Sunderman recently expressed that may only be 
another year, further indicating the great improvements claimant has received through 
his treatment. There is no “external gain” to be had by claimant continuing with this 
treatment and continuing to improve, as anticipated by the definition of malingering.  
 
In contrast, Sunderman has provided a detailed explanation of claimant’s 
symptoms that support his diagnosis of PTSD. (Cl. Ex. 1) His opinions are supported by 
the medical evidence and claimant’s clear and consistent testimony. I find his opinions 
to be better supported by the evidence as a whole, and the most reliable. I find that 
claimant’s ongoing mental health symptoms are causally related to the work accident of 
December 4, 2017. As such, he is entitled to ongoing mental health treatment for those 
symptoms, as well as reimbursement for the expenses he has paid out of pocket since 
the denial of care.  

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
Claimant argues that defendant improperly withdrew authorization for his mental 
health treatment, and that he is entitled to ongoing care for his work-related mental 
health injury. Defendant argues that claimant is not entitled to alternate medical care, 
because his ongoing treatment with Sunderman is not causally related to the December 
4, 2017 work accident. Defendant points to Dr. Jasper’s opinions in support of its 
position, and further argues that the bulk of claimant’s most recent therapy with 
Sunderman is related to claimant’s personal “everyday stresses,” as opposed to the 
work accident.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is 
based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it 
need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa 
App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When considering the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider 
whether the examination occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the 
compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s 
education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the 
weight and value” of the opinion. Rockwell Graphic Systems, Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 
187, 192 (Iowa 1985). In considering Dr. Jasper’s opinion, I found it to be narrowly 
focused on test results, and in stark contrast to all of the other evidence in the record. 
Dr. Jasper provided a one-time evaluation, a great deal of which was spent 
administering 13 different neuropsychological evaluations. Further, there is no other 
evidence in the record to support his conclusion that claimant is malingering. Claimant’s 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
condition has continued to improve with the treatment he has been receiving, he is not 
seeking any additional compensation for his injuries at this time, and he continues to 
work at Tyson.  
In contrast, Mr. Sunderman provided a detailed explanation of claimant’s 
symptoms that support his diagnosis of PTSD. His opinions are supported by the 
medical evidence and claimant’s clear and consistent testimony. I found his opinions to 
be better supported by the evidence as a whole, and the most reliable. As such, I found 
that claimant’s ongoing mental health symptoms are causally related to the work 
accident of December 4, 2017. 
 
 
Under Iowa law, the employer is required to provide care to an injured employee 
and is permitted to choose the care. Iowa Code § 85.27(4). The treatment must be 
offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue 
inconvenience to the employee. West Side Transport v. Cordell, 601 N.W.2d 691 (Iowa 
1999). Right to choose the care means the right to choose the provider, not the 
treatment modalities recommended by the provider. Employer must provide the 
treatment, testing, imaging, or other treatment modalities recommended by its own 
authorized treating physician, even if a consulting physician disagrees with those 
recommendations. Haack v. Von Hoffman Graphics, File No. 1268172 (App., July 31, 
2002); Cahill v. S & H Fabricating & Engineering, File No. 1138063 (Alt Care, May 30, 
1997), Leitzen v. Collis, Inc., File No. 1084677 (Alt Care, September 9, 1996); Hawxby 
v. Hallett Materials, File No. 1112821 (Alt Care, February 20, 1996). The right to choose 
the care does not authorize the employer to interfere with the medical judgment of its 
own treating physician. Boggs v Cargill, Inc., File No. 1050396 (Alt Care, January 31, 
1994). 
 
 
In addition to Dr. Jasper being a consulting practitioner, his opinions were not 
convincing. Given the above, I find that defendant unreasonably interfered with the care 
being provided by Mr. Sunderman, its own authorized treating provider. Dr. Jasper’s 
opinions do not justify such interference. As a result, defendant has lost the right to 
further choose the care for claimant’s mental health injury. 
 
 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for treatment he continued at his own expense 
following defendant’s denial of further mental health care. Defendant argues that 
claimant is not entitled to reimbursement because he knew that Mr. Sunderman’s care 
was no longer authorized after May of 2020. However, under Iowa law, once defendant 
denied compensability for ongoing mental health treatment, it lost the right to choose 
the medical providers for that care during the period of denial. “[T]he employer has no 
right to choose the medical care when compensability is contested.” Bell Bros., 779 
N.W.2d at 204. Further, when compensability is contested, “the employer cannot assert 
an authorization defense in response to a subsequent claim by the employee for the 
expenses of the alternate medical care.” R. R. Donnelly, 670 N.W.2d at 197-198. 
 
 
Ultimately, therefore, defendant is precluded from asserting an authorization 
defense as to any treatment during the period of denial, and defendant lost the right to 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
control the medical care claimant sought during the period of denial. Brewer-Strong, 913 
N.W.2d at 247; Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 204. As such, claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement for the treatment he received for his mental health injuries during the 
period of the denial, as reflected in claimant’s exhibit 3. 
 
 
Claimant seeks a taxation of costs for the expenses listed in claimant’s exhibit 6, 
which include the filing fee, certified mail fee, and fee for the IME report of Charles 
Wenzel, D.O. Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code 
§ 86.40. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or 
workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. 
 
The costs claimant seeks are all allowable under 876 IAC 4.33. As claimant was 
successful in his claim, I use my discretion and award him $607.15 in costs. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. Defendant shall immediately 
authorize and timely pay for claimant’s continuing mental health care with TJ 
Sunderman. 
 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for all out-of-pocket expenses he has 
incurred in seeking mental health treatment during the period of denial, including but not 
limited to the expenses reflected in claimant’s exhibit 3. 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of six hundred seven 
and 15/100 dollars ($607.15). 
 
Signed and filed this _____16th ___ day of February, 2022. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jerry Jackson (via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 

STRINGER V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
