Case Number: 5055873
Case Title:  BROMELL, JOSEPH V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MGMT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bromell Joseph-5055872D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOSEPH BROMELL, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
BUILDING SYSTEMS 
  :                 File Nos. 5055872, 5055873 
MANAGEMENT, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                  ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GRANITE STATE INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
   
  :             Head Note Nos.: 1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
 
 
  :             1803, 1803.01, 2500 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Joseph Bromell, filed petitions in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Building Systems Management, Inc., employer, and Granite 
State Insurance Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of a 
stipulated injury on May 6, 2013 and an alleged injury sustained on August 28, 2014.  
This matter came on for hearing before Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
Erica J. Fitch, in Des Moines, Iowa.  The record in this case consists of Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1, 22, 39, 40, and 44 through 46, Defendants’ Exhibits H and L, and the 
testimony of the claimant, Terry Vargason, Charles Myers, Lisa Chapman, and David 
Kacena.  The parties submitted post-hearing briefs. 
ISSUES 
In File No. 5055872 (Date of Injury: May 6, 2013 (trauma); involving stipulated 
injuries to the left shoulder and ribs, and disputed injury to the cervical spine): 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the injury of May 6, 2013 is a cause of temporary disability from 
October 24, 2016 through November 7, 2016;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-06  15:28:56     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether the injury is a cause of permanent disability;  
3. The extent of industrial disability, if any;  
4. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits; 
5. Whether defendants are responsible for claimed medical expenses;  
6. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination; and 
7. Specific taxation of costs. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
In File No. 5055873 (Date of Injury: August 28, 2014 (cumulative); involving 
disputed injuries to the bilateral upper extremities and cervical spine): 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment on August 28, 2014;  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability; 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from October 24, 
2016 through November 7, 2016;  
4. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability;  
5. Whether the alleged disability is a scheduled member disability or an 
unscheduled disability;  
6. The extent of claimant’s permanent disability, if any;  
7. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits;  
8. Whether defendants are responsible for medical expenses;  
9. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination; and 
10. Specific taxation of costs. 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 3 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing was excellent.  His 
testimony was clear, direct, and knowledgeable.  Claimant’s testimony has remained 
consistent throughout the protracted course of this case.  To the extent his testimony is 
not reflected in contemporaneous medical records, the conflict is easily reconciled with 
the fact medical providers may not record all reports verbatim.  On several occasions 
throughout the course of hearing, the undersigned observed claimant massage his right 
hand and attempt to flex or rotate the right wrist.  Claimant also, less frequently, 
physically shook the right hand.  I observed the right hand was never straightened and 
generally held a clawed and bent position.  I find no evidence claimant is dishonest or 
he lacks veracity.  Claimant is found credible.   
Claimant was 60 years of age at the time of hearing.  He resides in Moscow, 
Iowa; he lives with his significant other, Lisa Chapman.  (Hearing transcript, pages 63-
64; Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pp. 3-4; Defendants’ Exhibit L, Deposition Transcript p. 5)  
Claimant graduated high school in 1977; he has no other formal post-secondary or 
vocational education.  (Hearing transcript p. 64; CE1, p. 4)  His work history consists of 
primarily construction work, including in concrete, general residential, commercial, and 
maintenance.  He has also performed farmhand labor.  (Hearing transcript p. 66; CE1, 
pp. 4-5)  Claimant described his pre-injury health as very good.  He denied any chronic 
neck problems, but admitted to sporadic chiropractic treatment for neck or back 
complaints.  (Hearing transcript pp. 64-65) 
Claimant began work at defendant-employer in 2010.  He began as a 
maintenance employee.  (Hearing transcript p. 78; CE1, pp. 4, 7)  The business of 
defendant-employer is managing rental property, including houses, duplexes, condos, 
and apartments.  Employees performed required maintenance, such as water heater 
replacements, drywall, door and window replacement, plumbing, and electrical work.  
Defendant-employer is owned by David Kacena.  (Hearing Transcript pp. 92, 108-109; 
CE1, pp. 7-8; DEL, Depo. Tr. p. 10)  Immediately preceding his stipulated work injury of 
May 6, 2013, claimant worked full time and earned $17.00 per hour.  (CE1, pp. 8-9) 
While at work on May 6, 2013, claimant received a call from Mr. Kacena, who 
requested he inspect the framework of a roof on a property.  Roofers had been hired, 
but were experiencing difficulty with a portion of the roof.  Claimant and a coworker, 
Charles “Chuck” Myers, climbed onto the roof and began work.  At some point, claimant 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 4 
 
took a step backwards and fell through the roof into the rafters below.  With assistance, 
claimant was able to exit back onto the roof.  Due to claimant’s immediate pain, Mr. 
Myers transported claimant to the hospital.  At the hospital, it was determined claimant 
had suffered with three broken ribs, as well as various cuts and bruises.  He was 
discharged and advised to follow up the following day with an occupational health 
provider.  (Hearing transcript pp. 70-72) 
On May 7, 2013, claimant presented to Mercy Occupational Health with 
complaints of pain of the chest and side, towards the back of the ribs.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 
10, p. 1)  Claimant was evaluated by Ernest Perea, M.D., who noted complaints of left-
sided chest and upper back pain.  Dr. Perea indicated claimant fell through a roof onto a 
cross brace and had been seen in the emergency room with complaints of left scapular 
pain, left lateral rib pain, and resolved shortness of breath.  X-rays had revealed 
nondisplaced left 6th through 8th lateral rib fractures.  Dr. Perea applied an Ace wrap for 
additional rib support, prescribed oxycodone, and restricted claimant from use of his left 
arm.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 10, pp. 4-6) 
Two days later, claimant returned to Dr. Perea, on May 9, 2013.  At that time, 
claimant reported significant rib area pain and a new complaint of left shoulder pain with 
decreased range of motion.  Dr. Perea localized the pain to over the glenohumeral and 
anterior acromioclavicular portions of the left shoulder.  Dr. Perea performed a Toradol 
injection, ordered a course of physical therapy, ordered a left shoulder x-ray, and left 
work restrictions in effect.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 10, pp. 11-12) 
On May 20, 2013, claimant presented to Mercy Occupational Health and was 
examined by Daniel Hogan, M.D.  Claimant reported continued back and ribcage pain, 
as well as continued difficulty squeezing with the left hand.  Dr. Hogan recommended 
continuation of the existing treatment program and refilled a prescription for oxycodone.  
(CE44, Depo. Ex. 10, p. 14)   
On June 3, 2013, claimant returned to Dr. Perea in follow up of rib and back pain.  
Claimant reported discomfort about his rib belt region, as well as a sharp stabbing 
feeling in his shoulder, down his back to his rear.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 9, p. 1)  Dr. Perea 
noted claimant fractured three ribs in the fall and indicated continued left rib pain was 
expected.  He also noted claimant’s left shoulder was painful, with impacted movement.  
Dr. Perea suspected internal derangement of the left labrum or shoulder.  (CE44, Depo. 
Ex. 9, p. 2)  He ordered chest x-rays and a left shoulder MRI; prescribed physical 
therapy; and imposed work restrictions with respect to the left arm.  Dr. Perea 
recommended use of over-the-counter medication, as needed.  (CE44, Depo. Tr. pp. 2-
3) 
Claimant presented to Dr. Perea on June 10, 2013.  Dr. Perea noted complaints 
of left rib and back pain, as well as sharp pain from the upper thoracic area down into 
the gluts.  Dr. Perea opined claimant’s x-rays demonstrated healing of the left rib 
fractures and opined claimant was making slow progress.  He opined a left shoulder 
MRI showed advanced tendinopathy of the insertion of the distal supraspinatus tendon.  

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 5 
 
He opined claimant demonstrated severe adhesive capsulitis and dysfunction in 
shoulder motion.  Dr. Perea opined claimant had not made progress with respect to his 
shoulder and accordingly, referred claimant for evaluation with shoulder specialist, Mark 
Mysnyk, M.D.  He ordered continued physical therapy for the rib condition and left work 
restrictions in effect.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 11, pp. 1-2) 
Pursuant to Dr. Perea’s referral, on July 5, 2013, claimant presented to Dr. 
Mysnyk for shoulder evaluation.  Claimant reported he did not notice left shoulder pain 
until he weaned from pain medication prescribed for his rib injuries.  He described 
stiffness of his shoulder, as well as stiffness and a swollen sensation of his fingers.  Dr. 
Mysnyk opined a June 7, 2013 MRI showed moderately advanced distal tendinopathy 
involving the anterior supraspinatus tendon, and mild intraarticular long head biceps 
tendinopathy.  Dr. Mysnyk noted no definite labral tear, but indicated claimant was 
extremely painful on O’Brien’s test and demonstrated positive impingement signs.  Dr. 
Mysnyk diagnosed, at minimum, left shoulder impingement syndrome.  He prescribed a 
course of physical therapy, use of anti-inflammatories, and imposed work restrictions.  
Claimant was directed to follow up in one month for consideration of a shoulder 
injection.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 13, p. 1) 
At physical therapy on July 16, 2013, the therapist noted complaints of rib pain, 
low back pain, a tight feeling of the left hand, left shoulder pain, and occasional 
numbness into the fingers.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 12, p. 1) 
On August 9, 2013, claimant returned to Dr. Mysnyk and received a left shoulder 
injection.  The injection provided considerable relief.  Dr. Mysnyk released claimant to 
return to work on September 21, 2013, without restrictions.  (CE22, p. 3) 
Following the May 2013 injury, claimant testified he suffered broken ribs, as well 
as injuries to his upper back, left shoulder, and neck.  He also noted reporting bilateral 
hand tightness and numbness during physical therapy.  (CE1, p. 6)  Claimant testified 
he began to experience bilateral arm, hand, and elbow symptoms, as well.  (CE1, p. 7)  
Claimant testified his evaluations with Dr. Perea were short in nature and consisted 
primarily of Dr. Perea asking him questions.  Claimant testified he specifically recalled 
informing Dr. Perea of problems with his neck and a tight, swollen sensation of his 
hands.  Claimant testified Dr. Perea’s response to such complaints was to highlight 
claimant’s broken ribs.  He estimated first noticing hand tightness, followed by a neck 
ache radiating down the back of the arm, two to three weeks’ post-injury, as he utilized 
strong pain medication immediately following the fall.  Due to neck complaints, claimant 
testified he began to see a chiropractor.  (Hearing transcript pp. 72-76) 
Claimant’s chiropractor, Shannon Woodward, D.C., subsequently signed a 
statement regarding his care of claimant.  The statement was authored by claimant’s 
counsel, but edited and signed by Dr. Woodward.1  Thereby, Dr. Woodward indicated 
                                                 
1 Dr. Woodward’s signed statement is dated November 21, 2018. 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 6 
 
that at the time of his July 17, 2013 evaluation, claimant described the May 2013 fall 
and also indicated he had lifted an object two days prior, resulting in immediate pain of 
the upper back which moved into the neck.  Dr. Woodward opined that claimant more 
than likely presented with, at minimum, cervicalgia.  He opined the condition was more 
likely than not caused by the fall; he explained the traumatic injuries would have led to 
weaker support for the shoulder girdle and neck, leading to a greater chance of muscle 
strain.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 15, p. 2) 
Charles “Chuck” Myers testified at evidentiary hearing.  Mr. Myers worked for 
defendant-employer from 2013 to 2016.  During this period, Mr. Myers worked as a 
maintenance worker and subsequently became maintenance supervisor.  Mr. Meyers 
was present with claimant on May 6, 2013 and witnessed him fall through the roof.  He 
assisted claimant to a vehicle and transported him to the emergency room.  (Hearing 
transcript pp. 38-42, 47)  Mr. Myers testified claimant’s immediately recognizable 
injuries were to his ribs, as well as scratches and bruises.  When claimant returned to 
work, he complained of rib pain and difficulty with bilateral hand gripping.  Mr. Myers 
testified claimant had obvious difficulty moving his body and appeared to be in pain.  Mr. 
Myers observed claimant’s inability to perform certain work tasks due to lack of grip 
strength and weakness of his upper extremities.  He testified claimant fatigued more 
quickly and, in time, had a more hunched posture.  (Hearing transcript pp. 43-44)  
Mr. Myers’ testimony at the time of hearing was clear and direct.  His demeanor 
at the time of hearing was good and gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity.  Mr. Myers is found credible. 
Terry Vargason testified at evidentiary hearing.  Mr. Vargason testified he worked 
for defendant-employer from early 2013 through mid-2014.  He was hired as an office 
manager.  During that time, Mr. Vargason relied on claimant as the maintenance 
manager or, at minimum, a lead employee on the maintenance team.  (Hearing 
Transcript pp. 26-27)  On May 6, 2013, Mr. Vargason received a call from Mr. Myers, 
advising that claimant had fallen through a roof and inquiring as to what steps to take.  
Mr. Vargason advised Mr. Myers to take claimant to the hospital if he was injured.  
Thereafter, Mr. Vargason recalls claimant relaying issues with his ribs, shoulder, neck, 
and hands.  He personally noticed claimant had weakened grip strength when shaking 
hands.  (Hearing Transcript pp. 30-34)  On cross-examination regarding any complaints 
of a neck injury, Mr. Vargason clarified he was aware claimant had broken ribs, an 
injured shoulder, “arm trouble,” and hand numbness.  (Hearing Transcript p. 36)  On 
redirect, Mr. Vargason indicated claimant did not specifically state he had injured his 
neck, but suffered from “just a combination” of musculoskeletal issues.  (Hearing 
Transcript p. 37)  
Mr. Vargason’s testimony at the time of hearing was clear, direct, and consistent 
with the evidentiary record.  His demeanor was excellent and gave the undersigned no 
reason to doubt his veracity.  Mr. Vargason is found credible. 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Due to continued worsening of his hand complaints, claimant discussed his need 
for medical care with Mr. Kacena on August 28, 2014.  (CE1, pp. 6, 12)  On September 
3, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Perea with complaints of bilateral wrist pain, numbness 
and tingling of the fingers, and difficultly straightening the fingers.  The onset of 
symptoms was noted as one week prior, with continued worsening.  Dr. Perea ordered 
an EMG/NCV, recommended splinting, and prescribed a Medrol Dosepak.  (CE22, p. 3)  
Claimant underwent the recommended EMG/NCV with Dr. Tyson Garrett, who opined 
claimant’s NCV studies were dramatically abnormal of the right upper extremity.  His 
findings included: definite right carpal tunnel syndrome, severe; definite right ulnar 
neuropathy at the elbow, severe; posterior interosseous nerve entrapment at the Arcade 
of Frohse; and left carpal tunnel syndrome, mild.  Following review, Dr. Perea 
recommended specialist evaluation.  (CE22, p. 4; CE44, Depo. Ex. p. 3)   
At the referral of defendants, claimant presented to Patrick Hartley, M.D. on 
October 30, 2014 for evaluation and consideration of the cause of claimant’s bilateral 
upper extremity neurological symptoms.  Dr. Hartley noted claimant sought medical 
evaluation in August 2014 after discussing his complaints with his employer.  Claimant 
could not identify the duration of symptoms, but reported he was asymptomatic the prior 
spring and his symptoms increased over the summer months with work activities.  
Claimant described right hand tightness, tingling, pain, and decreased mobility.  Left 
hand symptoms included tightness, swollen and achy fingers, and decreased mobility 
which remained superior to that of the right hand.  Claimant described decreased grip 
strength and some difficulty with fine manipulation.  He reported no history of neck 
injury, but indicated he recently experienced neck discomfort and sought treatment two 
weeks prior.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, p. 1)  Dr. Hartley noted claimant’s history of treatment 
for his ribs and left shoulder following the fall at work.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, pp. 1-2)   
Dr. Hartley reviewed an EMG/NCV performed by Dr. Garrett on September 30, 
2014.  He noted the NCV tests revealed left carpal tunnel syndrome, mild, as well as a 
dramatically abnormal right upper extremity with the following conditions: definite right 
carpal tunnel syndrome, severe; definite right ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, severe; 
and posterior interosseous nerve entrapment at Arcade of Frohse; with clinical 
weakness in all three nerve distributions and a marked work history of supination and 
pronation.  The EMG was read as revealing acute denervation in the median, ulnar, and 
PIN territories.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, p. 3)     
Dr. Hartley performed a physical examination. On examination, Dr. Hartley 
performed significant evaluation of claimant’s bilateral forearms and hands, as well the 
neck and bilateral upper extremities.  His findings included: slightly decreased range of 
extension of the cervical spine; bilateral Spurling’s induced radicular discomfort 
radiating down the upper extremities; and slightly decreased range of motion of the left 
shoulder.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, p. 2)  X-rays of the cervical spine were taken.  The 
radiologist read the x-rays as revealing mild degenerative changes at C5, C6, and C7, 
with mild disc narrowing and small anterior osteophyte formation.  Dr. Hartley saw no 
evidence of severe spondylosis or spondylolisthesis.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, pp. 2-3; 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 8 
 
CE44, Depo. Ex. 8, p. 1)  Dr. Hartley ultimately assessed bilateral upper extremity 
neuropathy, right greater than left.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, p. 5) 
Dr. Hartley opined claimant’s work activities represented a significant contributing 
factor in the causation of his upper extremity neurological symptoms and EMG/NCV 
findings.  He opined the EMG/NCV findings did not suggest a radicular cause for the 
right upper extremity neurological symptoms.  However, given the examination findings 
with positive Spurling’s test and recent neck pain for which claimant sought chiropractic 
treatment, Dr. Hartley recommended a cervical MRI to rule out significant neural 
foraminal encroachment from degenerative disc or facet disease.  In the event the MRI 
suggested a cervical etiology for the upper extremity neurological findings, Dr. Hartley 
indicated he would reconsider his causation opinion.  Given the severity of claimant’s 
nerve entrapment and associated muscle weakness and atrophy, Dr. Hartley 
recommended a prompt referral to an orthopedic hand surgeon.  In the interim, Dr. 
Hartley imposed work restrictions and recommended use of hand splints. (CE44, Depo. 
Ex. 2, p. 3)               
At Dr. Hartley’s recommendation, on January 9, 2015, claimant underwent an 
MRI of his cervical spine.  The report noted clinical indications of neck pain and to rule 
out significant neural foraminal encroachment from degenerative disc or facet disease.  
The radiologist read the results as showing mild multilevel degenerative changes, most 
significant at C6-C7, with mild to moderate spinal stenosis and suspicion for subtle high 
T2 cord signal change; and moderate to severe neural foraminal stenosis on the left at 
C7-T1.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 8, pp. 2-3)      
On May 14, 2015, claimant returned to Dr. Hartley for further evaluation of 
bilateral neuropathy and neck pain.  Claimant reported worsening symptoms.  
Examination findings included: bilateral Spurling’s induced radicular discomfort down 
the back of the arms; abnormal resting posture of the right hand, with radial deviation; 
thenar atrophy; and decreased range of motion.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, p. 6)  Dr. Hartley 
assessed: right ulnar nerve entrapment at the elbow, worsening; right median nerve 
entrapment at the wrist, worsening; right posterior interosseous nerve entrapment in the 
forearm, worsening; left median nerve entrapment at the wrist, slightly worsening; stable 
multilevel degenerative changes in the cervical spine; stable mild to moderate spinal 
stenosis at C6-C7; and stable moderate to severe neural foraminal stenosis at C7-T1 on 
the left.  He opined claimant’s cervical CT and MRI showed degenerative changes and 
foraminal narrowing on the left, but indicated these findings would not explain the 
severity of claimant’s symptoms and examination findings involving the right forearm, 
wrist, and hand.  Dr. Hartley imposed work restrictions.  In terms of further care, Dr. 
Hartley again recommended a prompt referral to an orthopedic hand surgeon; he noted 
he understood claimant had an appointment scheduled with Dr. Erika Lawler in July 
2015.  (CE44, Depo. Ex. 2, pp. 6-7)   
Claimant testified defendant-insurance carrier’s representative told Dr. Hartley 
not to refer claimant for further evaluation.  Claimant testified Dr. Hartley advised him to 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 9 
 
seek legal advice.  As a result, claimant retained the services of an attorney.  (Hearing 
transcript pp. 73-74; DEL, Depo. Tr. p. 31)   
In late 2015, claimant sought evaluation with his personal provider, Jason 
Thornburg, PA-C, using his personal health insurance.  Following evaluation, Mr. 
Thornburg referred claimant for care at ORA Orthopedics.  Claimant was initially seen 
by board certified orthopedic surgeon, Timothy Millea, M.D.  (Hearing transcript, pp. 86, 
98-99; CE45, Depo. Ex. 2, p. 1)  Claimant underwent a repeat EMG with Robert 
Chesser, M.D. on February 3, 2016, with findings consistent with a right C8-T1 radicular 
process.  Dr. Millea recommended surgical nerve releases prior to considering cervical 
intervention.  (CE22, p. 5)  Dr. Millea performed right carpal and cubital tunnel release 
and decompression on February 24, 2016.  (Hearing transcript pp. 86-87; CE22, pp. 5-
6)   
Claimant did not improve following surgery.  Dr. Millea referred claimant to an 
upper extremity specialist, Tobias Mann, M.D.  Dr. Chesser performed a repeat EMG on 
June 8, 2016, which did not demonstrate a radiculopathy, but did show denervation and 
neuropathic findings.  Dr. Mann referred claimant to hand specialist, Thomas 
VonGillern, M.D.  Dr. VonGillern ordered a repeat cervical spine MRI which revealed a 
prominent disc osteophyte complex.  An MRI of the right forearm revealed intramuscular 
edema in the flexor carpi ulnaris and flexor digitorum profundus muscles, and to a 
lesser degree in the digitorum superficial muscles.  (CE22, p. 6; CE45, Depo. Tr. pp. 42-
43) 
In terms of claimant’s neck condition, by a letter dated August 26, 2016, Dr. 
Millea opined he was unable to attribute any of claimant’s cervical spine problems to the 
May 2013 work injury.  He explained that the interval of time between the traumatic 
injury and claimant’s initial report of relevant symptoms was inconsistent with direct 
causation of the condition.  (CE45, Depo. Ex. 1) 
Dr. VonGillern performed a second right-arm surgery on October 24, 2016.  
During arthroscopy, Dr. VonGillern found chondromalacia and a triangular fibrocartilage 
tear.  He performed a chondroplasty, partial triangular fibrocartilage excision, 
debridement of the scapholunate ligament tear, superficial right ulnar nerve neurolysis 
at the elbow, right ulnar nerve neurolysis at the wrist and Guyon’s canal, and right 
median nerve lysis at the forearm and wrist.  After surgery, claimant testified he was off 
work for a couple of weeks.  He later returned to work under restrictions. (CE22, pp. 6-7; 
Hearing transcript pp. 87-88)   
At the referral of his counsel, on July 20, 2017, claimant presented to Arnold 
Delbridge, M.D. for an independent medical examination (IME).  Following records 
review, history, x-rays, and examination, Dr. Delbridge authored a report containing his 
findings and opinions dated September 11, 2017, which addressed both claimant dates 
of injury.  In his report, Dr. Delbridge noted claimant sustained an injury on May 6, 2013, 
when he fell through a roof, impacting his left lateral chest wall and injuring his left 
shoulder and fracturing the 6th, 7th, and 8th ribs on the left side.  Dr. Delbridge noted 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 10 
 
claimant later complained of cervical spine symptoms, but the initial focus had been the 
painful rib injury.  (CE22, p. 1)  Dr. Delbridge noted claimant presented to Dr. Perea on 
September 3, 2014 with complaints of bilateral wrist pain, numbness and tingling of the 
fingers, and difficultly straightening the fingers.  The duration of symptoms was noted as 
onset a week prior and worsening.  (CE22, p. 3)  Dr. Delbridge reviewed claimant’s 
evaluation and treatment records regarding his complaints.  (CE22, pp. 1-6) 
Dr. Delbridge interviewed claimant regarding his work duties.  (CE22, p. 8)  X-
rays of claimant’s wrists, left shoulder, and cervical spine were taken and reviewed.  Dr. 
Delbridge also examined claimant’s upper extremities, shoulders, and neck.  (CE22, p. 
7)  Thereafter, Dr. Delbridge assessed cubital tunnel and carpal tunnel syndromes of 
the left upper extremity.  He opined each condition warranted a 4 percent upper 
extremity rating, for a combined total of 8 percent left upper extremity impairment on the 
basis of compression of the median and ulnar nerves.  As for the right upper extremity, 
Dr. Delbridge opined claimant suffered from abnormalities of the ulnar nerve of the right 
forearm, warranting permanent impairment ratings of 4 percent for sensation loss and 
23 percent for motor disturbance, for a combined total impairment of 28 percent right 
upper extremity.  Dr. Delbridge opined claimant’s cervical spine was “involved in his 
injury.”  He opined it was not unusual claimant did not immediately report cervical spine 
symptoms, given claimant’s painful rib injury and use of pain medication.  He concluded 
claimant’s cervical spine condition contributed to claimant’s right hand difficulties, 
particularly at C8 and T1 levels.  He ultimately opined claimant fell within DRE Cervical 
Category II, warranting an 8 percent whole person impairment.  (CE22, p. 8)   
Dr. Delbridge opined claimant’s cervical, left upper extremity, and right upper 
extremity conditions were related to claimant’s work injury(ies).  He further expressed 
belief claimant was likely experiencing more than entrapment of the ulnar and median 
nerves of the right upper extremity, particularly with respect to the C8-T1 level, with 
cervical spine issues and an atypical ulnar palsy.  Dr. Delbridge ultimately combined 
and converted claimant’s permanent impairment ratings, resulting in a combined 27 
percent whole person impairment.  (CE22, pp. 8-9)  Dr. Delbridge estimated claimant’s 
functional capacity, noting a severely compromised right hand.  He recommended: 
maximum lift of 25 pounds with both hands and 5 to 10 pounds with the right hand; no 
vibration; no ladders; and no work in high places if the right hand is used for gripping.  
(CE22, pp. 10-11) 
On October 17, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. VonGillern.  This date marked his 
last active treatment of the alleged work injuries.  (Hearing transcript pp. 88-89)  
Claimant testified the surgery performed by Dr. VonGillern involved his right wrist and 
elbow; although left-sided surgery was contemplated, claimant declined surgery due to 
worsening of right-sided symptoms following the prior surgeries.  Claimant testified he 
believed at that time, Dr. VonGillern also opined the etiology of claimant’s ongoing 
symptoms was his neck.  (Hearing transcript pp. 68-69)   
Due to ongoing neck symptoms, Dr. VonGillern referred claimant to his 
colleague, Mahesh Mohad, M.D.  Dr. Mohan performed a neck injection.  Claimant 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 11 
 
testified the injection numbed his neck pain for a period of months.  He later returned for 
a follow-up injection, but Dr. Mohad was no longer with the practice and claimant 
testified his replacement did not want to participate in claimant’s care.  (Hearing 
transcript pp. 105-106)  
On November 2, 2017, Dr. Delbridge sat for a deposition.  At that time, Dr. 
Delbridge testified he remained an active, board certified orthopedic surgeon, who 
performed generally one independent medical examination per week.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. 
pp. 4-5, 57)  Dr. Delbridge identified the complaints he evaluated in connection with 
claimant’s July 20, 2017 IME.  As a result of the fall through the roof, Dr. Delbridge 
opined claimant suffered broken ribs and injured his left shoulder; however, by the time 
of Dr. Delbridge’s evaluation, both conditions had resolved without permanent 
impairment.  Dr. Delbridge noted claimant complained of back pain radiating into the 
buttocks, but Dr. Delbridge had found no permanent impairment of the lumbar spine as 
a result of the fall.  (CE39, pp. 7-8)   
Dr. Delbridge testified the focus of the IME had been claimant’s neck and upper 
extremities.  Dr. Delbridge opined claimant probably injured his neck in the 2013 fall, but 
any contemporaneous symptoms were overpowered by the painful injuries to his ribs 
and shoulder.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. p. 9)  Dr. Delbridge testified claimant believed he 
injured his neck in the fall, but he did not notice neck complaints due to the severity of 
pain in other areas.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. p. 10)  Dr. Delbridge opined claimant sustained a 
cumulative injury with respect to his upper extremities.  (CE39, Depo Tr. p. 9)  
Dr. Delbridge opined the neck injury occurred when the neck was “whipped 
around” in the fall.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. p. 11)  As evidence of a neck injury, Dr. Delbridge 
cited: limited range of motion; radicular pain into the upper extremity, not typical of ulnar 
nerve pain; and atypical posture/clawing of the hand for what was to be expected of 
ulnar nerve deficiency.  Dr. Delbridge opined claimant’s presentation was consistent 
with compromise of the C8 and T1 nerves in the neck, which he opined had been 
confirmed on EMG.  He opined this compromise caused claimant’s superficialis tendons 
to weaken.  Dr. Delbridge opined these factors resulted in significant hand symptoms 
and numbness that did not correspond to a pure ulnar nerve injury.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. 
pp. 11-12)   
In addition to attributing claimant’s neck condition to the 2013 fall, Dr. Delbridge 
also endorsed the possibility of double crush syndrome.  Dr. Delbridge testified 
claimant’s neck was compromised in the accident, but initially improved; however, the 
condition worsened upon returning to work and performing repetitive movements.  He 
explained the result was compression of the neck and upper extremities, which he 
referred to as double crush syndrome.  (CE39, Depo Tr. p. 19)  Dr. Delbridge noted 
double crush syndrome had not been formally diagnosed, but he considered it a 
possibility.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. p. 20) 
Dr. Delbridge opined claimant injured his left shoulder in the May 2013 fall, 
resulting in adhesive capsulitis.  He opined the adhesive capsulitis caused edema in the 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 12 
 
distal part of the left arm and forearm, which probably exacerbated or materially 
aggravated existing nerve compression.  He noted claimant reported difficulties, which 
worsened upon returning to work and subsequent nerve studies showed deficiencies in 
both the ulnar nerve at the elbow and median nerve at the wrist.  On this basis, Dr. 
Delbridge opined the May 2013 injury either caused or materially aggravated claimant’s 
left carpal and cubital tunnel syndromes.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. pp. 20-21)  Dr. Delbridge 
opined claimant’s right upper extremity conditions represented cumulative injury, 
wherein claimant’s work activities aggravated the right arm.  (CE39, Depo. Tr. p. 23) 
In terms of permanent restrictions, Dr. Delbridge noted it was very difficult for 
claimant to perform work with the right hand.  As a result, he recommended: only 
occasional manipulation and handling with the right hand; no climbing ladders due to 
lack of right hand strength; no high places; and no use of vibratory tools.  Dr. Delbridge 
also recommended limits in lifting and carrying of 5 to 10 pounds maximum with the 
right hand and 25 pounds maximum bilaterally.  He described Dr. VonGillern’s 
contemporaneous restrictions as largely the same as those he recommended.  (CE39, 
Depo. Tr. p. 30)    
On November 9, 2017, Richard Kreiter, M.D., sat for deposition.  Dr. Kreiter’s 
background is as an orthopedic surgeon, although his recent work focused upon legal 
evaluations.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 3)  Dr. Kreiter performed an IME on February 23, 
2017, at the request of claimant’s counsel.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 5-6)  Dr. Kreiter noted 
claimant had fallen through a roof in May 2013 and sustained multiple rib fractures; he 
indicated that in cases of rib fractures, patients “concentrate” on that pain.  (CE40, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 6-7)  After weaning from pain medication, claimant noticed shoulder and 
neck complaints.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 7-8)  Dr. Kreiter ultimately opined claimant 
suffered from work-related injuries to the ribs, left shoulder, left upper extremity, right 
upper extremity and neck.  He opined the rib fractures, left shoulder, and left arm 
conditions did not result in permanent impairment.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 17) 
Dr. Kreiter focused the IME upon the right upper extremity and neck conditions.  
He opined claimant presented with degenerative changes of the neck, as well as 
radiculopathy.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 17)  Dr. Kreiter expressed belief claimant likely 
presented with degenerative changes in his neck, which were aggravated by the 2013 
fall.  He explained that to his knowledge, claimant had no history of neck treatment and 
claimant indicated he reported neck symptoms following the fall and his return to work.  
(CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 9-12)  Dr. Kreiter reviewed Dr. Millea’s August 26, 2016 report, 
wherein Dr. Millea declined to attribute any portion of claimant’s neck condition to the 
work injury.  Dr. Kreiter indicated he would agree with Dr. Millea’s opinion if claimant did 
not report neck symptoms for months following the injury.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 26-27)  
Dr. Kreiter indicated he would not have expected claimant to report radicular neck 
symptoms quickly, given his receipt of treatment for other painful conditions.  He 
anticipated claimant would have noticed right-sided arm and shoulder symptoms after 
weaning from pain medication.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 43-44)  In the event claimant did 
not report neck complaints until months after the fall, Dr. Kreiter opined the condition 
was probably not related to the work injury.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 12) 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Dr. Kreiter opined claimant’s right upper extremity complaints developed from his 
neck condition.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 19)  He testified claimant’s condition was “not a 
simple thing,” and resulted in double crush, in addition to carpal and cubital tunnel 
syndromes.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 20)  In support of his opinion, Dr. Kreiter noted EMG 
confirmation of carpal and cubital tunnel, as well as findings indicative of a neck 
process.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 21)  He specifically relied upon Dr. Chesser’s EMG/NCV 
testing with findings indicative of radiculopathy.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 25)  Dr. Kreiter 
explained that in instances of double crush, a patient presents with minor carpal or 
cubital tunnel syndrome and a cervical condition; these two processes “compound each 
other.”  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 21)  Dr. Kreiter expressed belief Dr. Millea pursued elbow 
and wrist intervention in hopes the simpler surgical intervention would resolve claimant’s 
symptoms.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 25-26) 
Dr. Kreiter testified he provided a provisional impairment rating at the time of his 
IME, as claimant had not yet achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI).  Dr. 
Kreiter provisionally opined claimant fell within DRE Cervical Category V, due to 
neurologic loss of hand function and grip, warranting a permanent impairment rating of 
35 to 38 percent whole person.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. pp. 27-33)  As claimant received 
subsequent orthopedic evaluation, Dr. Kreiter expressed hope claimant improved in the 
interim and that he would assume a contemporaneous rating would more accurately 
reflect claimant’s impairment.  (CE40, Depo. Tr. p. 36) 
On November 19, 2018, Thomas VonGillern, M.D. responded to questions raised 
by claimant’s attorney.  Thereby, he opined the trauma sustained in the May 6, 2013 fall 
did not cause claimant’s cervical derangement condition.  He further opined he did not 
believe the cervical spine condition was permanently aggravated or worsened by the 
fall.  Finally, Dr. VonGillern opined he did not believe the trauma of the fall resulted in 
claimant suffering a double crush syndrome.  (DEH, p. 356)  
On January 28, 2019, Patrick Hartley, M.D., sat for deposition.  Dr. Hartley noted 
defendants had referred claimant for assessment and opinion.  (CE44, Depo. Tr. pp. 4, 
6)  During his initial evaluation, a positive Spurling’s test led him to refer claimant for 
additional workup, as such a finding indicates likely cervical radiculopathy.  (CE44, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 14-16)  In the event cervical radiculopathy was present, Dr. Hartley 
testified the condition could be due to an acute injury or a degenerative process.  
(CE44, Depo. Tr. pp. 79-80)  Dr. Hartley testified that if the fall in May 2013 caused 
acute injury to the cervical spine and associated impingement on the nerve roots, he 
would have expected some motor or sensory symptoms in the weeks following the 
injury.  Although he declined to identify a specific timeframe, he estimated an 
anticipated timeframe of 4 to 6 weeks for onset of symptoms.  (CE44, Depo. Tr. p. 44)  
Dr. Hartley testified it was possible that claimant presented with a double crush 
phenomenon and that may explain claimant’s less than optimal surgical results.  
However, he could not state with medical certainty that the fall caused the double crush 
phenomenon, if present.  (CE44, Depo. Tr. p. 44) 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 14 
 
On February 13, 2019, Dr. Millea sat for deposition.  Dr. Millea specializes in 
spinal surgery.  Claimant was referred to Dr. Millea for evaluation of his neck.  (CE45, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 16, 28)  Dr. Millea noted he began treating claimant on December 31, 
2015, at which time claimant related his symptoms back to the May 2013 fall.  (CE45, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 3, 8)  During the course of treatment, Dr. Millea recommended claimant 
begin with cubital and carpal tunnel surgeries.  In the event the surgeries provided 
insufficient relief, Dr. Millea indicated he would consider cervical intervention.  (CE45, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 28-29)  Dr. Millea ultimately referred claimant for evaluation by hand and 
upper extremity specialist, Dr. Mann; Dr. Mann subsequently referred claimant to Dr. 
VonGillern.  (CE45, Depo. Tr. pp. 42-43)     
Despite unsatisfactory results, Dr. Millea subsequently declined to recommend 
spinal surgery for fear of failure to provide relief.  He opined claimant was not a surgical 
candidate, as the potential benefits of surgery were outweighed by the associated risks.  
Dr. Millea opined claimant’s EMG results provided more convincing evidence of 
peripheral nerve entrapment than a cervical spine problem.  (CE45, Depo. Tr. pp. 29-
30, 45)  Dr. Millea opined claimant’s lack of improvement following upper extremity 
surgeries did not prove a cervical etiology.  (CE45, Depo. Tr. p. 44)  He opined the 
noted issues of shoulder stiffness, finger stiffness, difficulty squeezing, and hand 
tightness were not indicative of cervical radiculopathy.  (CE45, Depo. Tr. pp. 31-32)  He 
found nothing in claimant’s medical records to confirm a cervical injury.  (CE45, Depo. 
Tr. pp. 40-41)  On August 26, 2016, Dr. Millea had opined claimant’s cervical spine 
problems were not causally related to the work injury of May 2013.  (CE45, Depo. Tr. p. 
3)  After subsequent review of additional medical records and discussion at deposition, 
Dr. Millea indicated his opinions remained unchanged.  (CE45, Depo. Tr. pp. 13, 40-41)         
Dr. Hartley sat for a second deposition on March 25, 2019.  At that time, Dr. 
Hartley reaffirmed his prior testimony.  (CE46, Depo. Tr. p. 3)  Dr. Hartley opined 
claimant’s bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome was related to repetitive wrist activity; 
specifically, Dr. Hartley opined claimant’s work activities substantially contributed to the 
conditions.  Dr. Hartley also opined claimant’s ulnar neuropathy condition was likely 
related to work activities.  (CE46, Depo. Tr. pp. 18-20)  He declined to attribute the 
upper extremity symptoms to the May 2013 fall.  (CE46, Depo. Tr. p. 23)  He indicated it 
was unclear whether claimant’s degenerative neck condition was an independent 
contributing factor in claimant’s upper extremity symptoms and indicated he could not 
state the May 2013 fall more likely than not caused and/or aggravated an existing neck 
condition which then became symptomatic.  (CE46, Depo. Tr. pp. 19-20)  Dr. Hartley 
was also unable to state with a reasonable degree of medical certainty that work 
activities worsened claimant’s neck condition.  Dr. Hartley indicated he would defer to 
spine surgeon, Dr. Millea, with respect to cervical spine issues.  (CE46, Depo. Tr. pp. 
21-22, 25)   
Claimant reported continued symptoms he relates to his work injuries.  Claimant 
testified both his left shoulder and rib injuries healed.  (Hearing transcript p. 85)  
Claimant relates his neck and upper extremity complaints to the May 2013 fall at work.  
(Hearing transcript pp. 85-86; DEL, Depo. Tr. pp. 18-19)  He testified his right hand and 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 15 
 
wrist are constantly bent or clawed and the wrist does not move.  His left fingers have a 
sensation of tightness or feeling swollen.  Claimant declined left-sided surgery due to 
fear of a poor outcome, like on his right side.  (Hearing transcript pp. 96, 98)  Claimant 
testified his sleep is interrupted by both neck and hand complaints, as he struggles to 
find a comfortable position.  (Hearing transcript p. 77)  Claimant testified he is not 
capable of singularly performing all the tasks he was capable of performing preinjury; he 
requires assistance with more physically demanding tasks.  Claimant explained he has 
experienced considerable loss of strength, particularly right-sided grip strength.  
Claimant testified his right wrist is locked and his movement is limited.  He is right-hand 
dominant.  (Hearing transcript pp. 69-70, 78-79; DEL, Depo. Tr. p. 32) 
Due to continued neck complaints, claimant arranged an appointment with Dr. 
Millea that was scheduled for the month following hearing.  Claimant’s medical records 
had also been sent to Chad Abernathey, M.D., for review and potential assumption of 
care.  (Hearing transcript, pp. 83-84)    
Lisa Chapman testified at evidentiary hearing.  Ms. Chapman began dating 
claimant in 2003; the two have lived together since 2004.  Ms. Chapman learned of the 
May 6, 2013 injury when claimant telephoned her after leaving the hospital.  Ms. 
Chapman testified claimant is not a person who complains, but is a “suck it up” type of 
individual.  (Hearing transcript p. 52)  Nevertheless, for the first several weeks after the 
fall, claimant “hurt all over,” with pain “concentrated in the ribs.”  (Hearing transcript p. 
53)  She expressed belief claimant began to experience hand and neck symptoms after 
weaning from pain medication.  She relayed the two did not attend a July 4th fireworks 
display, as looking up would cause claimant neck pain.  Ms. Chapman testified claimant 
also began to request regular neck massages.  (Hearing transcript pp. 53-55)  She also 
noted claimant’s body position appeared stiff and he frequently changed position to get 
comfortable.  Ms. Chapman testified she began to sleep in another bedroom in 2016, 
upon realization claimant’s inconsistent sleep was interrupting her sleep as well.  She 
also indicated claimant began to rub his right hand, as if due to cramping, and the hand 
appears curled.  (Hearing transcript pp. 55-57)  Ms. Chapman testified claimant’s neck 
and right hand symptoms have progressively worsened over time.  (Hearing transcript 
p. 58)  
Ms. Chapman’s testimony was clear and direct.  Her demeanor at the time of 
evidentiary hearing was excellent and gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity.  Ms. Chapman is found credible. 
Claimant remains employed full time at defendant-employer.  He earns $19.00 
per hour and works 40 hours per week.  Following the May 2013 fall, claimant returned 
to work as a maintenance worker.  Mr. Myers’ employment with defendant-employer 
ended in November 2016; at that time, claimant transitioned to the position of 
maintenance supervisor.  In this role, claimant worked as a working supervisor and 
supervised three or four workers.  He received work orders, obtained materials, and 
assigned employees to complete the tasks; he also verified work was done properly and 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 16 
 
in a timely manner.  (Hearing transcript pp. 78-80, 91-92, 110; See CE1, pp. 7-9; DEL, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 8-10)   
However, within the week preceding evidentiary hearing, claimant was advised 
he would no longer hold the maintenance supervisor position and would return to a 
maintenance worker position.  Claimant explained that Mr. Kacena had called claimant 
to let him know that a new maintenance supervisor would be hired.  Claimant indicated 
Mr. Kacena stated he did not want claimant to quit, but he would be returning to 
maintenance work full time.  Claimant testified Mr. Kacena desired a maintenance 
supervisor who could perform computer-related tasks.  (Hearing transcript pp. 79-82, 
92-93)  Claimant testified he intends to keep working at defendant-employer and 
perform the tasks he is capable of completing.  (Hearing transcript pp. 104-105) 
Mr. Kacena testified at evidentiary hearing.  He confirmed he recently hired a 
new maintenance supervisor at defendant-employer.  He explained that the company 
transitioned to management software which heavily involves computer and smartphone 
usage.  Mr. Kacena also testified the company had experienced some attrition and 
indicated claimant did not relate well to some workers.  He testified claimant is a hard 
worker and works well on his own, but Mr. Kacena needed a maintenance supervisor 
that was more people-oriented.  Additionally, Mr. Kacena prefers to work from around 
4:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., which left an issue of lack of supervision in the afternoon hours.  
He testified the position change was not related to claimant’s work injury claims and he 
has no intention to terminate claimant.  (Hearing transcript pp. 110-114)  
Mr. Kacena’s testimony was clear and direct.  His demeanor at the time of 
evidentiary hearing was good and gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity.  Mr. Kacena is found credible.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In File No. 5055872 (Date of Injury: May 6, 2013 (trauma); involving stipulated injuries to 
the left shoulder and ribs, and disputed injury to the cervical spine): 
The first issue for determination is whether the injury of May 6, 2013 is a cause of 
temporary disability from October 24, 2016 through November 7, 2016.  To the extent 
claimant, by post-hearing brief, sought temporary benefits for other periods, the claims 
are considered waived, as no other claimed periods were raised on the approved 
hearing report or at the time of evidentiary hearing.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of 
recuperation from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker 
is entitled to temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 17 
 
disabled by the injury.  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work, or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar 
to the work performed at the time of injury.  Section 85.33(1).  
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor 
an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the 
healing period. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant claims entitlement to temporary disability benefits from October 24, 
2016 through November 7, 2016.  This period coincides to the time claimant was off 
work following right upper extremity surgery by Dr. VonGillern on October 24, 2016.  
The only considered injuries relative to the May 6, 2013 traumatic fall are stipulated 
injuries to the left shoulder and ribs, and a disputed injury to the cervical spine.  
Therefore, to the extent Dr. VonGillern performed surgery due to a right upper extremity 
injury, that claim is not properly raised in reference to the May 6, 2013 injury.  The only 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 18 
 
potential basis for an award of temporary benefits following this surgery in reference to 
the May 6, 2013 injury would be if the surgery were attributable to the alleged cervical 
condition.  Accordingly, it must be determined if claimant sustained a cervical injury as a 
result of the May 6, 2013 fall.  In questions of causation, the opinions of medical 
providers are of paramount importance; given the complexity and potentially intertwined 
nature of claimant’s conditions, those opinions are crucial.   
Claimant testified he developed symptoms of his neck and bilateral hands within 
two to three weeks of the May 6, 2013 fall.  Ms. Chapman testified claimant’s neck pain 
began prior to the July 4th holiday.  Claimant testified he informed Dr. Perea of his 
symptoms, but Dr. Perea deferred to claimant’s rib fractures as explanation.  In support 
of his argument that the work injury caused or aggravated a cervical condition, claimant 
relies upon the opinions of his chiropractor, Dr. Woodward, as well as IME physicians, 
Drs. Delbridge and Kreiter.   
Dr. Woodward examined and performed chiropractic adjustment at an 
appointment July 17, 2013.  Dr. Woodward noted claimant reported the May 2013 fall 
and also indicated neck pain developed following a lifting event two days prior.  Dr. 
Woodward subsequently opined that claimant’s cervical condition was likely due to the 
May 2013 fall, as the trauma would have resulted in weaker support and increased 
likelihood of muscle strain. 
Dr. Woodward’s opinion is unconvincing as to the question of whether the work 
injury caused or aggravated claimant’s cervical spine condition.  Rather, following an 
intervening event, Dr. Woodward attributed claimant’s then-condition to the work injury 
by way of resultant weakened neck musculature.  Even if provided weight, this opinion 
does not specifically address whether the traumatic work injury caused or aggravated 
an existing degenerative condition of claimant’s neck.  Furthermore, the evidentiary 
record is devoid of detailed examination findings and it is unclear whether Dr. 
Woodward possessed any of claimant’s relevant objective examination or testing results 
from his treating and evaluating physicians.  After consideration, I decline to award any 
weight to the opinion of Dr. Woodward.  
Dr. Delbridge served as one of claimant’s chosen IME physicians.  Dr. Delbridge 
opined claimant probably injured his cervical spine by whipping his neck around in the 
May 6, 2013 fall.  He opined claimant’s cervical spine condition was not only involved in 
the fall, but contributed to claimant’s right hand difficulties; he specifically endorsed the 
possibility of double crush phenomenon.  Upon comparison to the remainder of the 
evidentiary record, particularly the contrary opinions of treating surgeons Drs. Millea and 
VonGillern, I find Dr. Delbridge’s opinion unconvincing.   
Dr. Kreiter served claimant’s other chosen IME physician.  He opined it was likely 
degenerative changes in claimant’s neck were aggravated by the work injury on May 6, 
2013.  However, Dr. Kreiter hedged on his opinion when confronted with the contrary 
opinion of Dr. Millea and indicated he would agree with Dr. Millea if neck symptoms did 
not present for an unspecified period of months.  Dr. Kreiter also opined claimant’s right 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 19 
 
upper extremity symptoms developed from the neck condition, resulting in double crush, 
cubital tunnel syndrome, and carpal tunnel syndrome.  Dr. Kreiter’s opinion with respect 
to causation of claimant’s neck condition is equivocal and lacking specificity.  Given this 
lack of clarity, I find his opinions entitled to little weight as compared to the opinions of 
claimant’s treating providers, Drs. Millea and VonGillern. 
Following review of the entirety of the evidentiary record, I award greatest weight 
to the consistent opinions of treating physicians, Drs. Millea and VonGillern. 
Dr. Millea opined he found no convincing evidence of a cervical injury and in the 
event a cervical condition was present, the condition was not causally related to the 
work injury on May 6, 2013.  Dr. Millea opined the objective evidence of a peripheral 
nerve entrapment was stronger than for a cervical spine etiology.  He also specifically 
opined he was unable to attribute any cervical issues to the fall due to the interval of 
time between the injury and subsequent complaints of relevant symptoms.  
Furthermore, claimant’s personal provider referred claimant to Dr. Millea for neck 
evaluation, given Dr. Millea’s specialty as a spinal surgeon.  Thereafter, Dr. Millea 
examined claimant, reviewed claimant’s history and imaging, and crafted a course of 
care.  Dr. Millea performed the initial procedures personally, providing him the 
opportunity to observe claimant intraoperatively.  He also referred claimant for 
evaluation by hand and upper extremity specialists, leading to his course of care with 
Dr. VonGillern.   
Dr. Millea’s opinions are further buttressed by the statements of IME physician’s 
Drs. Hartley and Kreiter.  Dr. Hartley indicated it was unclear if claimant’s neck played a 
role in his symptomatology and he could not state to a degree of medical certainty that 
claimant’s neck condition was caused or aggravated by the May 6, 2013 fall.  Similarly, 
while double crush could potentially explain claimant’s suboptimal results, he could not 
state with medical certainty that claimant demonstrated such a scenario.  Dr. Hartley 
also specifically deferred to Dr. Millea with respect to issues pertaining to the cervical 
spine.  Dr. Kreiter indicated he would agree with Dr. Millea’s opinion that claimant’s 
neck condition was not work-related if claimant did not present with neck symptoms for 
a period of months.  This extended duration was specifically noted by Dr. Millea.  While 
claimant may have experienced symptoms he believed were related to his neck, he is 
not a medical provider who is qualified to opine as to the source of those symptoms.  
Rather, he is an individual who suffered a very painful traumatic injury that likely 
manifested diffuse symptoms in a number of bodily locations.  Dr. Perea provided 
claimant’s contemporaneous medical care, which included further testing and specialist 
referrals; there is no evidence Dr. Perea refused to consider neck symptoms.  To the 
contrary, claimant testified Dr. Perea explained his complaints by reference to the 
painful rib fractures.  On this basis, I cannot find claimant presented with relevant 
symptoms within a few weeks of the May 2013 fall, particularly when Dr. Millea 
specifically opined claimant did not present with such symptoms.      
Given the level of Dr. Millea’s involvement in claimant’s case and his 
specialization in spinal surgery, I find Dr. Millea’s opinion entitled to significant weight.  

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 20 
 
Dr. VonGillern opined claimant’s neck condition was not caused or aggravated by 
the fall on May 6, 2013.  He also specifically opined the fall did not cause double crush 
phenomenon.  His opinion renounces the possibility of such a scenario raised by 
claimant’s evaluating physicians.  Dr. VonGillern served as claimant’s treating surgeon 
and as such, he had the opportunity to examine claimant on multiple occasions, 
including intraoperatively.  He was privy to and involved in obtaining claimant’s 
examination history and testing results.  Furthermore, Dr. VonGillern was identified as a 
hand specialist and surgeon.  As such a specialist and as a treating physician, I find Dr. 
VonGillern’s opinion entitled to significant weight.       
After consideration of the entirety of the evidentiary record, I award greatest 
weight to the opinions of Drs. Millea and VonGillern.  As such, I find claimant has failed 
to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the work injury of May 6, 2013 caused 
or aggravated a cervical condition.  Given claimant has failed to carry this burden and 
given that claimant has not raised a right upper extremity injury in connection to this 
traumatic injury, I find claimant is not entitled to temporary disability benefits from 
October 24, 2016 through November 7, 2016.    
The next issue for determination is whether the injury is a cause of permanent 
disability. 
Claimant suffered stipulated injuries to his left shoulder and ribs as a result of the 
fall on May 6, 2013.  Each condition was treated conservatively and claimant ultimately 
returned to work without restrictions relative to each injury.  No physician opined 
claimant sustained permanent impairment as a result of either the left shoulder or rib 
injuries.  Both of claimant’s IME physicians, Drs. Delbridge and Kreiter, specifically 
opined claimant did not suffer ratable permanent impairment as a result of the 
conditions.  Claimant did not testify to any discrete limitations due to either the rib or left 
shoulder condition.  On these facts, I find claimant has not carried his burden of 
establishing he suffers with permanent disability as a result of the work injury of May 6, 
2013.  As claimant has failed to prove he suffered permanent disability as a result of the 
work injury of May 6, 2013, no award of industrial disability is warranted and no 
permanent partial disability benefits will be ordered.   
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
claimed medical expenses.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975). 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 21 
 
Defendants are responsible for authorized medical care obtained in treatment of 
the May 6, 2013 work injury, including care for the left shoulder injury and left rib 
fractures.  There has been no evidence presented that defendants did not provide 
payment for any such authorized, causally-related medical expenses; therefore, no 
specific award of medical costs can be made. 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of an independent medical examination. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Claimant underwent an independent medical examination with Dr. Kreiter, for 
which Dr. Kreiter charged $1,200.00: $400.00 for an examination and $800.00 for the 
written report.  In order to be entitled to reimbursement of an IME, there must first have 
been an evaluation of permanent disability by an employer-retained physician.  In this 
case, defendants authorized and provided medical care.  However, review of the 
evidentiary record does not reveal that an employer-provided physician ever opined as 
to the extent of permanent disability.  Accordingly, claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement of Dr. Kreiter’s IME expense. 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of the costs of: 
Dr. Kreiter’s report fee ($800.00); subpoena expense for Mr. Myers’ testimony 
($204.80); and subpoena expense for Mr. Vargason’s testimony ($104.00).  Defendants 
prevailed in determination of each of the issues presented for consideration; 
accordingly, none of the requested costs are taxed to defendants.    
In File No. 5055873 (Date of Injury: August 28, 2014 (cumulative); involving disputed 
injuries to the bilateral upper extremities and cervical spine): 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of his employment on August 28, 2014.  

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 22 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant alleges he sustained cumulative injuries to his bilateral upper 
extremities and cervical spine, manifesting on August 28, 2014.  Defendants dispute 
each claim.  Due to the intertwined nature and presentation of the August 28, 2014 and 
May 6, 2013 injuries, it is important to highlight that only a cumulative injury claim is 
raised with respect to the August 28, 2014 injury; this claim is independent from 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 23 
 
potential allegations that the May 6, 2013 injury played a causal role in the bilateral 
upper extremity and neck conditions. 
Only two medical providers specifically addressed a cumulative basis for 
claimant’s bilateral upper extremity and neck conditions.  Defendants’ IME physician, 
Dr. Hartley, opined claimant’s bilateral upper extremity neuropathy and bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome were attributable to repetitive wrist activity and that claimant’s work 
activities were a significant contributing factor in causing the conditions.  Dr. Hartley 
indicated he could not state claimant’s neck condition worsened due to work activities.  
Claimant’s IME physician, Dr. Delbridge, opined claimant’s left carpal and cubital tunnel 
conditions reflected work-related cumulative injuries, as did ulnar nerve abnormalities of 
the forearm.  Dr. Delbridge opined claimant originally injured his neck in the May 2013 
fall, but the condition improved, only to worsen upon returning to work.  His testimony 
on this point was offered in discussion of a potential claim of double crush. 
Both physicians, Drs. Hartley and Delbridge, opined claimant’s bilateral upper 
extremity conditions reflected cumulative injuries attributable to work duties.  These 
opinions are unrebutted and therefore, adopted.  Drs. Hartley and Delbridge disagree as 
to whether claimant’s work duties played a role in claimant’s neck condition.  Following 
review of the records, I award greater weight to the opinion of Dr. Hartley on this 
question.  Dr. Hartley’s opinion was clearly and specifically stated in respect to 
discussion of the etiology of claimant’s neck condition.  Dr. Delbridge’s testimony lacked 
the specificity of Dr. Hartley’s and was offered in description of a potential instance of 
double crush phenomenon, a possible diagnosis that was refuted by Dr. VonGillern.   
It is determined claimant sustained cumulative injuries to his bilateral upper 
extremities arising out of and in the course of his employment with defendant-employer, 
manifesting on August 28, 2014.  Claimant has failed to prove he sustained a 
cumulative injury to his cervical spine arising out of and in the course of his 
employment.      
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
temporary disability.  The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to 
temporary disability benefits from October 24, 2016 through November 7, 2016.  These 
issues will be considered together.  To the extent claimant, by post-hearing brief, sought 
temporary benefits for other periods, the claims are considered waived, as no other 
claimed periods were raised on the approved hearing report or at the time of evidentiary 
hearing. 
Claimant credibly testified he was off work for a couple weeks following his right 
upper extremity surgery with Dr. VonGillern on October 24, 2016.  His testimony 
corresponds to the claimed period of October 24, 2016 through November 7, 2016.  By 
this decision, it was determined claimant’s right upper extremity condition was 
compensable as a cumulative injury.  As claimant was off work following surgery to treat 
a compensable condition, claimant has proven the injury was a cause of temporary 
disability during the claimed period.  Claimant is entitled to temporary total disability or 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 24 
 
healing period benefits, whichever shall prove applicable, for the claimed period of 
October 24, 2016 through November 7, 2016.  The parties stipulated at the time of the 
injury, claimant’s gross average weekly wage was $728.06 and he was single and 
entitled to one exemption.  The proper rate of compensation is therefore, $446.69. 
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
permanent disability.  The next issue for determination is whether the alleged disability 
is a scheduled member disability or an unscheduled disability.  These issues will be 
considered together. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(u).  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
The fact finder must consider both medical and lay evidence relating to the extent of the 
functional loss in determining permanent disability resulting from an injury to a 
scheduled member.  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 N.W.2d 267, 272-273 
(Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  
Benefits for permanent partial disability of two members caused by a single 
accident is a scheduled benefit under section 85.34(2)(s); the degree of disability must 
be computed on a functional basis with a maximum benefit entitlement of 500 weeks.  
Simbro v. DeLong's Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 1983). 
As set forth, supra, claimant met his burden of establishing he sustained 
cumulative injuries to his bilateral upper extremities manifesting on August 28, 2014.  
Claimant failed to prove he sustained injury to his cervical spine.  Accordingly, any 
permanent disability, if established, would be compensated as a scheduled injury. 
It must therefore be determined if claimant suffers with permanent disability to 
either or both upper extremities.  Claimant credibly testified he suffers with abnormal 
right hand and wrist posture, limited motion, loss of grip strength, and sensations of left 
finger tightness.  Claimant’s abnormal hand and wrist posture was evident to 
observation at hearing, as was his frequent need to massage and stretch the right hand.  
Two physicians, Drs. Delbridge and Kreiter, opined as to the extent of permanent 
impairment sustained by claimant as a result of the bilateral upper extremity conditions.  
Dr. Delbridge opined claimant suffered with left cubital and carpal tunnel syndromes.  
For each condition, Dr. Delbridge awarded 4 percent upper extremity impairment; he 
determined a total combined impairment of 8 percent left upper extremity as a result of 
compression of the median and ulnar nerves.  Dr. Delbridge opined claimant suffered 
with ulnar nerve abnormalities of the right upper extremity.  He found a combined 
impairment of 28 percent right upper extremity, specifically a 4 percent loss for 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 25 
 
sensation and 23 percent loss for motor disturbance.  Dr. Delbridge also recommended 
permanent restrictions, based primarily upon claimant’s right hand limitations.  Dr. 
Kreiter provided a provisional impairment rating.  He found no impairment to the left 
upper extremity and a 35 to 38 percent whole person impairment due to neurological 
function and grip of the right hand.  Dr. Kreiter considered claimant’s right upper 
extremity impairment in conjunction with a cervical impairment and rated claimant’s 
impairment on the basis of DRE Cervical Category V. 
Following review, I award greatest weight to the opinions of Dr. Delbridge as to 
the issues of permanent disability.  Dr. Delbridge specifically delineated the basis of his 
ratings to each upper extremity independently and not in conjunction with a 
noncompensable cervical condition.  Dr. Delbridge’s ratings to each upper extremity are 
consistent with claimant’s credible testimony of ongoing complaints and limitations, as 
well as with my observations of claimant’s condition at hearing.  Dr. Kreiter’s provisional 
ratings were inconsistent with claimant’s testimony and utilized an incorrect rating 
methodology, as claimant failed to prove he sustained a compensable cervical injury.   
Therefore, it is determined claimant has proven the work injury of August 28, 
2014 resulted in permanent disability to his left and right upper extremities.  The 
disability is compensable as a bilateral injury to the upper extremities pursuant to 
section 85.34(2)(s).  
The next issue for determination is the extent of claimant’s permanent disability.  
The next issue for determination is the proper commencement date for permanent 
disability benefits.  These issues will be considered together.  
As set forth supra, only Drs. Delbridge and Kreiter opined as to the extent of 
claimant’s permanent impairment as a result of the cumulative injury of August 28, 
2014.  The opinions of Dr. Delbridge as to the extent of claimant’s permanent 
impairment and need for restrictions represent the best and most persuasive evidence 
in the record.  Accordingly, I adopt Dr. Delbridge’s permanent impairment ratings of 8 
percent left upper extremity and 28 percent right upper extremity.  
Pursuant to section 85.34(2)(s), claimant’s disability is to be compensated on the 
basis of 500 weeks.  Accordingly, Dr. Delbridge’s upper extremity ratings must be 
converted to whole person impairments and combined.  By the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, a rating of 8 percent upper extremity 
converts to 5 percent whole person and a rating of 28 percent upper extremity converts 
to 17 percent whole person.  Combining these two ratings via the combined values 
chart results in a combined impairment of 21 percent whole person as a result of the 
bilateral upper extremity conditions.  
It is determined claimant sustained a 21 percent whole person impairment as a 
result of the cumulative bilateral upper extremity injuries manifesting on August 28, 
2014.  This award entitles claimant to 105 weeks (21 percent x 500 weeks = 105 weeks) 
of permanent partial disability benefits at the weekly rate of $446.69.  While initially 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 26 
 
noted as a disputed issue, by post-hearing brief, defendants agreed with claimant’s 
proposed commencement date of November 8, 2016.  Accordingly, permanent partial 
disability benefits shall commence on the agreed date of November 8, 2016, the date 
following termination of claimant’s healing period.  
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
claimed medical expenses. 
Due to exclusion of a number of claimant’s exhibits at evidentiary hearing, the 
record does not contain an itemized claim for medical benefits.  However, this decision 
determined claimant sustained compensable injuries to his bilateral upper extremities as 
a result of the August 28, 2014 injury.  Defendants denied liability for claimant’s claim 
and provided no care, leading claimant to seek care for these work-related conditions.  
As claimant has proven he suffered compensable injuries and these injuries required 
medical care, the responsibility for such care should be borne by defendants.  
Defendants are hereby found responsible for medical treatment causally related to the 
compensable bilateral upper extremity injuries, specifically including the upper extremity 
surgeries.  Within 10 days of this decision, the claimant shall serve upon defendants an 
itemized list of all medical expenses incurred in treatment of the compensable bilateral 
upper extremity injuries.  Expenses obtained in connection with cervical spine treatment 
shall be excluded.  Within 10 days thereafter, defendants shall notify claimant of any 
objections to claimed expenses.  Through this process, if the parties are unable to 
agree as to responsibility for claimed medical expenses, the dispute may become the 
subject of a request for rehearing before the undersigned.  
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of an independent medical examination. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for Dr. Kreiter’s IME in the amount of $1,200.00.  
Defendants denied liability for claimant’s claims prior to receiving an evaluation of 
permanent disability by an employer-retained physician.  Defendants’ denial does not 
equate to an opinion of zero impairment and does not trigger claimant’s right to a 
reimbursable IME.  Accordingly, claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of Dr. 
Kreiter’s IME expense. 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of the costs of: 
Dr. Kreiter’s report fee ($800.00); subpoena expense for Mr. Myers’ testimony 
($204.80); and subpoena expense for Mr. Vargason’s testimony ($104.00).  Claimant 
prevailed in this matter and an award of costs is appropriate.  The costs associated with 
the subpoenas of Mr. Myers and Mr. Vargason are allowable costs and are hereby 
taxed to defendants.  The cost of Dr. Kreiter’s report is also taxable as a practitioner’s 
report.  Claimant only requested taxation of the costs associated with report preparation 
and excluded the portion of the costs associated with examination.  This request is 
consistent with the ruling of Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 27 
 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015).  Defendants are therefore taxed with total costs in the amount 
of $1,108.80 ($800.00 + $204.80 + $104.00). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
In File No. 5055872 (Date of Injury: May 6, 2013 (trauma); involving stipulated 
injuries to the left shoulder and ribs, and disputed injury to the cervical spine): 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Claimant shall take nothing further from these proceedings.  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to claimant pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
In File No. 5055873 (Date of Injury: August 28, 2014 (cumulative); involving 
disputed injuries to the bilateral upper extremities and cervical spine): 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant healing period benefits at the weekly rate of 
four hundred forty-six and 69/100 dollars ($446.69) for the period of October 24, 2016 
through November 7, 2016. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant one hundred five (105) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing November 8, 2016 at the weekly rate of four 
hundred forty-six and 69/100 dollars ($446.69).  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 

BROMELL V. BUILDING SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 28 
 
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants are responsible for medical expenses as set forth supra.  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33 as set forth supra. 
Signed and filed this       6th      day of November, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Paul McAndrew (via WCES) 
Thomas M. Wertz (via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERICA J. FITCH 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
