Case Number: 5057454
Case Title:  SCHADLE, DANDEENA V. UNION COMMUNITY SCHOOL D
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Schadle, Dandeena-5057454.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT IN AND FOR BLACK HAWK COUNTY 
 
UNION COMMUNITY SCHOOL 
DISTRICT and EMC INSURANCE, 
 
Petitioners, 
 
vs.  
 
DANDEENA SCHADLE,  
 
Respondent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case No.  CVCV140244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER 
 
 
 
 
 
This matter came before the Court on August 19, 2020 for consideration of the 
Petition for Judicial Review of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner. After 
arguments of counsel and review of the pleadings, the Court took the matter under 
advisement. 
On appeal, Petitioners assert there is not substantial evidence to support the 
Commissioner’s finding of a sixty percent industrial disability. Petitioners also argue the 
Commissioner did not consider the necessary factors. 
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
 
Respondent was 53 years old at the time of the worker’s compensation hearing. 
She graduated from college in 1998 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in education. After 
college, she has been an art teacher. Since 1994, she has been teaching art for grades 
Kindergarten through 8th grade at Union Community School District (Union). 
 
On May 4, 2015, Respondent fell at work, and suffered a work injury. As a result 
of the work injury, the Commissioner concluded, which is unchallenged by Petitioners on 
appeal, that Respondent sustained permanent impairments to her left knee, right hip, right 
shoulder, and right foot/ankle. Arbitration Decision, pg. 24–25. Respondent also suffered 
a temporary mental health condition. Id. at 25. 
 
While Respondent’s only formal restriction is no kneeling for her left knee, the 
undisputed evidence in the record shows Respondent is significantly functionally limited 
in multiple joints even after multiple surgeries. Joseph Chen, M.D., a physiatrist employed 
by UIHC, assessed a whole person permanent impairment rating of 23%, due to range of 
motion limitations of her left knee, right hip, right shoulder, and right foot/ankle. Arbitration 
Decision, pg. 15–16. Arnold Delbridge, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon, assessed a whole 
person permanent impairment rating of 31%. Id. at 17. Dr. Noiseux, an orthopedic 
surgeon who performed surgery on Respondent, assigned a 37% permanent impairment 
of her left lower extremity. Id. at 26.  
E-FILED  2020 OCT 02 11:22 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
Respondent testified about the impairments. She testified she has pain in her left 
knee most of the time, and that it swells when she is on her feet a lot. Arbitration Decision, 
pg. 19. She reported she cannot kneel on her left knee, and reported difficulty squatting. 
She also testified she has trouble going up and down stairs. Id. She also testified she has 
pain in her right hip and right shoulder most of the time, which increase with activity. She 
reported poor balance and weakness in her right leg and right shoulder. Id. at 19–20. She 
also testified to pain in her right ankle/foot when walking and that she wears a brace to 
stabilize her ankle. Id. 
 
Respondent also explained how her limitations were affecting her ability to perform 
her duties as an art teacher. Transcript, p. 56–63; Arbitration Decision, pg. 27. 
Respondent cannot walk around the classroom as often as she used to, and instead her 
students must come to her desk. Arbitration Decision, pg. 21. Respondent cannot kneel 
and take things out of cupboards anymore, and instead her students must reach into the 
cupboards to obtain the art materials. Id. at 19. Respondent cannot lift the heavy clay 
boxes and bags, and instead her students lift and carry the clay. Id. at 20. Respondent 
cannot carry heavy objects in general, and instead her students must help. Id. 
Respondent cannot use the potter’s wheel, and cannot teach her students with it 
anymore. Id. She cannot walk as much and as fast as she used to, and so the following 
have all been significantly impacted: walking around in class, walking between classes, 
walking to the office, walking up stairs, and walking to the auditorium. Transcript, p. 58–
62. When she has hall duty or cafeteria duty, she must sit down on a chair, even though 
teachers are expected to stand. Id. at 59. 
 
At the time of the hearing, Respondent continued to work as an art teacher for 
Union. She received regular raises since her work injury. 
 
After considering Respondent’s testimony and the opinions of Drs. Chen, Noiseux, 
and Delbridge, the Commissioner concluded Respondent sustained a sixty percent 
industrial disability, which is now being challenged by Petitioners on appeal. Arbitration 
Decision, pg. 27. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
The finding of a sixty percent industrial disability is a mixed question of law and 
fact. Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012). 
The Court reviews the record as a whole to determine if the finding of fact is 
supported by substantial evidence. Id. Evidence is substantial if a reasonable mind would 
accept it as adequate to reach the given finding. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 
646, 649 (Iowa 2000). Substantial evidence is not absent just because it is possible to 
draw different conclusions from the same evidence. University of Iowa Hospitals v. 
Waters, 674 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa 2004). Instead, the focus is on whether the evidence is 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 02 11:22 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
sufficient to support the decision made, not whether it is sufficient to support the decision 
not made. Meyers v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  
Because the challenge to the agency’s industrial disability determination 
challenges the agency’s application of law to facts, the Court cannot disrupt the agency’s 
decision unless it is irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 526. 
Furthermore, the Commissioner has a duty to state the evidence it relies on and 
to detail the reasons for its conclusions. IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 
2000). The decision is sufficient if it is possible to determine the path taken through 
conflicting evidence. Id. at 633–34. If it is possible to work backward from the decision 
and to deduce what must have been the Commissioner’s findings and legal conclusions, 
then the decision is sufficient. Id. The Commissioner is not required to set out verbatim 
all the testimony or evidence in its ruling, and a losing party cannot successfully urge the 
commissioner did not consider all the evidence just because the commissioner 
specifically refers to only some of the evidence. Myers v. F.C.A. Servs., Inc., 592 N.W.2d 
354, 356 (Iowa 1999). 
GOVERNING LAW 
An employee who suffers a “permanent disability” is entitled to compensation. Iowa 
Code § 85.34. The compensation for an unscheduled injury resulting in permanent partial 
disability is based on the employee’s lost earning capacity, i.e. industrial disability. St. 
Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 653 (Iowa 2000). Lost earning capacity requires 
inquiry of limitations on the employee’s ability to perform the physical requirements of the 
employment, but also consideration of all the factors that bear on the employee’s actual 
employability. Id. These factors include: the employee’s functional disability, age, 
education, qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in similar employment. Id.  
The focus is not only on what the employee can and cannot do, but also on the 
employee’s ability to be gainfully employed. St. Luke’s Hosp, 604 N.W.2d at 653. Actual 
reduction in earnings is not necessary. Id. In determining industrial disability, the 
Commissioner is not required to fix disability with precise accuracy. Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012). 
ANALYSIS 
There is substantial evidence to support the Commissioner’s finding of a sixty 
percent industrial disability. The Commissioner clearly found the testimony of Respondent 
credible, and relied on the expert opinions of Dr. Chen and Dr. Noiseux. While there was 
no vocational analysis in the record, the Commissioner was able to determine the impact 
of Respondent’s permanent impairment on her ability to perform her duties as an art 
teacher based upon the testimony and the evidence. 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 02 11:22 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
While Petitioners correctly point out that Respondent’s sole formal restriction is no 
kneeling on her left knee, there is substantial evidence showing Respondent’s degree of 
actual impairment was much greater. In addition to her left knee, Respondent had 
permanent impairment in her right hip, right shoulder, and right foot/ankle. 
The Commissioner must have concluded Respondent’s ability to engage in similar 
employment, i.e. her actual employability, was significantly reduced based upon her 
decreased ability to perform the duties of an art teacher. The record demonstrates 
Respondent relied on upon her students to perform basic tasks associated with her 
employments; tasks she would ordinarily be expected to perform on her own. Lifting clay, 
using the potter’s wheel, walking around the classroom, and reaching into cupboards for 
class material are only some examples in the record where Respondent’s impairments 
impacted her ability to perform her duties and required informal accommodations from 
her students. 
Petitioners argue the Commissioner engaged in insufficient analysis of the relevant 
factors. However, the Court disagrees and finds the Commissioner made findings on all 
the factors throughout its 33 page decision, and considered the most important and 
relevant factors in its analysis on pages 23–27. To the extent the Commissioner did not 
explicit state its analysis, the Court can infer its conclusions from its decision. 
Though Respondent continues to be employed by Union and her income has 
increased with raises, the key inquiry is whether she lost earning capacity based upon 
her inability to perform her work duties and her decrease in employability. There is 
sufficient evidence in the record to support the Commissioner’s finding that she has lost 
earning capacity in amount of sixty percent. 
 
The Commissioner’s finding is hereby AFFIRMED. 
E-FILED  2020 OCT 02 11:22 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV140244
UNION COMM SCHOOL DIST ET AL VS D SCHADLE
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-10-02 11:22:02     page 5 of 5
E-FILED  2020 OCT 02 11:22 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
