Case Number: 1662439.03
Case Title:  TRESSEL, KATHRYN V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Tressel Kathryn-1662439.03D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KATHRYN TRESSEL, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
       File No. 1662439.03 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
  ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION  
  : 
CENTER, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
Head Notes: 1803, 1808, 2907 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Kathryn Tressel, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Nordstrom 
Distribution Center, as the self-insured employer.  This case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on October 26, 2021.   
Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via videoconference using CourtCall.  All participants appeared 
remotely via CourtCall. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 10, as well as Defendant’s Exhibits A through I.  Claimant testified on her own 
behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the hearing.   
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  
This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on December 3, 
2021.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether the work injury caused permanent disability. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Mar-24  14:58:05     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 2 
 
2. 
If the injury caused permanent disability, the proper date for 
commencement of permanent disability benefits. 
3. 
If the injury caused permanent disability, whether the injury should be 
compensated as a scheduled member injury to two listed body parts 
identified in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(t) or compensated with industrial 
disability benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
4. 
If the injury caused permanent disability, the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent disability benefits, including a claim that claimant 
is permanently and totally disabled as a result of the work injury. 
5. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Kathryn Tressel, claimant, is a 37-year-old woman, who resides in Dubuque, 
Iowa.  She did not complete high school but obtained a GED.  Ms. Tressel has 
continued her education and obtained an associate degree in general studies from 
Northeast Iowa Community College in 2009.  In 2020, claimant completed and earned 
her bachelor’s degree in criminal justice through the University of Dubuque.  As of the 
date of the hearing, claimant was enrolled in a communications master’s degree 
program at the University of Dubuque.  She receives some accommodations that permit 
her additional time to take tests, write reports, and she is allowed to record lectures due 
to stipulated work injuries and limitations resulting from those work injuries. 
I find that claimant is likely capable of completing the master’s degree program.  I 
find that her ability to retrain will open up additional avenues for employment and 
advancement.  Given her age and proximity to retirement, her motivation to retrain, and 
her intellectual capabilities, claimant is likely to successfully complete the master’s 
degree program and obtain employment in her chosen field. 
Ms. Tressel’s employment background includes work as a sales associate and 
photographer at a Sears Portrait Studio, as a baker and cashier at a restaurant, a 
customer service representative for two different employers, an assistant manager at 
RadioShack, and her position as a processor for this employer, Nordstrom.  Claimant’s 
rate of pay prior to the injury date ranged from $6.50 to $10.00 per hour prior to 
accepting employment at Nordstrom.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, pp. 30-31)  Her annualized 
earnings prior to accepting employment with Nordstrom ranged from $3,409 to $20,960.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 8, p. 67) 
Claimant commenced her employment with Nordstrom in April 2011 and earned 
$18.60 per hour working at Nordstrom.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 31)  Her annualized 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 3 
 
earnings with Nordstrom ranged from $30,460 to $38,850 during her employment.  She 
earned $32,709 in 2018, the last full year of her employment with Nordstrom.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 8, p. 67)  Ms. Tressel testified that she worked 40 hours per week at the 
store, but simple math using her annualized earnings in 2018 and her hourly rate 
suggests she worked approximately 35 hours per week on average. 
In her position as a processor at Nordstrom, claimant processed stock to be put 
into the stores.  She was required to remove packaging, place items on hangers, mark 
items with prices, and prepare the merchandise for display in the store.  Her work 
required repetitive use of her hands and arms. 
On February 14, 2019, Ms. Tressel sustained stipulated work injuries resulting in 
diagnoses of bilateral carpal tunnel and left de Quervain’s syndrome.  (Hearing Report)  
Defendant accepted those injuries and provided necessary medical care for claimant’s 
injuries.  Specifically, defendant directed claimant to Erin J. Kennedy, M.D., for medical 
care. 
Dr. Kennedy diagnosed claimant with carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally as well 
as radial styloid tenosynovitis.  She ordered EMG testing on both arms and attempted 
physical therapy.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 2)  Unfortunately, conservative measures did not 
resolve claimant’s symptoms.  Dr. Kennedy referred claimant to an orthopaedic 
surgeon.  Defendant scheduled claimant to be evaluated by David S. Field, M.D. 
Dr. Field evaluated claimant on April 30, 2019.  He noted that claimant’s clinical 
presentation suggested carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally.  However, he noted that 
claimant’s EMG testing did not confirm the diagnosis.  Therefore, Dr. Field attempted an 
injection into claimant’s left wrist for the presumed carpal tunnel syndrome diagnosis.  
(Joint Ex. 4, p. 44) 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Field twice in May 2019 and again on June 11, 
2019.  Dr. Field opined that claimant’s case was “a very difficult case to settle in terms 
of a diagnosis and treatment plan.”  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 48)  He discharged claimant from his 
orthopaedic care as of June 11, 2019, suggesting he had nothing else to offer.  (Joint 
Ex. 4, p. 48) 
Defendant returned claimant for care through Dr. Kennedy.  Dr. Kennedy 
continued to diagnose claimant with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and left radial 
styloid tenosynovitis.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 15)  Defendant authorized a second opinion 
evaluation with an orthopaedic surgeon, Ericka Lawler, M.D., at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics. (Joint Ex. 6, pp. 66-71)  Dr. Lawler evaluated claimant on October 
17, 2019 and diagnosed claimant with “left greater than right dequervain[‘]s and bil 
carpal tunnel syndrome.”  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 70)  She recommended a steroid injection into 
claimant’s left wrist for the de Quervain’s symptoms as well as a thumb splint.  (Joint Ex. 
6, p. 70) 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 4 
 
 Dr. Lawler re-evaluated claimant on November 25, 2019.  She noted a 40 
percent improvement of symptoms as a result of the injection.  However, claimant 
reported ongoing symptoms.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 72)  Ultimately, Dr. Lawler recommended 
surgical release of the left carpal tunnel and left de Quervain’s tenosynovitis.  (Joint Ex. 
6, p. 78) 
Dr. Lawler performed the recommended left carpal tunnel release as well as a 
left de Quervain’s release on January 31, 2020.  (Joint Ex. 6, pp. 82-83)  Dr. Lawler 
subsequently recommended right carpal tunnel release and took claimant back to 
surgery to perform the right carpal tunnel release on June 16, 2020.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 94) 
Claimant’s symptoms resulting in the de Quervain’s syndrome were located in 
the left thumb.  The surgical release performed by Dr. Lawler released a sheath that 
houses a tendon that permits the left thumb to function.  However, the situs of the left de 
Quervain’s release is of importance and in dispute.  As will be discussed in the 
conclusions of law section, claimant asserts that the left de Quervain’s syndrome is an 
injury to the left hand.  Defendant contends that the de Quervain’s is a left arm injury.  
Therefore, review of the operative note is important and useful. 
Dr. Lawler’s operative note is located at Joint Exhibit 6 on pages 82 through 84.  
The pertinent description of her surgical procedure is located at the top of page 84.  Dr. 
Lawler describes her operative procedure for the left de Quervain’s syndrome: 
Attention was first turned to the first dorsal compartment.  1 cm proximal to 
the radial styloid, a 1.5 cm transverse incision was made.  Dissection was 
carried down through the soft tissue using Steven scissors bluntly.  
Subcutaneous nerves were identified and retracted dorsally to protect 
them.  The compartment is identified.  The compartment was incised on its 
dorsal border using a Beaver blade.  This was carried both proximally and 
distally until the compartment was completely released. 
The radial styloid referenced in Dr. Lawler’s operative note is the distal end of the 
radius in claimant’s left forearm and wrist.1  Dr. Lawler notes that her incision was made 
1 centimeter proximal to the radial styloid.  In other words, Dr. Lawler made her incision 
for the de Quervain’s syndrome 1 centimeter above the distal end of the radius.  Put 
another way, relative to the end of the radius, the incision was made toward the forearm 
and away from the hand or thumb.  A visual depiction of the location of the surgical 
incision and release can be seen in Defendant’s Exhibit I, though I did not necessarily 
rely upon that exhibit to prove the location or situs of the injury.  Rather, I rely upon the 
description provided by Dr. Lawler. 
Dr. Lawler notes that she had to release the compartment both proximally and 
distally from her incision point.  However, this necessarily means that the surgery 
                                                 
1 Styloid process is defined as: “A protuberance on the outer portion of the distal end of the 
radius.”  Taber’s Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, 14th Edition, page 1381. 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 5 
 
performed for claimant’s left de Quervain’s syndrome included surgical work both 
toward her thumb and also proximal to the distal end of her left radius (moving upward 
toward the forearm).  Although I acknowledge that the surgical procedure may have 
crossed the distal end of the radius, at least a portion of the surgical procedure and 
repair occurred proximal to the distal end of the radius.  Accordingly, I find that the situs 
of the injury is, at least partially, in claimant’s left wrist and forearm.   
Ms. Tressel testified that both surgeries provided some initial relief.  However, 
she feels as though her physical therapy was cut short, and her symptoms remained 
through the date of hearing.  Claimant continued treating at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics’ orthopaedic department through August 31, 2020.  On that date, 
the evaluating physician, Lindsey S. Caldwell, M.D., opined that claimant was healed 
from the surgical procedures.  She noted that claimant was still experiencing symptoms, 
particularly with repetitive activities and recommended referral back to an occupational 
medicine physician for further care. 
Defendant referred claimant to a different occupational medicine physician at this 
point.  Jonathon M. Fields, M.D. evaluated claimant on November 18, 2020.  He 
obtained EMG’s and MRIs of both arms and re-evaluated Ms. Tressel on December 16, 
2020.  Dr. Fields noted that claimant had normal EMGs in both arms.  He also assessed 
claimant with normal 2-point discrimination in all digits of her hands, identified no 
swelling and full range of motion in both wrists.  Dr. Fields also noted negative Tinel’s 
and Phalen’s testing bilaterally.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 122)   
Dr. Fields opined that claimant required no further treatment and was at 
maximum medical improvement as of December 16, 2020.  He released claimant to 
return to full duty work as of December 16, 2020 and indicated that he had “no medical 
explanation for her reported ongoing symptomatology.”  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 123)  Dr. Fields 
further opined that claimant sustained no permanent impairment as a result of her 
injuries, concluding, “There is no basis for an impairment rating.”  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 123) 
After Dr. Fields’ full duty release, claimant attempted to return to work at 
Nordstrom.  Unfortunately, claimant could not perform the required duties and testified 
that she felt distraught.  Specifically, she testified she had difficulties lifting and 
unpacking boxes and could not keep up with her assigned duties.  Nevertheless, 
claimant testified that she returned and worked without restrictions from December 16, 
2020 through January 29, 2021.  She described experiencing constant pain, requiring 
ice after her workday, and leaving work crying due to the wrist and hand pain she 
experienced. 
Given her ongoing symptoms and difficulties, the employer authorized a return 
evaluation with Dr. Kennedy on January 29, 2021.  Dr. Kennedy noted claimant’s 
ongoing symptoms and indicated that claimant “returned to full duty but has failed full 
duty with continued significant pain.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 16)  Dr. Kennedy opined that 
claimant was not at maximum medical improvement, contradicting Dr. Fields’ opinion.  
Dr. Kennedy further noted that Dr. Fields “questions validity and does not have the 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 6 
 
benefit of having treated this patient.  I have had this benefit and believe she is valid in 
her symptom report.  Inconsistences in rapid grip testing is the result of pain, and fear of 
pain, not invalidity.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 17)  Dr. Kennedy recommended medications that 
may help with claimant’s nerve pain and recommended re-evaluation by Dr. Lawler. 
Dr. Kennedy evaluated claimant again in April 2021.  She noted that Dr. Lawler 
recommended no further surgical intervention.  Dr. Kennedy recommended a functional 
capacity evaluation (FCE) be performed.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 21)  That FCE was performed 
on April 20, 2021.  The physical therapist noted possible self-limiting behavior but 
reported work abilities in the sedentary category after testing demonstrated lifting limits 
of 20 pounds on an occasional basis.  (Joint Ex. 2, pp. 25-26) 
Following the FCE, Dr. Kennedy declared maximum medical improvement on 
April 22, 2021.  She imposed permanent restrictions at that time that limited claimant to 
lifting, carrying, pushing, or pulling no more than 10 pounds with both hands 
occasionally and 5 pounds with either hand.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 39) 
On June 3, 2021, Nordstrom issued a termination letter to claimant.  In that 
termination letter, the employer acknowledged the permanent restrictions imposed by 
Dr. Kennedy.  The employer noted that the restrictions would require “elimination of 
essential job functions,” which the employer did not deem reasonable or 
accommodative for claimant’s position as a processor.  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 48)  The 
employer also noted, “your permanent restrictions would require elimination of essential 
job functions for all vacant positions at your level.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 48)  The 
employer did encourage claimant to apply for an administrative assistant position that 
would constitute a promotion.  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 48)  Claimant did not follow through 
on that recommendation. 
Claimant obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by Sunil 
Bansal, M.D. on August 27, 2021.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)  Dr. Bansal concurred with the 
diagnoses of bilateral carpal tunnel and left de Quervain’s tenosynovitis.  He also 
concurred with the restrictions imposed by Dr. Kennedy.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 11, 14) 
Dr. Bansal did not concur with the MMI declarations of either Dr. Fields or Dr. 
Kennedy.  Rather, he opined that maximum medical improvement occurred after the 
final evaluation by Dr. Lawler on February 25, 2021.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 14)  Dr. 
Bansal also opined that claimant sustained permanent functional impairment as a result 
of her injuries.  Specifically, he assigned three percent permanent functional impairment 
of the whole person as a result of the left carpal tunnel syndrome.  He assigned one 
percent permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of the left de 
Quervain’s tenosynovitis, as well as an additional two percent of the whole person as a 
result of the right carpal tunnel syndrome.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 13-14) 
Having considered the various medical opinions in this case, I find the opinions of 
Dr. Bansal to be most reasonable, credible, and convincing in this evidentiary record.  
Dr. Kennedy had the advantage of being a long-term treating physician both before and 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 7 
 
after the surgical procedures.  However, I do not find her delay of MMI until after the 
FCE is completed to be appropriate and reasonable.   
Similarly, I do not find the opinion of Dr. Fields providing an earlier MMI date to 
be reasonable.  Claimant had significant ongoing symptoms and further evaluation and 
consideration of additional medication management or further surgical intervention was 
appropriate and reasonable.  Instead, I find that Dr. Bansal’s assignment of MMI as of 
the last date of evaluation by Dr. Lawler, February 25, 2021, to be reasonable and 
appropriate.  After that date, no further improvement was anticipated.  Accordingly, I 
accept Dr. Bansal’s opinion on this issue and find that claimant achieved MMI on 
February 25, 2021. 
I further accept the opinions of Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Bansal on the issue of 
permanent restrictions.  Claimant attempted to return to work without restrictions after 
the full-duty release by Dr. Fields.  She was unable to perform her full range of job 
duties without significant increase in symptoms.  The full-duty release was not practical 
and ultimately claimant proved she requires some permanent restrictions.  The 
restrictions offered by Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Bansal are reasonable and appropriate. 
Having found that claimant requires permanent work restrictions and that she 
experienced significant increase in symptoms upon return to work full-duty, I similarly 
find that she has proven she sustained permanent disability in some amount.  Dr. Fields 
opined that claimant does not qualify for permanent impairment under the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition.  While the Guides could be read consistent with Dr. Fields’ opinion, I note 
Dr. Kennedy’s critique and criticism that Dr. Fields may not have been aware claimant 
had negative EMG testing even before surgery on either arm. 
For whatever reason, claimant’s EMG testing does not demonstrate the clinical 
findings recorded by Dr. Kennedy, Dr. Field, Dr. Lawler, and Dr. Bansal.  In this sense, I 
find that the permanent impairment rating identified by Dr. Bansal is consistent with the 
AMA Guides and is more reasonable and consistent with claimant’s conditions and 
ongoing symptoms.  I find that claimant has proven she sustained three percent 
permanent functional impairment as a result of the left carpal tunnel syndrome.  
Claimant has also proven she sustained one percent permanent functional impairment 
of the whole person as a result of the left de Quervain’s tenosynovitis, as well as an 
additional two percent of the whole person as a result of the right carpal tunnel 
syndrome.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 13-14) 
Utilizing the Combined Values Chart located on pages 604 and 605 of the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition, I note that a three percent permanent impairment (left carpal 
tunnel) and one percent permanent impairment (left de Quervain’s) combine to four 
percent permanent impairment of the whole person.  This four percent impairment is 
then combined with the two percent impairment for the right carpal tunnel and results in 
a six percent permanent functional impairment of the whole person when all of 
claimant’s injuries and conditions are considered.  I find claimant proved a six percent 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 8 
 
permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of the February 14, 
2019 work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute in this case is whether the February 14, 2019 injury caused 
permanent disability.  Having found the opinions of Dr. Bansal to be the most convincing 
causation opinions in this record, I also found that claimant proved each of her injuries 
caused permanent disability.  I accepted the opinions and permanent impairment 
ratings offered by Dr. Bansal as most accurate and convincing.  Therefore, I also found 
claimant proved she sustained two percent permanent functional impairment of the 
whole person as a result of her right carpal tunnel syndrome.  Ms. Tressel similarly 
proved she sustained a three percent permanent functional impairment of the whole 
person as a result of the left carpal tunnel syndrome and an additional one percent 
whole person functional impairment as a result of the left de Quervain’s syndrome. 
The next dispute that must be resolved is whether the de Quervain’s syndrome 
should be legally categorized as an injury to the left hand or the left arm.  Claimant 
contends that she sustained injuries to the left arm and right arm as a result of the 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome diagnoses.  However, she asserts that the left de 
Quervain’s syndrome is an injury to the left hand.  Defendant disputes this and argues 
that the de Quervain’s syndrome is an injury to the left arm. 
Having reviewed the evidence in this record, I found that the location of the 
surgery performed for claimant’s left de Quervain’s syndrome was 1 centimeter proximal 
to the end of the radius.  The radius is clearly a bone in the arm.  Therefore, I found that 
the surgery performed for claimant’s de Quervain’s syndrome occurred, at least 
partially, proximal to the hand (i.e., in the wrist).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has considered how an injury should be compensated 
when the injury is arguably between or in either of two body parts.  The Court has 
consistently held that it is the anatomical situs of the permanent injury or impairment 
which determines how an injury should be compensated.  Lauhoff Grain Co. v. 
McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 
348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); 
Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 N.W. 598 (1936).  An injury occurring 
proximal to a joint is to be compensated to the more proximal body part. But see Smidt 
v. JKB Restaurants, L.C., File No. 5067766 (Appeal Dec. 2020) (“I also rejected the 
deputy commissioner's strict application of the bright line rule that whatever is 
proximal to the joint should be treated as an unscheduled injury under section 
85.34(2)(v).”); Chavez v. MS Technologies, L.L.C., File No. 5066270 (Appeal Sept. 
2020); Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883 (Appeal Sept. 2020).   
For instance, a hip injury is generally an injury to the body as a whole and not an 
injury to the leg.  The leg extends to the acetabulum or socket side of the hip joint.  
Lauhoff Grain Co. v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 9 
 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943).  Prior to a statutory change in 2017, an injury 
to the shoulder was considered a body as a whole situation because a shoulder injury 
extended proximal to the arm.  Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 
N.W.2d 161 (1949). 
Perhaps the most instructive case involves a dispute about whether an injury 
involves the hand or the arm.  In Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812 (Iowa 
2008), the Iowa Supreme Court confronted an injury that involved a carpal bone in the 
wrist.  The Court concluded that bones within the wrist are considered part of the arm 
for compensation purposes because the wrist is proximal to the hand.  In making this 
decision, the Court held that the hand begins at the distal point of the bones of the wrist.  
Id.   
Carpal tunnel syndrome involves structures within the wrist. Wrist injuries are 
compensated as arm injuries under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m). Holstein Elec. v. 
Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812 (Iowa 2008). Therefore, carpal tunnel syndrome is 
compensated as an arm injury. 
This case involves a similar issue.  It is clear from the above that the bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndromes are compensated to the arm.  The question is whether the de 
Quervain’s syndrome is compensated as a hand or arm injury.  Having reviewed the 
evidence submitted, it is clear that the surgical procedure occurred 1 centimeter 
proximal to the tip of the radius.  The distal end of the radius forms part of the wrist and 
connects with the thumb.  As noted above, the hand does not begin until the distal point 
of the bones in the wrist.  The radius is a bone within the arm and its distal end forms 
part of the wrist.  Given that the surgery occurred, at least partially, proximal to the distal 
end of the radius, I conclude that the de Quervain’s surgery occurred, at least partially, 
in the left wrist.  As such, I conclude that the de Quervain’s syndrome is an injury to the 
left arm and is not legally categorized as an injury to the left hand.   
Having concluded that the de Quervain’s is an injury to the left arm, I conclude 
that claimant proved injuries to the bilateral arms.  Benefits for permanent partial 
disability of two members caused by a single accident is a scheduled benefit under 
section 85.34(2)(t); the degree of disability must be computed on a functional basis with 
a maximum benefit entitlement of 500 weeks.  Simbro v. DeLong's Sportswear, 332 
N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 1983). 
 The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is 
entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to 
the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf 
Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 
1998). 
When determining the functional loss of a scheduled member injury: 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 10 
 
[T]he extent of loss of percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American [M]edical [A]ssociation, as 
adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to 
chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in 
determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment ... 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2018). 
Therefore, I conclude that this case should be compensated on a functional 
disability method based on claimant's permanent loss of function of the whole person 
based on an injury to two scheduled member injuries. Id.  With this in mind, I accepted 
the permanent functional impairment ratings of Dr. Bansal as convincing and accurate.  
I utilized the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, to combine Dr. Bansal’s impairment ratings and 
found that claimant proved a six percent permanent functional impairment of the whole 
person as a result of the combined effects of her bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and 
her left de Quervain’s syndrome.   
As noted, claimant’s permanent disability for a bilateral scheduled member injury 
is calculated using 500 weeks.  Accordingly, I multiply the 6 percent permanent 
functional impairment of the whole person by 500 weeks and conclude that claimant is 
entitled to an award of 30 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(t), (v); Simbro v. DeLong’s Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 1983). 
However, Ms. Tressel asserts a claim for permanent total disability benefits.  
Indeed, a worker with a bilateral scheduled member injury may qualify for permanent 
total disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(t).  Total disability does not mean a 
state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total disability occurs where the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee's experience, 
training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the 
employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 
1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
I acknowledge the claimant’s vocational opinion.  Claimant’s vocational expert 
opined that claimant “is now 90% precluded in her ability to obtain employment based 
upon her past vocational training or experience, current physical limitations.”  
(Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 23)  However, claimant’s vocational expert also conceded, “Based 
upon her past academic and current academic performance I would opine that Ms. 
Tressel demonstrates the ability to retrain.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 23)  I conclude that 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 11 
 
claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that she is permanently 
and totally disabled. 
Instead, I found that Ms. Tressel maintains the ability to perform substantially 
gainful employment in the general labor market.  She is young enough and educated 
enough to seek additional training and employment.  In fact, she is currently enrolled in 
a master’s program.  Although claimant now carries permanent work restrictions and is 
limited from many types of employment, I found that she is not permanently and totally 
disabled when all of the relevant factors are considered.  Accordingly, Ms. Tressel’s 
recovery is limited to 30 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(t). 
The parties dispute when the permanent partial disability benefits should 
commence.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (2017) provides, “Compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically indicated that maximum 
medical improvement from the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment can be determined.”  
I accepted Dr. Bansal’s assessment of maximum medical improvement on 
February 25, 2021.  This is the date when claimant’s recovery ended, and it was 
possible to assess her permanent functional impairment.  Accordingly, I conclude that 
the permanent partial disability benefits commence on February 26, 2021.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2). 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  In 
this case, claimant has prevailed and recovered an award of permanent partial disability 
benefits.  I conclude that it is appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some amount. 
Claimant introduced her requested costs at Claimant’s Exhibit 10.  She seeks the 
cost of her filing fee ($100.00).  This is a reasonable cost and is taxed pursuant to 876 
IAC 4.33(7). 
Ms. Tressel seeks assessment of her functional capacity evaluation with Daryl 
Short.  However, claimant had already submitted to an FCE prior to Mr. Short’s FCE.  
Mr. Short’s FCE did not have a significant impact on the outcome of this case.  
Exercising the agency’s discretion, I conclude this is not a cost that should be taxed 
against the defendant. 
Ms. Tressel also seeks assessment of the cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME.  Dr. Bansal 
charged $3,488.00 for his evaluation and report.  Of that amount, Dr. Bansal assigns 
$637.00 to his examination and assigned the remaining $2,851.00 to drafting his report.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 10, p. 78)  I am skeptical about these charges because Dr. Bansal 
assigns no charges to his records review, though clearly outlines in his report that he 
reviewed prior medical records.  I suspect that some of these charges were subsumed 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 12 
 
within his charges for drafting his report.  However, this does not appear to be directly 
challenged by defendant. 
The Iowa Supreme Court held that only that portion of a physician’s charges 
related to drafting a report in lieu of testifying in a case can be assessed as a cost 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015).  In this case, I found Dr. Bansal’s report to be credible, 
convincing, and relied upon it for my assessment of permanent disability.  In this sense, 
Dr. Bansal’s report was necessary for claimant’s success in this case.  I conclude it is 
reasonable to and hereby assess the cost of Dr. Bansal’s report ($2,851.00) as a cost 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
Claimant’s final request for cost is for Mr. Davis’ vocational assessment and 
report.  Ultimately, I did not rely upon Mr. Davis’ report or opinions and found that 
claimant is not entitled to industrial disability or permanent total disability benefits.  
Accordingly, the report from Mr. Davis was not relied upon and I conclude it is not 
reasonable to assess it as a cost. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant shall pay claimant thirty (30) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on February 26, 2021. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated weekly rate of four hundred 
eighty-six and 66/100 dollars ($486.66) per week. 
All past due benefits shall be paid in a lump sum and interest shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of two thousand nine 
hundred fifty-one and 00/100 dollars ($2,951.00). 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 
 

TRESSEL V. NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 13 
 
Signed and filed this _____24th ___ day of March, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Eric Loney (via WCES) 
James Peters (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
