Case Number: 5061959
Case Title:  RODRIGUEZ PENA, SANDRA N V. CONAGRA FOODS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Rodriguez Pena Sandra-5061959D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SANDRA RODRIGUEZ PENA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5061959 
CONAGRA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1803, 1803.1, 
 
Defendants. 
  :        3001 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Sandra Rodriguez Pena, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Conagra, employer, and Old Republic Insurance Company, 
insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of a stipulated injury sustained on 
August 9, 2015.  This matter came on for hearing before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch.  The record in this case consists of Joint 
Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 3, Defendants’ Exhibits A through E, 
and the testimony of the claimant.  The parties submitted post-hearing briefs. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the injury of August 9, 2015 is a cause of temporary disability during 
the period of July 24, 2018 through November 2, 2018;  
2. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits during the period 
of July 24, 2018 through November 2, 2018;  
3. Whether the permanent disability is a scheduled member disability or an 
unscheduled disability; 
4. The extent of claimant’s permanent disability; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Sep-25  12:23:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 2 
 
 
5. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits;  
6. The proper rate of compensation; and  
7. Specific taxation of costs. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant was 51 years of age at the time of hearing.  She resides in Omaha, 
Nebraska, with her husband.  Claimant was born in El Salvador, where she obtained a 
9th grade education.  She moved to the United States in 2000.  She began work at 
defendant-employer in May 2007.  She held the same position throughout her 
employment: general laborer.  As a general laborer, claimant performed a variety of 
tasks, including serving food, working on pallets, and running machines.  Claimant’s 
medical history is relevant for depression and heel pain, both of which were treated by a 
medical provider.  (Claimant's testimony) 
While at work on August 9, 2015, claimant rolled her ankle while standing on a 
stool serving vegetables.  Claimant reported the injury and was seen at the facility’s 
nursing station.  She was treated conservatively with ice, ibuprofen, and physical 
therapy.  During this time, claimant continued to work under restrictions of alternating 
between sitting and standing.  Ultimately, the evaluating physician referred claimant to a 
specialist for evaluation.  Claimant testified she believed she was forced to wait five to 
six months for medical care.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On September 21, 2015, claimant presented to David Inda, M.D. for right ankle 
evaluation.  Following evaluation, Dr. Inda questioned a possible peroneal tendon injury 
and ordered an MRI.  He left existing work restrictions in place.  (JE1, page 1) 
Claimant underwent the recommended right ankle MRI on September 22, 2015.  
The reading physician’s assessments included: chronic appearing partial tears of the 
anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and calcaneofibular ligament (CFL); and moderate 
tendinosis peroneus longus and brevis with focal longitudinal split tear of the peroneus 
brevis at the level of the lateral peroneal tubercle with mild insertional peroneus brevis 
tendinosis.  (JE2, p. 35) 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 3 
 
 
Following MRI, claimant returned to Dr. Inda.  He opined the MRI revealed a 
peroneus brevis split tear, as well as chronic tears involving the ATFL and CFL, and 
mild arthritis.  Dr. Inda assessed right ankle pain with instability and peroneal tendon 
tear.  He recommended proceeding with a course of conservative care, specifically 
therapy and an ASO brace.  Dr. Inda noted claimant was off work and should remain off 
for the remainder of the week, then return to work without restrictions aside from using 
the brace.  (JE1, p. 3) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Inda on October 12, 2015.  At that time, Dr. Inda noted 
claimant had desired to avoid surgery, but she was unable to complete a work day and 
struggled to perform activities of daily living.  The decision was made to proceed with 
surgical intervention.  Claimant was removed from work temporarily and then released 
to sit-down work on October 26, 2015.  (JE1, pp. 6-7) 
In response to inquiry from defendants, Dr. Inda opined the recommended 
surgery would be related to the work injury, as surgery would repair the peroneal brevis 
tendon and likely address chronic ligament conditions.  (JE1, p. 4)  Subsequently, Dr. 
Inda opined the chronic conditions were aggravated by the work injury.  He opined the 
tendon tear and chronic issues must be treated together in one process.  (JE1, p. 8) 
Claimant underwent surgery with Dr. Inda on November 11, 2015.  The 
procedure consisted of: ankle arthroscopy with limited synovectomy; Brostrom ligament 
reconstruction with Gould modification; and peroneal tendon debridement with side-to-
side tenodesis.  (JE3, pp. 37-38) 
Following surgery, claimant was kept off work and initially treated with Percocet.  
(JE1, p. 9)  On November 24, 2015, Dr. Inda placed a short-leg cast, but claimant was 
not permitted to bear weight on the leg.  (JE1, p. 10)  On December 8, 2015, claimant 
was placed in a boot and allowed to partially weight-bear.  Dr. Inda also released her to 
seated work.  (JE1, p. 11) 
On January 5, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. Inda and reported she continued to 
experience quite a bit of pain.  Dr. Inda opined such pain was reasonable and they 
would work through the healing process together.  He prescribed Ultram and imposed 
work restrictions of: use of the boot/CAM walker; unlimited seated work; and the ability 
to stand up to 4 hours per day, non-consecutively.  (JE1, p. 12) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Inda on February 15, 2016.  At that time, Dr. Inda 
described claimant’s post-operative course as slow.  He noted improvement, but 
claimant had not returned to work and continued to report pain and limitations.  Dr. Inda 
left claimant’s restrictions in place, but added an aggressive course of physical therapy 
for range of motion and sensitization.  (JE1, p. 13) 
On March 14, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. Inda.  Following examination, Dr. 
Inda ordered a compression sleeve for the ankle, as well as completion of one final 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 4 
 
 
week of therapy.  He released claimant to return to work without restrictions effective 
March 22, 2016.  (JE1, p. 14) 
Claimant returned to work, full duty, on March 22, 2016.  (CE1, pp. 1-2)  She 
returned to work at defendant-employer.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Following returning to work, claimant periodically followed up with Dr. Inda.  On 
April 11, 2016, claimant presented with complaints of pain and discomfort.  Dr. Inda 
opined the complaints were understandable given claimant’s recent return to work.  He 
prescribed Voltaren for pain complaints.  (JE1, p. 15)  At an appointment on May 9, 
2016, Dr. Inda noted claimant had returned to her regular job and was tolerating it fairly 
well.  Claimant reported some tenderness, as well as new pain symptoms about the 
lateral border of the foot.  Dr. Inda ceased use of diclofenac and ordered a trial of 
Mobic.  (JE1, p. 16) 
On June 6, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. Inda.  Following examination, Dr. Inda 
placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI).  He ordered therapist 
evaluation to determine the extent of claimant’s range of motion.  Dr. Inda released 
claimant from care and opined future care could include office visits and ASO braces.  
He did not anticipate a need for permanent work restrictions.  (JE1, p. 17) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Inda on August 9, 2016.  At that time, she reported 
some continued pain and discomfort.  Claimant reported ankle sleeves provided better 
relief than the ASO brace; as a result, Dr. Inda issued a prescription for up to three 
ankle sleeves per year.  (JE1, p. 18)  That same date, Dr. Inda opined claimant 
sustained a permanent impairment of 10 percent foot or 7 percent lower extremity for 
ankle range of motion, utilizing Table 17:11 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (JE1, p. 19) 
On January 24, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. Inda for evaluation of both feet.  
Claimant complained of some increasing pain of the ankle, as well as dry skin present 
since cast removal.  She rated her pain at a level 5 on a 10-point scale.  Claimant 
denied any subsequent injury or change in work duties.  Dr. Inda noted some weight 
gain.  X-rays revealed anchors in place, without complication.  He issued prescriptions 
for two ankle compression sleeves per year and Lanaphilic ointment for claimant’s skin 
condition.  He released claimant without restrictions, to return as needed.  (JE1, p. 20) 
Defendant-employer terminated claimant effective December 6, 2017 for violation 
of company policy, described as a major infraction.  Defendant-employer maintains the 
reason for claimant’s termination was unrelated to the work injury.  Supportive 
investigative documents are included in evidence; the results of the investigation are 
omitted from this decision due to the sensitive nature of the incident and the fact the 
incident was unrelated to the work injury.  (CE1, pp. 1-2, 14-17)  Claimant testified she 
believes she was fired as a result of the work injury and her requests for care; she 
maintains the basis of the investigation was manufactured as a reason to end her 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 5 
 
 
employment.  At the time of her termination, claimant had been working her normal 
general labor job.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On May 14, 2018, claimant presented to Dr. Inda with complaints of right ankle 
pain.  She reported pain about the right ankle, up the leg into the right thigh.  Claimant 
reported the symptoms worsened with activity and could reach a level 8 on a 10-point 
scale.  Claimant indicated she was no longer working.  (JE1, p. 21)  Dr. Inda performed 
an examination and ordered x-rays.  (JE1, pp. 22-23)  Thereafter, he assessed possible 
peroneal tendinitis and right ankle swelling.  He also noted the possibility of radicular leg 
pain.  Dr. Inda prescribed Mobic and released claimant without restrictions.  (JE1, p. 23) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Inda on July 9, 2018 and reported some relief with 
Mobic.  She relayed level 4 pain at rest and up to level 9 pain with walking and standing.  
Claimant denied working.  (JE1, p. 25)  Dr. Inda indicated he lacked further treatment 
options and opined claimant was not a surgical candidate.  He prescribed a more rigid 
Arizona ankle brace.  Dr. Inda imposed work restrictions allowing for: unlimited seated 
work; non-consecutive standing up to 4 hours per day; and no use of ladders.  (JE1, pp. 
26-27) 
On July 18, 2018, claimant presented to Dr. Inda’s colleague, Jason Hadenfeldt, 
PA.  Claimant reported right ankle pain, extending into the leg and buttocks.  Ms. 
Hadenfeldt noted nonspecific pain of the lateral leg, as well as pain of the buttock, 
paraspinal muscles, and sacroiliac joint area, but no gross radicular symptoms.  
Claimant requested a change of her work restrictions; her request was denied.  
Claimant was advised to give her symptoms time to respond to treatment.  (JE1, p. 28) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Inda on July 24, 2018.  Following examination, Dr. Inda 
assessed right leg radiculopathy and opined further workup was appropriate, led by 
either claimant’s primary care provider or a spine specialist.  In the interim, Dr. Inda 
opined he did not believe claimant was capable of working and removed claimant from 
work for up to three months in order to obtain further evaluation.  (JE1, pp. 30-31) 
In response to further inquiry, Dr. Inda authored correspondence to defendants’ 
counsel dated October 15, 2018.  Thereby, Dr. Inda opined claimant’s current 
symptoms originated from her back and accordingly, he would defer to a spine surgeon.  
Dr. Inda indicated he felt further evaluation was warranted, as well as determination 
about whether the complaints were related to any abnormal pathomechanics related to 
claimant’s ankle and gait.  He indicated he removed claimant from work due to an 
exacerbation of symptoms, largely related to pain of the back and thigh.  Pending 
evaluation by a spine specialist, he did not feel comfortable allowing claimant to 
proceed without restrictions.  (DEE, p. 27) 
Defendants referred claimant for an independent medical examination with board 
certified orthopedic surgeon, Michael Morrison, M.D., on October 24, 2018.  (DEB, p. 
12)  Dr. Morrison performed a records review and physical examination.  On 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 6 
 
 
examination, Dr. Morrison noted claimant ambulated with a rather severe limp which 
maintained her in a bent-over position at the waist.  (DEB, pp. 2-5)  Following 
examination, Dr. Morrison assessed status post-surgery and pronation of the hindfoot 
with loss of the longitudinal arch.  He opined claimant achieved MMI in 2016, per Dr. 
Inda.  Dr. Morrison agreed with Dr. Inda’s application of the AMA Guides and arrived at 
a permanent impairment of 7 percent lower extremity following surgery.  He did not 
recommend permanent restrictions.  (DEB, p. 5)   
Dr. Morrison opined that the pronated hindfoot and loss of longitudinal arch were 
placing stress on the hindfoot and claimant should consider some significant inserts to 
improve the arch and balance the hindfoot.  However, Dr. Morrison opined this care was 
necessitated by a preexisting condition and was not related to the work-related ankle 
injury.  (DEB, p. 6)  Dr. Morrison also opined the complaints of symptoms from the right 
ankle up into the gluteal area and low back were not related to the work injury.  (DEB, 
pp. 5, 10)     
On November 2, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. Inda.  Dr. Inda indicated he 
previously removed claimant from work to allow for back evaluation, but no further 
evaluation had been sought.  Despite no further care, Dr. Inda noted improvement in 
low back pain, but persistent leg and ankle pain.  (JE1, p. 32)  Following examination, 
Dr. Inda assessed persistent discomfort of the right lateral hindfoot.  Dr. Inda indicated 
he lacked additional treatment options and released claimant from care, placing her 
again at MMI.  (JE1, p. 33)  He imposed permanent restrictions of: unlimited seated 
work; standing up to 4 non-consecutive hours; no use of ladders; and a maximum lift of 
up to 40 pounds.  (JE1, p. 34)  Dr. Inda subsequently clarified these restrictions were 
related to claimant’s right ankle.  (DEE, pp. 30-31) 
At the referral of claimant’s attorney, on December 14, 2018, claimant presented 
to board certified occupational medicine physician, Sunil Bansal, M.D., for an 
independent medical examination (IME).  Dr. Bansal authored a report containing his 
findings and opinions dated February 1, 2019.  As an element of his IME, Dr. Bansal 
performed a medical records review.  (JE4, pp. 40-45)  Dr. Bansal also performed a 
physical examination of claimant’s bilateral ankles, back, and gait pattern.  (JE4, pp. 46-
47) 
Additionally, Dr. Bansal interviewed claimant for a subjective history of her injury, 
current condition, and return to work details.  Following the injury, claimant reported she 
began to walk with a limp and favored her right ankle due to pain.  As a result of the 
limp, Dr. Bansal noted claimant developed pain in her left foot, left ankle, and back.  
(JE4, p. 45)  Dr. Bansal noted claimant was “terminated” from her job due to assigned 
restrictions of four hours standing and four hours sitting per shift.  He noted defendant-
employer “was not able to accommodate these restrictions” and claimant was “let go” as 
a result.  Dr. Bansal noted claimant had been unable to locate a job since her 
termination.  (JE4, p. 46)  In discussion of her existing symptomatology, claimant 
localized the primary source of pain to her right foot.  She reported some reduction in 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 7 
 
 
low back pain, but continued pain with prolonged walking.  Dr. Banal also noted left-
sided pain, beginning in the left foot and radiating up the leg into the back, as well as 
nocturnal leg numbness.  Claimant indicated she was capable of standing and/or 
walking approximately 30 to 60 minutes, and the ability to lift 25 to 30 pounds; she 
reported difficulty traversing stairs.  (JE4, p. 46) 
Following records review, examination, and interview, Dr. Bansal responded to 
inquiries posed by claimant’s counsel.  Dr. Bansal issued the following diagnoses 
related to the work injury: right ankle sprain with peroneal tendon tear, status post-
surgery; left ankle strain; and lumbar strain.  In response to inquiry as to which ongoing 
symptoms and medical issues were causally connected to the injury, Dr. Bansal opined 
claimant suffered a right ankle sprain and tear which resulted in the need for surgery.  
Thereafter, he opined claimant developed a limp and gait derangement from the injury, 
resulting in a recommendation to wear an ankle orthotic.  Dr. Bansal noted claimant 
developed pain of her left ankle, but he found no evidence of functional loss.  As to the 
issue of permanent impairment caused by the injury, Dr. Bansal identified impairment as 
a result of claimant’s right ankle condition.  Specifically, utilizing the AMA Guides Table 
17-5, Dr. Bansal opined claimant met the criteria for a gait derangement, as claimant 
had been recommended to use an ASO brace (ankle stabilizing orthotic).  On this basis, 
he opined claimant sustained a 15 percent whole person impairment.  (JE4, pp. 47-48)  
He recommended permanent restrictions of: no prolonged standing or walking greater 
than 30 minutes, with use of an ASO brace; avoidance of multiple stairs or climbing; and 
no lifting over 30 pounds.  (JE4, p. 49)  Dr. Bansal opined further care could include 
routine maintenance of orthotic and ankle sleeves.  He also opined claimant was at risk 
for further injury to the left lower extremity and back in the event claimant’s gait 
derangement worsened.  (JE4, p. 48)    
Defendants deposed claimant on March 13, 2019.  At that time, claimant testified 
her low back pain was “gone” and she had only experienced back symptoms for “a short 
period of time.”  (DEA, Deposition Transcript. p. 27)  Aside from her right ankle and right 
foot complaints, claimant denied any other health concerns associated with the work 
injury.  (DEA, Depo. Tr. p. 33) 
Claimant has not worked since her termination from defendant-employer in 
December 2017.  At evidentiary hearing, claimant testified she began limping due to 
pain while still working for defendant-employer.  However, after her termination, the pain 
worsened due to lack of use.  She wears an ankle brace at all times.  In addition to 
ankle pain, claimant testified she has developed foot, leg, and back pain.  She 
described significant back pain complaints which, at times, prevents her from walking.  
Claimant testified her back pain worsened between her deposition in March 2019 and 
evidentiary hearing approximately two months later, on May 16, 2019.  Claimant 
testified she had a small amount of back pain at the time of her deposition, but did not 
mention it, as she did not believe that complaint was important.  She reported her pain 
had become severe enough that she scheduled a medical appointment for the week 
following evidentiary hearing.  (Claimant's testimony) 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 8 
 
 
Defendants paid claimant 15.4 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, 
representing a 7 percent lower extremity impairment, at the weekly rate of $468.34.  
(Hearing Report)  In computing this rate of compensation, defendants utilized claimant’s 
earnings in 13 of the 14 weeks preceding claimant’s work injury, corresponding to the 
weeks ending March 22, 2015 through August 2, 2015.  Defendants excluded the week 
of May 31, 2015, wherein claimant was only paid for 34.86 hours.  Defendants utilized 
the remaining 13 weeks, during which claimant was paid for 43.3 to 61.2 hours.  By this 
computation, defendants found a gross average weekly wage of $697.08.  (DED, p. 26)   
Claimant disagrees with defendants’ rate calculation.  During the 14-week period of 
March 22, 2015 through August 2, 2015, claimant excluded three weeks of earnings, 
the weeks of April 5, May 31, and July 5, 2015.  In excluding these weeks, claimant 
found a gross average weekly wage of $705.83.  (CE2, p. 1)  During the week of April 5, 
2015, claimant was paid for 24 hours of vacation and a total of 45.14 hours.  During the 
week of July 5, 2015, claimant was paid for 8 hours of vacation and a total of 48.17 
hours.  (DED. p.  26)  Claimant testified her work hours varied based on plant demand 
levels.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant’s demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing was somewhat equivocal 
given her history of depression; however, she often cried during the course of her 
testimony.  On direct examination, claimant testified without leading or prompting by 
counsel; yet on cross-examination, claimant frequently failed to provide direct answers 
and instead, replied by denying knowledge.  Claimant’s testimony also contained a 
number of exaggerations, if not explicit falsehoods.  She testified to defendant-employer 
and coworkers making false allegations against her; the investigative records refute her 
testimony.  Claimant also testified she was denied medical care for five to six months, 
when the evidentiary record reveals claimant was seen by a specialist within two 
months and underwent surgery three-months post-injury.  Claimant is found not 
credible. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether the injury of August 9, 2015 is a 
cause of temporary disability during the period of July 24, 2018 through November 2, 
2018.  The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to temporary 
disability benefits during the period of July 24, 2018 through November 2, 2018.  These 
issues will be considered together. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 9 
 
 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Claimant seeks healing period benefits for the period of July 24, 2018 through 
November 2, 2018.  During this period, Dr. Inda removed claimant from work to allow for 
evaluation of symptoms originating from claimant’s back.  While Dr. Inda served as 
claimant’s authorized, treating physician, Dr. Inda did not opine claimant’s symptoms 
were related to the work-related right ankle injury; instead, he deferred on that question 
to the provider evaluating claimant’s back.  Claimant did not follow through with Dr. 
Inda’s recommendation to seek evaluation by a spine specialist or primary care 
provider.   
Only the IME providers, Drs. Morrison and Bansal, offered opinions regarding a 
potential causal connection between claimant’s back, thigh, and gluteal pain, and the 
work injury.  Dr. Morrison specifically opined claimant’s right leg pain, which reached to 
the gluteal area and low back, were not causally related to the right ankle injury.  In 
addition to the stipulated right ankle condition, Dr. Bansal assessed a left ankle strain 
and low back strain as a result of the work injury.   
Following review of the entirety of the record, I award greatest weight on the 
issue of causation to the opinion of Dr. Morrison.  Dr. Morrison’s opinion addresses 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 10 
 
 
complaints involving claimant’s right leg, gluteal region and low back.  These right-sided 
symptoms are the same as those noted by Dr. Inda and which prompted his 
recommendation for further care.  Over the two-month period between May 14, 2018, 
when claimant first was evaluated for symptoms beyond her right ankle, and July 24, 
2018, when Dr. Inda removed claimant from work, claimant was evaluated by Dr. Inda 
or his colleague on four occasions.  On each of those occasions, claimant was 
evaluated for symptoms involving her right leg, thigh, gluteal region, and back.  
Therefore, the removal from work was to allow for evaluation of right-sided symptoms 
reaching to the low back.  Dr. Bansal’s report notes complaints of left-sided symptoms 
of the left ankle, left leg, and low back.  He assessed left ankle and low back strains, 
neither of which are corroborated by contemporaneous treatment records or evaluations 
beyond his own.  As Dr. Bansal’s opinions are based upon a history that is inconsistent 
with contemporaneous records and claimant is not a credible witness, Dr. Bansal’s 
opinions on this matter are entitled to no weight.   
Accordingly, I award greatest weight to the opinion of Dr. Morrison and determine 
claimant has failed to carry her burden that she was removed from work during the 
claimed period as a result of the right ankle injury of August 9, 2015.  As claimant has 
failed to carry her burden of establishing she was off work as a causal result of the work 
injury, she is not entitled to healing period benefits during the period of July 24, 2018 
through November 2, 2018. 
The next issue for determination is whether the permanent disability is a 
scheduled member disability or an unscheduled disability.  The next issue for 
determination is the extent of claimant’s permanent disability.  These issues shall be 
considered together. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(u).  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
The fact finder must consider both medical and lay evidence relating to the extent of the 
functional loss in determining permanent disability resulting from an injury to a 
scheduled member.  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 N.W.2d 267, 272-273 
(Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a) - (t) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 11 
 
 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943).  Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936). 
Claimant argues she has sustained an industrial disability as a result of gait 
derangement.  Defendants argue claimant’s permanent impairment is limited to her right 
lower extremity.  Drs. Inda and Morrison opined claimant sustained permanent 
impairment to her right lower extremity based upon the right ankle injury.  Dr. Inda 
opined claimant sustained a 7 percent lower extremity impairment on the basis of ankle 
range of motion.  Dr. Bansal also rated claimant’s permanent impairment on the basis of 
the right ankle injury; however, he opined claimant’s impairment should be rated on a 
whole person basis due to gait derangement.  On this basis he found a 15 percent 
whole person impairment.  Dr. Bansal did not opine claimant sustained permanent 
impairment as a result of alleged injury to any other body part.   
Therefore, the basis and situs of claimant’s permanent impairment is localized to 
claimant’s right ankle.  The dispute then becomes whether that right ankle condition is 
properly limited to a right lower extremity impairment or should be rated to the whole 
body.  The only potential basis for a whole person impairment is Dr. Bansal’s rating, 
which after review of the entirety of the record and consideration of the rating 
methodology, I decline to adopt.  Dr. Bansal’s rating is based upon Table 17-5 of the 
AMA Guides and the relevant subsection requires routine use of a short leg brace 
(ankle-foot orthosis [AFO]).  Claimant was originally prescribed an ASO brace, not an 
AFO brace.  She was later prescribed a more rigid Arizona brace, which is considered 
an AFO brace.  However, the frequency with which claimant utilizes any ankle brace is 
unclear.  As addressed supra, claimant was not a credible witness and the history relied 
upon by Dr. Bansal is inaccurate and inconsistent in certain respects.  Additionally, 
claimant originally reported a preference for use of ankle sleeves to Dr. Inda and there 
are no contemporaneous medical records regarding the success of use of the Arizona 
brace.  At the time the Arizona brace was prescribed, claimant was complaining of 
symptoms throughout the entire right leg and back; Dr. Inda did not specifically state if 
this brace was designed to treat work-related ankle symptoms.  Dr. Morrison 
recommended claimant pursue orthotics, but specifically opined her need for such 
devices was due to preexisting foot conditions.   
In addition to questions surrounding the accuracy of Dr. Bansal’s rating 
methodology, his rating should also be contrasted to the consistent ratings of Drs. Inda 
and Morrison.  Dr. Inda served as claimant’s treating surgeon and as such, had the 
opportunity to observe and examine claimant’s condition over a course of care, 
including intraoperatively.  Dr. Inda also possessed the benefit of considering the extent 
of claimant’s permanent impairment in 2016, at the conclusion of her active treatment 
specific to the ankle.  Dr. Morrison subsequently expressed agreement with Dr. Inda’s 
rating methodology and numerical computation of the extent of disability. 
Following review of the entirety of the record, I provide greater weight to the 
consistent opinions of Drs. Inda and Morrison.  I therefore determine claimant’s 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 12 
 
 
permanent impairment is confined to her right lower extremity.  Although claimant does 
require permanent restrictions as a result of the work injury, it is noteworthy that she 
returned to work full duty for over 1 ½ years prior to her termination.  The permanent 
restrictions were not imposed until nearly one year following her termination and despite 
not working during that period.  When these facts are combined with claimant’s lack of 
credibility, an award of permanent impairment benefits beyond the rated functional 
impairment is not warranted.  I find claimant sustained a permanent impairment of 7 
percent right lower extremity as a result of the August 9, 2015 work injury.  This award 
entitles claimant to 15.4 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits (7 percent x 220 
weeks = 15.4 weeks).      
The next issue for determination is the commencement date for permanent 
disability benefits. 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Section 85.34.  In this case, claimant’s healing period terminated upon 
her return to work on March 22, 2016.  Accordingly, permanent partial disability benefits 
commence on this date.   
The next issue for determination is the proper rate of compensation.  
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury.  Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, however.  Section 85.36(6). 
There is no dispute regarding claimant’s earnings during the 14 weeks preceding 
the work injury.  Rather, the dispute regarding claimant’s gross average weekly wage 
rests in which weeks should be considered representative of claimant’s earnings.  
Claimant excludes three weeks from her computation, while defendants only exclude 
one week.  The parties agree that the week of May 31, 2015 should be excluded; I 
concur with the week’s exclusion.  However, claimant also requests exclusion of the 
weeks of April 5, 2015 and July 5, 2015, without expressly stating the basis of the 
exclusion.  Presumably, claimant seeks exclusion due to claimant’s use of vacation 
hours.  The mere inclusion of vacation hours does not automatically deem a week 
unrepresentative.  During these weeks, claimant’s total hours paid fall within her 
otherwise accepted range of hours: 43.3 to 61.2 hour per week.  Without further 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 13 
 
 
argument, I cannot find the two weeks are unrepresentative of claimant’s weekly 
earnings.    
Furthermore, claimant’s gross earnings calculation utilizes only 11 weeks of 
earnings, as she did not substitute additional weeks of earnings for the two additional 
weeks she argues are unrepresentative.  There is no explanation for why these weeks 
were not replaced in the computation, as claimant was in the employ of defendant-
employer for over 7 years prior to her injury.  In contrast, defendants’ computation 
comports with the framework of section 85.36(6), in that defendants excluded one week 
of the preceding 13 weeks and replaced it with a representative week immediately 
preceding that period.  
Claimant has not carried her burden in establishing the weeks of April 5, 2015 
and July 5, 2015 are unrepresentative and should be excluded from the gross earnings 
computation.  Claimant’s proposal further does not comport with statutory guidelines for 
computation of gross weekly earnings.  Accordingly, I adopt defendants’ proposed 
calculation of claimant’s weekly earnings.  It is therefore determined claimant’s gross 
average weekly wage was $697.08.  The parties stipulated claimant was married and 
entitled to 3 exemptions at the time of the work injury.  Claimant’s rate of compensation 
is therefore, $468.34.      
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of the costs of: 
filing fee ($100.00) and deposition transcription fees ($92.00).  (CE3)  These are 
allowable costs and are taxed to defendants.    
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant fifteen point four (15.4) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing March 22, 2016 at the weekly rate of four hundred 
sixty-eight and 34/100 dollars ($468.34).  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.  Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a 
lump sum together with interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable 
and not paid when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due 
weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an 
annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 

RODRIGUEZ PENA V. CONAGRA 
Page 14 
 
 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. 
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33, as set forth supra. 
Signed and filed this        25th      day of September, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jordan Glaser (via WCES) 
Kent M. Smith (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERICA J. FITCH 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
