Case Number: 21015112.03
Case Title:  STUHR, DAWN ESLINGER V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS ASSN
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stuhr Dawn-21015112.03r.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DAWN STUHR f/k/a DAWN ESLINGER,   : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 21015112.03 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASS.,   : 
      REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GRINNELL MUTUAL REINSURANCE 
  : 
    Head Notes: 1108.50, 1402.40, 1802, 
CO.,  
  : 
 
 
   1803, 2502, 2602, 2907 
 
  :          
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Dawn Stuhr f/k/a Dawn Eslinger, claimant, filed a review-reopening petition on 
May 31, 2024.  Claimant is seeking workers’ compensation benefits from Adair County 
Mutual Insurance Association, employer and Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Company, 
insurance carrier, as defendants.  Specifically, claimant seeks to review and reopen a 
January 9, 2023 arbitration decision.  The arbitration hearing occurred on June 2, 2022 
before a different deputy commissioner. At that time the issue of permanency was not 
ripe. In the arbitration decision the deputy commissioner stated the matter was 
“bifurcated and only the issues addressed herein are final.  At such point in the future 
when either party contends that claimant has reached maximum medical improvement 
or other justiciable issues arise, said party may request a bifurcated hearing ….”  
(Bakerink v. Adair County Mutual Ins. Ass., File No. 21015112.01, pp. 13-14 (Arb. 
January 9, 2023). In the underlying arbitration decision, the presiding deputy 
commissioner found that claimant sustained an injury to her left knee, but not her right 
knee.  The deputy commissioner also found Dawn was entitled to future medical 
treatment with Craig R. Mahoney, M.D. for her left knee condition.   
The arbitration decision was summarily affirmed by the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner on July 26, 2023.  On January 16, 2024, the Iowa District 
Court for Polk County issued a ruling on petition for judicial review which affirmed in part 
and reversed in part the Commissioner’s decision. The Commissioner’s finding on 
causation were affirmed.  The Commissioner’s award of alternative medical care was 
reversed.  The Commissioner’s award of all costs related to Dr. Mahoney was affirmed.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Oct-20  14:17:09     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 2 
 
The Commissioner’s award of costs related to Dr. Kuhnlein was reversed.  No further 
appeal was filed. 
This review-reopening proceeding came on for hearing via Zoom 
videoconference before the undersigned on August 4, 2025, in the virtual/Des Moines, 
Iowa.  The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision.  The parties 
are now bound by their stipulations.  
Dawn Stuhr was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary record 
also includes joint exhibits 1-4, claimant’s exhibits 1-9, and defendant’s exhibits A-F.  All 
exhibits were received without objection.  At defendants’ request the undersigned also 
took administrative notice of the decision for agency file number 21015112.01 Adair 
County Mutual Insurance Association v. Eslinger, CVCV065947 (Iowa Dist. Ct. for Polk 
Cty., Jan. 16, 2024). The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 29, 2025, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained any permanent partial disability as the result of 
the stipulated May 24, 2019 work injury.  If so, the extent of permanency she 
sustained to her left lower extremity.   
2. Whether claimant is entitled to healing period benefits.  
3. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses, including 
medical mileage.   
4. Whether defendants should reimburse claimant for the independent medical 
examination.   
5. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 On May 24, 2019, claimant, Dawn Stuhr, slipped and fell on some mud and 
sustained an injury to her left knee which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment.  (Hearing Report; Transcript pages 12-13) The defendants denied the 
claim but the left knee injury was found to be compensable in the underlying arbitration 
decision.  (Tr. p. 13) At the time of the June 2022 arbitration hearing Dawn was 
experiencing significant pain and swelling in her left knee.  (Tr. pp. 13-14) Those 
symptoms persisted after the underlying hearing.  (Tr. p. 14) Dawn testified that she has 
not sustained any injuries to her left knee since that hearing.  (Tr. p. 14)  
Prior to the arbitration hearing Dawn received treatment from Craig R. Mahoney, 
M.D. at Iowa Ortho, a doctor selected by the defendants.  (Tr. p. 14) Dr. Mahoney 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 3 
 
treated her left knee, including steroid injections which provided temporary relief.  (Tr. 
pp. 14-15) He causally related her left knee problems to the work injury.  (Tr. p. 15)  
 
It appears that the first time Dr. Mahoney saw Dawn after the June 2, 2022 
hearing was on December 23, 2022. Dawn returned to Dr. Mahoney for bilateral knee 
pain. (JE1, pp. 1-4) Historically her left knee was worse than right.  Dr. Mahoney noted 
this was a chronic condition.  Dawn was previously in clinic 3.5 years ago for the left 
knee after an injury.  She reported a popping sensation in the posterolateral aspect of 
her right knee last week.  She also reported pain of her knees which was medially 
based.  Dawn’s symptoms were aggravated with weightbearing, standing, and walking 
stairs. She was using diclofenac twice daily which was monitored by her personal 
physician.  Two to three years ago she had a left knee cortisone injection.  No prior 
surgery.  (JE1, p. 1) Dr. Mahoney’s assessment was bilateral primary osteoarthritis of 
knee, pain in unspecified limb, and dietary counseling and surveillance.  (JE1, p. 3) 
Dawn had significant pain in the right and left knee which she had been experiencing for 
a long time.  She had age-advanced arthritis.  Dr. Mahoney felt that her genetics and 
weight played a big role.  (JE1, p. 3) Dr. Mahoney prescribed meloxicam and physical 
therapy.  He also administered a cortisone injection to the right knee.  He referred Dawn 
to the Mercy endocrine program to specifically address any medical interventions that 
could be used for weight loss.  She was to return in three months.  (JE1, p. 3)  
On March 20, 2023, Dawn returned to Iowa Ortho for right greater than left knee 
pain.  She was doing well with physical therapy.  She was losing weight and preparing 
to get married.  (JE1, pp. 5-7) The assessment was arthritis of both knees.  Dawn was 
encouraged to continue to be active from a low-impact standpoint.  She was involved in 
exercises on her own and physical therapy.  She would return for another shot prior to 
her wedding.  (JE1, p. 6)  
 
On June 5, 2023, Dawn saw Casey J. Howe, PA-C, at Iowa Ortho.  (JE1, pp. 8-
10) The notes state Dawn had KL grade 4 arthritis bilaterally.  She was there for 
cortisone injections.  (JE1, p. 8) Cortisone injections were administered in both knees.  
The plan was to continue to treat conservatively with injections every three months as 
needed.  (JE1, p. 9)  
 
Dawn returned to Iowa Ortho on November 8, 2023 for another injection in each 
knee.  (JE1, pp. 11-13) The assessment was primary osteoarthritis of both knees, pain 
in unspecified limb, and dietary counseling and surveillance.  Casey J. Howe, PA-C, 
noted that Dawn needed to lose a considerable amount of weight to be considered for 
knee replacement surgery.  They discussed bariatric surgery and a visit with her primary 
care provider to discuss injectable options.  Dawn was to return in 3 months and inject 
again if necessary.  (JE1, p. 13) 
 
On February 7, 2024, Dawn saw Dr. Mahoney.  (JE1, pp. 14-16) She received 
another injection in each knee.  Dr. Mahoney’s assessment was primary osteoarthritis of 
both knees.  He noted that he could continue to treat conservatively with injections 
every 3 months as needed.  They discussed weight loss.  Her BMI was 52.  Dr. 
Mahoney noted that her BMI played a role in the current scenario.  (JE1, p. 16)  

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 4 
 
 
On February 14, 2024, Dawn saw Timothy Piearson, D.O. at Adair County Health 
System for a diabetic check.  (JE2, pp. 17-18) Dawn continued on her medications.  
She reported that her specialists had added Trulicity to see if that would help with 
weight loss; so far it had not.  The prior week she saw ortho for injections in her knees.  
Dawn reported that her left knee had no cartilage but they did not want to replace her 
knees due to her age and weight.  Dawn reported it was difficult to exercise due to knee 
pain.  (JE2, p. 17) The assessment was type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension.  She 
was instructed to continue to watch her diet and activity.  (JE2, pp. 17-18)  
 
The defendants appealed the arbitration decision. After the final appeal decision 
was entered in January 2024, defendants directed Dawn’s treatment to Mark Fish, D.O. 
at Capital Orthopaedics.  (Tr. pp. 15-16)   
Dawn saw Dr. Fish on March 7, 2024 for a second opinion for her left knee 
regarding a work comp injury she sustained five years ago. (JE3, pp. 19-20) She fell on 
concrete and was walking on her left leg for a month before she was able to get care.  
She noted she still had popping, locking, and catching.  She has had increased pain 
with stairs, walking, and sit to stand transfers.  Dr. Fish’s assessment was pain of the 
left knee joint. (JE3, p. 21) Dr. Fish noted she had advanced degenerative joint disease 
in her left knee joint.  Surgical and conservative treatment options were discussed.  Dr. 
Fish felt that given the severity of osteoarthrosis, a knee replacement would ultimately 
offer the best chance of pain relief, and function.  However, he felt she was not a 
surgical candidate at that time due to her BMI of 51.6.  Dawn elected to proceed with 
conservatively monitoring her symptoms while contemplating treatment options. Dr. 
Fish’s assessment also included osteoarthritis of her right knee joint. (JE3, p. 21)  
 
On April 12, 2024 Dr. Fish authored a responsive missive to claimant’s attorney.  
(JE3, p. 221) Dr. Fish noted that Dawn was a candidate for a left total knee arthroplasty 
surgery.  However, she needed to have a BMI of 45 or less prior to the surgery.  Dawn 
had tried unsuccessfully over the past many years to attempt to lose weight 
conventionally. Dr. Fish agreed that due to her weight issue and her inability to lose 
weight conservatively, that weight loss surgery was an option to see if this would 
successfully reduce her weight prior to surgery.  (JE3, p. 22)  
 
On May 23, 2024, Dr. Fish answered a series of questions posed to him by 
defense counsel.  (DE B, pp. 7-9) Dr. Fish stated that Dawn never asked him for a 
bariatric surgeon consultation.  (DE B, p. 7) She did not specifically tell Dr. Fish that she 
tried a number of weight loss techniques that did not help.  (DE B, p. 7) Dr. Fish stated 
that Dawn was unable to opt for a knee replacement due to her weight.  (DE B, p. 7) Dr. 
Fish felt that a subchondroplasty procedure with arthroscopy could be considered as a 
treatment option for Dawn instead of a knee replacement.  (DE B, p. 7) Dr. Fish 
reviewed the June 15, 2019 MRI report and agreed that only the meniscus tear referred 
to in the MRI was caused or aggravated by the work incident of May 24, 2019.  (DE B, 
p. 8) Dr. Fish opined that she would be at MMI from the work injury, “when knee 
replacement was suggested vs meniscectomy.” (DE B, p. 8) Dr. Fish indicated that 
Dawn was not in need of any additional medical care for the work injury.  (DE B, p. 8) 
                                                 
1 This exhibit is duplicated in defendants’ exhibit D, page 19. 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 5 
 
Because Dawn did not have any surgical intervention he assigned 0 percent 
impairment.  (DE B, p. 8) Dr. Fish last treated Dawn on May 9, 2024 when he injected 
her left knee.  He also treated her osteoarthritis in the right knee with an injection.  (DE 
B, p. 8) Dr. Fish noted that potential treatment for her knee arthritis included injections, 
NSAIDS, bracing, physical therapy, and subchondroplasty.  (DE B, p. 8) Dr. Fish stated 
that due to Dawn’s young age, if she had a knee replacement she would likely require a 
revision at a later date.  (DE B, p. 8)  
 
On June 27, 2024, Dawn saw Brandon Smith, M.D. at Unity Point Clinic Weight 
Loss West Des Moines Clinic.  (JE4, pp. 53-65) The notes stated she was referred there 
by primary care physician Demi Eble, M.D., with a long-term history of morbid obesity 
since the age of 23.  She had a BMI of 53.42.  Dawn reported having multiple attempts 
at medical management of her obesity which had failed.  She tried multiple diets and/or 
medications including low carb, low fat, calorie counting, keto, phentermine, and 
mounjaro under the supervision of herself and her primary care physician.  (JE4, p. 53) 
Dawn had a history of work with Iowa Weight Loss Specialists in their non-surgical 
program from 2020-2022.  During that time, she reported losing around 30 pounds but 
really hit a weight loss barrier at around 300 pounds.  She has a family member who 
had surgery with our program and has done well.  Dr. Smith noted that Dawn had life-
limiting arthritis of her bilateral knees, left greater than right, and she had seen an 
orthopedic provider about possible knee replacement.  Dawn was given a goal weight of 
250 pounds (currently 331) in order to have the knee replacement surgery. Her 
maximum lifetime weight was 356 pounds and the most she had been able to lose was 
50 pounds doing phentermine and aggressive dieting.  (JE4, p. 53) Her current physical 
activities were limited due to knee replacement.  (JE4, p. 54) Dr. Smith and Dawn had a 
long discussion regarding guidelines for bariatric surgery.  (JE4, pp. 61-62) Dawn 
wanted to pursue the option of a Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy.  (JE4, pp. 53-65) 
 
On July 20, 2024, Dr. Mahoney answered a series of questions posed to him by 
defense counsel.  (DE A, pp. 4-6) Dr. Mahoney indicated that it was his opinion within a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty, that only the meniscus tear referred to him in 
November 2019 was caused or aggravated by the May 24, 2019 work injury.  (DE A, p. 
4) Dr. Mahoney believed Dawn reached MMI from her May 24, 2019 left knee injury as 
of November 1, 2019.  (DE A, p. 4) He opined that Dawn was not in need of any 
additional medical care for anything that was injured in her knee in the work incident of 
May 24, 2019.  (DE A, p. 5) He felt that Dawn did not sustain any permanent impairment 
pursuant to the AMA Guides Fifth Edition relative to her knee injury that was causally 
connected to the work incident of May 25, 2019.  (DE A, p. 5) 
 
Dr. Fish authored another missive to claimant’s counsel on August 5, 2024.  
(JE3, pp. 26-272) Dr. Fish had reviewed information provided to him by claimant’s 
counsel.  He noted that even though Dawn had undergone surgery in March 2019 on 
her left knee which included partial medial meniscectomy, abrasion chondroplasty of the 
patellofemoral joint and microfracture of the medial femoral condyle, she was doing 
well.  She did require a corticosteroid injection a few weeks after the surgery; however, 
                                                 
2 This exhibit is duplicated in defendants’ exhibit D, pages 14-15). 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 6 
 
she reported that she did well after the injection and had minimal pain.  She reported 
that she went to Nebraska Furniture Mart the weekend prior and walked the large store 
without difficulty.  After the May 24, 2019 injury she did not immediately relate pain to 
her left knee; she related pain to her head and her right wrist.  A few days later she 
began having increased pain in her left knee.  In June 2019 a repeat MRI demonstrated 
a new tear of the medial meniscus, including a medial meniscal root tear.  The MRI also 
demonstrated post-surgical changes as well as Grade IV chondromalacia of the medial 
compartment.  (JE3, p. 26) Dr. Fish noted that although Dawn had pre-existing 
degenerative changes of her left knee, it was apparent that she was doing well until the 
work injury and the injury had materially aggravated her pain.  He felt that it was 
therefore apparent that the work injury was an acute exacerbation of a chronic 
condition.  He also believed that the repair of the meniscus would not provide her 
adequate resolution to her symptoms.  Dr. Fish opined that a total knee arthroplasty 
would be the best treatment for her problem but Dawn would need to lose weight prior 
to the knee replacement surgery.  He felt that alternatively a sub chondroplasty of the 
medial compartment with debridement of the meniscus could be considered; however, 
he believed this would be less likely to provide her significant long-term improvement of 
her symptomology.  (JE3, pp. 26-27) 
 
Dawn had the weight loss surgery in September 2024 at UnityPoint. (Tr. p. 19) 
Dawn testified that following the surgery she was off work from her job at the City of 
Massena from September 4, 2024 through September 8, 2024.  (Tr. pp. 20-21) I find 
she was disabled from working during this time. Within two weeks of the surgery, she 
lost twenty-one pounds.  (JE4, p. 80) The weight loss surgery was successful and 
allowed her to get to an optimal BMI so she could have the knee replacement surgery in 
February 2024. (Tr. pp. 21-22) During that procedure the surgeon also fixed a hiatal 
hernia and performed a liver biopsy.  (Tr. p. 35)  
 
On November 25, 2024, Dawn returned to see Dr. Fish to discuss left knee 
replacement.  She had received a cortisone injection on November 11, 2024 and was 
required to wait three months past that to have surgery.  (JE3, pp. 28-29) Dr. Fish noted 
that Dawn was seen in his office on November 11, 2024 and that she could return to 
work on November 11, 2024.  (JE3, p. 30-31)  
 
On November 26, 2024, Dr. Fish sent a note to the workers’ compensation 
carrier which stated that he recommended left total knee arthroplasty surgery.  (JE3, p. 
32)  
 
Dawn saw Bryan Goos, P.T. for physical therapy on January 14, 2025.  (JE3, pp. 
33-37) Dawn reported with left knee pain prior to left total knee arthroplasty scheduled 
for February 12, 2025.  (JE3, p. 35) She had been having issues in the knee for the last 
5 years.  She slipped and fell on some mud in 2019 and tore her meniscus and had 
subacute fractures in the knee. She planned to do outpatient physical therapy closer to 
her home after surgery.  (JE3, pp. 35-37)  
 
On February 6, 2025, Dr. Fish signed a letter authored by claimant’s counsel.  By 
signing the letter Dr. Fish indicated,  

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 7 
 
[T]hat it is my opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, or 
51% probability, that the work injury Dawn Stuhr sustained to her left knee 
on May 24, 2019, was a substantial contributing factor to aggravating, 
accelerating, or lighting up her pre-existing left knee arthritis, and was 
therefore, a substantial factor in bringing about her current need for left 
knee arthroplasty surgery.  
(JE3, pp. 38-39) 
 
On February 12, 2025, Dr. Fish performed a left total knee arthroplasty.  (JE3, 
pp. 40-41) Dawn was off work from February 12, 2025 to February 27, 2025 due to her 
knee replacement surgery.  (Tr. p. 24) I find she was disabled from working during this 
time.  
 
Dawn returned to Capital Orthopaedics on February 27, 2025; she was two-
weeks post-op.  (JE3, pp. 42-45) She was to progress to formal physical therapy to 
work on range of motion, strengthening, and gait training.  (JE3, pp. 44-45) 
 
On March 27, 2025, Dawn was seen at Capital Orthopaedics.  She was 
ambulating without assistance and continued to work with physical therapy on strength.  
She had been gradually returning to normal daily activities.  She did have some 
complaints of her foot being numb since surgery.  Dr. Fish felt this may be from the 
nerve block or stretching of the nerve during surgery.  He believed it would take time to 
return to its normal state.  Dawn was to continue with physical therapy and increase her 
activities as tolerated.  (JE3, pp. 46-49)   
 
Dr. Fish saw Dawn again on June 2, 2025. (JE3, pp. 50-52) She was 3 months 
post left total knee arthroplasty.  She was instructed to continue to increase her 
activities as tolerated.  Dawn was instructed to follow up one year from the date of the 
surgery.  (JE3, pp. 50-52) 
Dr. Mahoney authored a responsive missive to defense counsel on June 18, 
2025.  (DE A, p. 3) He reiterated that it was still his opinion that “the meniscus was 
aggravated by the work injury, but the underlying degenerative condition of the left knee 
was not.” (DE A, p. 3) Dr. Mahoney was also asked to provide his opinion on whether 
there was a relationship between the left knee replacement and the work injury.  He 
stated,  
I believe the patient had underlying arthritis at the time of the injury.  I 
believe the knee replacement was due to her underlying arthritis, which 
was present prior to the injury itself.  I do not believe the injury was a 
significant contributing factor to her need for the left knee replacement. 
(DE A, p. 3) 
 
At the request of her attorney Dawn saw John D. Kuhnlein, D.O. for an IME on 
June 3, 2025.  (CE 1, pp. 1-23) Dawn reported intermittent left knee pain, the knee is 
more pain-free than painful.  She believed she had good range of motion.  Her strength 
was good when compared to before her total knee replacement.  She had numbness 
along the lateral knee extending to the incision.  She also had numbness and 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 8 
 
paresthesias in the sole of her left foot since the surgery from the heel to the left small 
toe; this had been gradually improving.  (CE1, p. 13) Dr. Kuhnlein’s diagnoses were: 
left-eyelid contusion, resolved; right wrist strain, resolved; left knee medial meniscus 
tear with March 13, 2019, arthroscopic partial medial meniscectomy, microfracture of 
grade III chondromalacia of the medial femoral condyle, and abrasion chondroplasty of 
the patella and trochlear groove; right knee medial meniscus tear, degenerative joint 
disease and chronic pain.  (CE1, p. 16) Dr. Kuhnlein opined that the work injury was a 
substantial more than minor factor in aggravating and accelerating the preexisting left 
knee osteoarthritis.  (CE1, p. 16) Dr. Kuhnlein stated,  
[f]urther supporting the argument that the need for the total knee 
arthroplasty was related to the May 24, 2019, injury is that Ms. Stuhr’s 
symptoms pattern significantly changed after the injury and lasted for 
years.  There is no documentation in the currently available file that her 
symptoms returned before the May 24, 2019, injury.  It was only after the 
injury that the symptoms recurred and progressed.  The left knee 
symptoms lasted for several years after the injury, with no known 
intervening left knee injury that would also account for the change in her 
symptoms after the injury.  To state that her symptoms and arthritic 
changes developed serendipitously outside of and unrelated to the injury 
would not match the medical records.  Therefore, it is more likely than not 
that the May 24, 2019, injury was a substantial more than minor factor in 
accelerating and aggravating her preexisting left osteoarthritis. 
(CE1, p. 17) 
Additionally, Dr. Kuhnlein related the bariatric surgery to the May 24, 2019 injury.  
(CE1, p. 18) He noted,  
Ms. Stuhr said multiple times during this evaluation that the main reason 
she had the bariatric surgery was so that she could have the left knee 
arthroplasty.  While it is clear that her obesity was not the sole factor in the 
development of her degenerative left knee arthritis, it is also clear that 
performing the bariatric surgery enabled her to have the left knee 
arthroplasty.  She could not have had the left total knee arthroplasty 
without the bariatric surgery, so the bariatric surgery was necessary and 
indicated. 
(CE1, p. 17) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein stated Dawn would reach MMI on or about February 12, 2026, a 
year after the total knee arthroplasty.  (CE1, p. 18) Dr. Kuhnlein cited to the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition and assigned impairment for the left knee. He noted she had a 
good result from the total knee arthroplasty.  He assigned 37 percent left lower 
extremity impairment for the total knee arthroplasty under Table 17-33.  (CE1, p. 18) I 
find that this impairment rating was made pursuant to AMA Guides Fifth Edition. 
Dr. Kuhnlein then stated that Dawn, 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 9 
 
[H]as a consistent sensory deficit in the lateral sural cutaneous nerve 
distribution on the lateral left knee.  Turning to Table 17-37, Page 552, the 
lateral sural cutaneous nerve is not listed, so an extrapolated value must 
be used.  The lateral sural cutaneous nerve is a branch of the fibular 
nerve, which is a branch of the sciatic nerve.  In reviewing the table, the 
values would overestimate impairment for this nerve injury, so I do not 
believe that would be appropriate to use.  I would instead use the value for 
the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve as a guide.  Doing so, I could assign 
an initial 2% left lower extremity impairment for the sensory deficit in the 
left lateral sural cutaneous nerve distribution.  However, this value must be 
multiplied by the modifier from Table 16-10, Page 482, following the 
instructions on page 550.  I would use the 25% modifier.  When these 
values are multiplied (2% x 25%) and rounded according to the 
instructions on page 20, this could be a 1% left lower extremity impairment 
for the sensory deficit.   
Not all values in the lower extremity may be combined.  This is covered in 
Table 17-2, Page 526.  In this case, it is most appropriate to combine the 
values for the total knee arthroplasty with the sensory deficit.  Using the 
Combined Values Chart on page 604, when these values are combined 
(37% x 1%), this is a 38% left lower extremity impairment.   
(CE1, p. 18)  
 Dr. Kuhnlein then assigned an additional 1 percent left lower extremity impairment for 
the sensory deficit and cited to Table 17-37 and Table 16-10.  (CE1, p. 18) He used the 
combined values chart to arrive at a total of 38 percent left lower extremity impairment.   
(CE1, p. 18)  
 
Defendants point out that Dr. Kuhnlein’s 1 percent rating for the sural cutaneous 
nerve allegation is not listed for a permanent impairment rating under the AMA Guides 
Fifth Edition, table 17-37, p. 552.  Defendants argue that the AMA Guides do not 
provide a permanency rating for deficits to the nerve and Dr. Kuhnlein attempts to 
extrapolate a rating.  As such, defendants contend that the 1 percent rating from Dr. 
Kuhnlein is not based solely on the Guides.  I find defendants’ argument to be 
persuasive.  I find that 1 percent rating assigned by Dr. Kuhnlein was not based solely 
on the Guides.   
 
The first issue to be addressed is whether claimant’s left knee arthroscopy was 
necessitated by the May 24, 2019 work injury.  Dawn relies on the opinions of Dr. Fish 
and Dr. Kuhnlein.  Ultimately, Dr. Fish opined that the work injury Dawn sustained to her 
left knee on May 24, 2019, was a substantial contributing factor to aggravating, 
accelerating, or lighting up her pre-existing left knee arthritis, and was therefore, a 
substantial factor in bringing about her current need for left knee arthroplasty surgery.  
(JE3, pp. 38-39) Dr. Kuhnlein believed that the May 24, 2019 injury was a substantial 
more than a minor factor in accelerating and aggravating her preexisting left knee 
osteoarthritis.  (CE1, p. 17)  

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 10 
 
 
Defendants rely on the opinion of Dr. Mahoney.  He opined that the work injury 
aggravated a meniscus and did not aggravate the claimant’s underlying degenerative 
condition of her left knee.  He believed that the work injury was not a significant 
contributing factor to the need for a knee replacement.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 3) Unfortunately, 
Dr. Mahoney failed to explain why after the work injury Dawn’s left knee arthritis 
progressed and persisted without relief until her knee arthroplasty.   
 
I find the opinions of Dr. Fish and Dr. Kuhnlein carry greater weight than that of 
Dr. Mahoney’s.  I acknowledge that Dr. Fish’s opinions have changed.  However, 
defendants selected Dr. Fish to treat Dawn so it cannot credibly be argued that he is 
somehow biased against the defendants.  Additionally, he was the most recent 
authorized treating physician who saw Dawn on multiple occasions over a lengthy 
period of time. Furthermore, both Dr. Fish and Dr. Kuhnlein provided persuasive 
rationale for their opinions.  Thus, I find that the May 24, 2019 work injury was a 
substantial contributing factor which materially aggravated or worsened Dawn’s left 
knee condition and her need for left knee arthroplasty surgery.   
 
We now turn to the extent of PPD.  There are two physicians who provided their 
opinions regarding permanent impairment as the result of the May 24, 2019 work injury.  
First, Dr. Mahoney opined that Dawn did not sustain any permanent impairment 
pursuant to the AMA Guides relative to her knee injury that was causally connected to 
the work incident of May 24, 2019.  (DE A, p. 5) Second, Dr. Kuhnlein assigned 38 
percent impairment as the result of the work injury.  I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s impairment 
rating carries greater weight than that of Dr. Mahoney’s because Dr. Mahoney’s rating 
was conducted prior to the knee replacement surgery.  As noted above, I found that the 
37 percent rating assigned by Dr. Kuhnlein was based on the Guides.  Therefore, I find 
that Dawn sustained 37 percent impairment to her left lower extremity as the result of 
the May 24, 2019 work injury.   
 
The next issue to be addressed is whether the weight reduction surgery was 
reasonable and necessary treatment.  In November 2023, Dawn was advised by Iowa 
Ortho that she needed to lose a considerable amount of weight to be considered for 
knee replacement surgery.  They had a discussion regarding bariatric surgery.  (JE1, 
pp. 11-13) In March 2024 Dr. Fish recommended a left knee replacement but felt she 
was not a surgical candidate due to her BMI of 51.6.  (JE3, p. 21) In April 2024 Dr. Fish 
advised she needed to have a BMI of 45 or less prior to the surgery.  He noted she had 
tried unsuccessfully over many years to lose weight conventionally.  Dr. Fish agreed 
that due to her weight issue and her inability to lose weight conservatively, that weight 
loss surgery was an option to see if this would successfully reduce her weight prior to 
knee surgery.  (JE3, p. 22) 
 
Dawn testified that her weight has been a struggle for a large percentage of her 
life.  (Tr. p. 17) She tried exercising, dieting, medication, and going to different weight 
loss clinics but she could never get beyond a certain point.  (Tr. pp. 17-18) If she did 
lose weight she would gain it back.  (Tr. p. 18) She could not exercise after her left knee 
injury in 2019.  (Tr. p. 38) Due to her lack of success, she decided to have a gastric 
sleeve performed so she could have her knee repaired.  (Tr. pp. 18-19) She did not 
believe she would ever be able to have the knee surgery if she did not have the gastric 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 11 
 
sleeve done.  (Tr. p. 19) According to Dawn, Dr. Fish was supportive of her having 
weight loss surgery.  (Tr. p. 19) He said that if she was successful in having the weight 
loss surgery and lost the weight, then she could have her knee replaced.  (Tr. p. 19) In 
May 2024 Dr. Fish stated that Dawn did not specifically ask him for a bariatric surgeon 
consultation.  (DE B, p. 7) He also indicated that she did not specifically tell Dr. Fish that 
she tried a number of weight loss techniques.  He stated that Dawn was not able to opt 
for a knee replacement due to her weight.  (DE B, p. 7)  
Regarding the bariatric surgery, Dr. Kuhnlein stated,  
[I]t is clear that performing the bariatric surgery enabled her to have the 
left knee arthroplasty.  She could not have had the left total knee 
arthroplasty without the bariatric surgery, so the bariatric surgery was 
necessary and indicated.  “The proof is in the pudding,” as her symptoms 
have significantly improved after the left total knee arthroplasty.  But for 
the bariatric surgery, she could not have had the total knee arthroplasty, 
so it was a necessary procedure to allow her to have the total knee 
arthroplasty.  Treating orthopedists she saw both stated that she needed 
to lose weight before she could be considered a candidate for total knee 
arthroplasty, and the only way she could lose weight at this point was 
bariatric surgery, as she had failed other weight loss treatments.  As such, 
I would relate the bariatric surgery to the May 24, 2019, injury in this 
fashion.   
(CE1, pp. 17-18)   
 
I find that Dawn had struggled with her weight for most of her life and had 
unsuccessfully tried to lose weight with more traditional measures. I further find that 
Dawn was advised by the treating orthopedic surgeon that she could not undergo the 
knee surgery unless he reduced her BMI.  I find that Dawn underwent the weight loss 
surgery and the weight loss surgery was successful.  I find that Dawn’s BMI was a 
preexisting non-work-related condition that was necessary to treat in order to effectively 
treat a work-related condition.  I find the weight loss surgery was reasonable and 
necessary treatment to address her BMI so that her left knee work injury could be 
properly treated.   
 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibits 5 and 6.  Dawn testified that the medical mileage and medical expenses, 
including the lien, listed in claimant’s exhibit 5 and 6 are related to her left knee 
replacement surgery and her weight loss surgery.  (Tr. p. 25) The bills were paid by her 
private health insurance that she has in connection with her job at the City of Messina.  
(Tr. pp. 25-26) I find that Dawn also paid some out-of-pocket expenses as set forth in 
claimant’s exhibit 5.  (Tr. p. 26; CE5) 
 
Dawn is seeking payment of expenses incurred at Iowa Ortho from December 
23, 2022 through February 7, 2024 where she treated for her left knee with Dr. 
Mahoney.  (CE 5, p. 37; CE5-6) I find these expenses were reasonable and necessary 
due to the work injury. Dr. Mahoney was selected by the defendants.  (Tr. p. 14) I find 
that during the pendency of the appeal of the arbitration decision defendants denied 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 12 
 
compensability of the left knee.  I further find that it was not until February 28, 2024 that 
defendants advised claimant that they planned to authorize Dr. Fish at Capital Ortho for 
evaluation and treatment of the left knee.  (CE9, p. 58)  
Dawn is also seeking expenses incurred at UnityPoint Health, Associated 
Anesthesiologists, P.C., Regional Laboratory, Iowa Radiology, The Iowa Clinic, and 
Pathology Laboratory.  (CE 5, pp. 37-39; CE5-6) I find that these expenses were 
incurred in connection with the weight loss treatment which was necessary for the 
proper treatment of the work injury.  Thus, I find that these expenses were reasonable 
and necessary as the result of the work injury.  
Next, Dawn is seeking payment of bills for treatment at Adair County Memorial 
Hospital.  (CE 5, pp. 39-40; CE5-6) Dawn underwent prescribed physical therapy for her 
left knee.  She was also seen and discussed medication to see if it would help with 
weight loss.  Because the left knee and weight loss treatment were found to be 
reasonable and necessary as the result of the work injury, I find that defendants are 
responsible for the medical expenses incurred at Adair County Memorial Hospital.  
(CE5, pp. 39-40; CE5-6) 
 
Dawn is seeking payment for post-surgical services she received at Greater 
Regional Medical Center.  (CE5, p. 40; CE5-6) I find that these expenses were 
necessitated by the work injury and are the responsibility of the defendants.   
Next are medical expenses from Capital Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine where 
claimant treated with Dr. Fish.  (CE5, pp. 40-41; CE5-6) I found that the left knee 
treatment, including the arthroplasty, was reasonable and necessary treatment as the 
result of the work injury.  Therefore, I find defendants are responsible for these 
expenses.   
 
I find that the expenses incurred at the Advanced Surgery Center, Orthotek Inc., 
and Heartland Anesthesia and Consulting for the total knee arthroplasty were 
reasonable and necessary treatment as the result of the work injury. (CE5, p. 41; CE5-
6) Therefore, I find defendants are responsible for these expenses.   
 
Dawn is seeking reimbursement for mileage incurred in connection with her 
medical treatment for her left knee and weight loss.  (CE7) I found that the left knee and 
weight loss treatment were reasonable and necessary treatment as the result of the 
work injury.  I find that the mileage Dawn set forth in her exhibit 7 are reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses which she incurred as the result of the work injury. 
Therefore, I find defendants are responsible to reimburse claimant for the mileage set 
forth in claimant’s exhibit 7. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for the IME of Dr. Kuhnlein which was performed 
on June 3, 2025.  (CE1) I find that on July 20, 2024, Dr. Mahoney opined that only the 
meniscus tear was caused or aggravated by the May 24, 2019 work injury.  (DE A, p. 4) 
Dr. Mahoney placed Dawn at MMI from any injury to her May 24, 2019 left knee injury 
and stated that she did not sustain any permanent impairment pursuant to the AMA 
Guides Fifth Edition relative to her knee injury that was causally connected to the work 
incident of May 25, 2019.  (DE A, p. 5) I find that this opinion from Dr. Mahoney 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 13 
 
constitutes an evaluation of permanent disability for the May 24, 2019 work injury and 
was made by a physician retained by the employer.  I further find that Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
permanent disability evaluation for the May 24, 2019 work injury took place after Dr. 
Mahoney’s evaluation of permanent disability.  However, I also find that a portion of Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s report was to evaluate body parts for claimant’s claims against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa. I find that approximately 70 percent of the IME was related to a 
compensable injury.      
 
Dawn is seeking healing period benefits for two timeframes.  First, from 
September 4, 2024 through September 8, 2024.  Dawn testified that after the weight 
loss surgery she was off work from her job at the City of Massena from September 4, 
2024 through September 8, 2024.  (Tr. pp. 20-21) The second timeframe Dawn is 
seeking healing period benefits for is February 12, 2025 through February 27, 2025.  
Dawn was off work from February 12, 2025 to February 27, 2025 due to her knee 
replacement surgery.  (Tr. p. 24) Defendants argue Dawn is not entitled to these 
benefits because neither the weight loss surgery nor the left knee replacement surgery 
was related to the work injury.  However, as noted above, the preponderance of the 
evidence demonstrates that both surgeries were reasonable and necessary as the 
result of the work injury.  Therefore, I find that Dawn was temporarily disabled from work 
as the result of her work injury from September 4, 2024 through September 8, 2024 and 
from February 12, 2025 to February 27, 2025.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
Claimant brings this review-reopening proceeding.  A review-reopening 
proceeding is appropriate whenever there has been a substantial change in condition 
since a prior arbitration award or settlement.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387 (Iowa 2009).  Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), this agency is authorized to 
reopen a prior award or settlement to inquire about whether the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation.  Id. 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made.  The 
change may be either economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review-
reopening.  Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated since the 
time of the initial award or settlement.  Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 
N.W.2d 109 (1957).  A failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated 
originally may also constitute a change of condition.  Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar 
Falls, Iowa, 272 N.W.2d 24 (Iowa App. 1978).   

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 14 
 
I find that since the time of the underlying arbitration hearing, the claimant has 
reached MMI and thus the issue of permanent partial disability is now ripe for 
determination.  I conclude claimant has demonstrated a change in condition related to 
the original injury since the original award was made.   
We now turn to the issue of causation.  The claimant has the burden of proving 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability 
on which the claim is based.  A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about the result; it need not be the only cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists 
when the causal connection is probable rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel 
& Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa 
App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant has demonstrated 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the May 24, 2019 work injury was a substantial 
contributing factor which materially aggravated or worsened claimant’s left knee 
condition and her need for left knee arthroplasty surgery.   
We now turn to the issue of permanent disability.  The parties stipulated that if 
the claimant sustained any permanent disability as the result of the work injury, the 
permanent disability is to her left lower extremity.  (Hearing Report, numbered 
paragraph 5(b)). An injury to the lower extremity is compensated pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(p). 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 15 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p) states that the loss of a leg is to be compensated 
on the basis of two hundred and twenty weeks.  Based on the above findings of fact I 
conclude claimant sustained 37 percent impairment of her left lower extremity.  
Pursuant to the 220 weeks schedule, claimant is entitled to 81.4 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits for the May 24, 2019 work injury.  These benefits shall be paid 
at the stipulated weekly rate of three hundred sixty-four and 58/100 dollars ($364.58) 
and commence on the stipulated date of June 2, 2025.  (Hearing Report, numbered 
paragraph 6; Tr. p. 6) 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibits 5 and 6.  Under Iowa law the employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, 
medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, 
ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the 
workers' compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 
injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second 
Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner, 78 
(Review-Reopening 1975).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude the medical expenses set forth in 
claimant’s exhibits 5 and 6 were reasonable and necessary as the result of the work 
injury. 
Regarding the Iowa Ortho medical expenses.  Defendants contend the 
authorization was up in the air for the treatment with Dr. Mahoney that took place after 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 16 
 
the arbitration hearing but before the judicial review decision.  Defendants argue that 
because the judicial review decision overturned the decision to name Dr. Mahoney as 
the treater, that treatment would not be compensable.  Defendants essentially argue 
that the treatment with Dr. Mahoney was not authorized.  However, this argument is not 
persuasive because defendants were denying compensability of the injury during this 
time. Lack of authorization is not a defense when the defendants deny compensability.  
I find that defendants are responsible for the expenses from Iowa Ortho.  (CE 5, p. 37)  
Next, claimant is seeking payment of medical expenses from UnityPoint Health in 
connection with her weight loss treatment.  (CE 5, pp. 37-38) This agency has a history 
of precedents that require an employer to treat a preexisting non-work-related condition 
to the extent that doing so is necessary in order to effectively treat a work-related 
condition.  See Shilling v. Eby Constr. Co., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report, 350 
(App. 1981).  This agency has noted that a medical procedure that is necessary to 
address a non-work-related condition preliminary to treating a condition that is caused 
or aggravated by the work injury may be the responsibility of the defendants.  See Gray 
v. Five Star Quality Care, File No. 5001178 (Arb. Sept. 16, 2003): See also Woods v. 
Siemens-Furnas Controls, File No. 1303082 (App. July 22, 2002): Edgington v. Iowa 
Spring Mfg., File No. 1281672 (Arb. Nov. 24, 2014).  
Defendants disputed that the weight loss treatment was related to the work 
injury.  However, based on the above findings of fact, I concluded that the weight loss 
treatment was reasonable and necessary to properly treat the work injury.  Dr. Fish 
stated claimant had to lower her BMI before her left knee could be properly treated.  
(JE3, p. 22) He also noted her inability to lose weight conservatively and that weight 
loss surgery was an option for her to reduce weight prior to knee surgery.  Dr. Kuhnlein 
indicated that claimant failed other weight loss treatments and the only way she could 
lose weight was bariatric surgery.  (CE1, pp. 17-18) These opinions are unrebutted. The 
weight loss procedure was performed and claimant lost weight.  Although she was 
obese prior to the work injury, she did not medically require a weight loss procedure 
until her work injury prompted the need for knee surgery.  I conclude the weight loss 
treatment was reasonable and necessary to treat her work injury.  I further conclude the 
defendants are responsible for the cost of the weight loss treatment for expenses 
incurred at UnityPoint Health, Associated Anesthesiologists, P.C., Regional Laboratory, 
Iowa Radiology, The Iowa Clinic, and Pathology Laboratory.  (CE 5, pp. 37-39) 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for the mileage she incurred seeking medical 
treatment.  (CE7, p. 52) Iowa Code section 85.27 provides that defendants shall provide 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses insured for medical services.  Agency 
rule 876 IAC 8.1(2) provides that claimant is entitled to be reimbursed for “All mileage 
incident to the use of a private auto.” Medical mileage is to be reimbursed at the 
applicable business standard mileage rate established by the Internal Revenue Service 
and in effect on July 1 of each calendar year. 876 IAC 8.1(2).  Claimant attached a 
detailed summary and itemization of each medical visit and the mileage incurred. 
Defendant argue that when claimant treated with Dr. Mahoney and Dr. Fish they also 
treated her for non-work conditions and therefore, defendants should only have to pay 
for one-half of the mileage.  Defendants do not cite any legal authority to support their 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 17 
 
argument. I conclude that claimant has established entitlement to reimbursement of her 
medical mileage as contained in claimant’s exhibit 7, page 52. Iowa Code section 85.27; 
876 IC 8.1(2). 
 
Claimant testified the medical bills were paid by her private health insurance that 
she has in connection with her job at the City of Messina.  (Tr. pp. 25-26) Because 
claimant’s medical payments for the treatment of her left knee and weight loss were 
made under an insurance plan that the defendant-employer did not contribute, the 
claimant is entitled to a direct payment.  See Midwest Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 
N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008).  Therefore, the defendants are responsible to make 
direct payment to claimant for past medical expenses paid through insurance coverage.    
I conclude Dawn has established that she paid some out-of-pocket expenses.  
(Tr. p. 26) Fees for medical and hospital services may be paid directly to the health care 
provider.  Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  The claimant is not entitled to 
be paid unless the claimant can establish that she has paid the charges herself.  Id. I 
conclude claimant is entitled to be paid directly for the out-of-pocket expenses set forth 
in claimant’s exhibit 5.   
Claimant is seeking reimbursement for Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME.  Iowa Code section 
85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a 
physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has 
previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial 
evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also permits 
reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any 
wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  Iowa 
Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee 
is being examined is determined to be compensable.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2017).  
“An employer is not liable for the cost of such examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to be a compensable injury. A 
determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform 
an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.”  Iowa Code 
§ 85.39(2); Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023).   
Iowa Code section 85.39(2), as amended, allows an employee with a 
compensable injury to be reimbursed the reasonable cost of an examination. See Iowa 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 18 
 
Code § 85.39(2)(2017); Mid American Construction LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 849 
(Iowa 2024). Under the statute, an examination may include reviewing medical records, 
conducting a physical exam, opining on causation, assessing permanent impairment, 
assigning restrictions, and recommending further care. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 851.  
I find that Dr. Kuhnlien’s IME addresses the May 24, 2019 left lower extremity 
injury and also addresses the claimant’s right upper extremity claim against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa.  Because the left lower extremity claim is a compensable injury, I 
find that the portion of the IME related to that claim should be reimbursed by the 
defendants.  However, I find that the right upper extremity claim is not compensable 
against these defendants and therefore is not the responsibility of the defendants.  I 
further find that approximately 70% of the IME addressed the compensable left lower 
extremity claim.  Therefore, I find that defendants are responsible for approximately 70 
percent of the total IME.  The total charge for the IME was $5,940.00, seventy percent 
of that amounts to $4,158.00.  I conclude defendants shall reimburse claimant for the 
IME in the amount of $4,158.00. 
Claimant is seeking temporary total disability or healing period benefits from 
September 4, 2024 through September 8, 2024 and February 12, 2025 through 
February 27, 2025.  (Hearing Report, numbered paragraph 4) Because claimant has 
demonstrated that she did sustain permanent disability as the result of the work injury 
these benefits would be properly classified as healing period benefits. 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are: (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
Based on the above findings of facts, I conclude the preponderance of the 
evidence demonstrates that both surgeries were reasonable and necessary as the 
result of the work injury and that claimant was disabled from work during these periods.  
Therefore, I find that Dawn was temporarily disabled from work as the result of her work 
injury from September 4, 2024 through September 8, 2024 and from February 12, 2025 
to February 27, 2025.  As such, I conclude claimant is entitled to healing period benefits 
from September 4, 2024 through September 8, 2024 and from February 12, 2025 to 
February 27, 2025. 
Lastly, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs in the amount of $7,418.75.  
(CE8) Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner or the deputy hearing the case.  876 IAC 4.33. I conclude that the 

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 19 
 
claimant was generally successful in her claim and exercise my discretion to award 
costs. 
Specifically, claimant seeks the filing fee in the amount of $128.75.  (CE 8, p. 54) 
I find this is an appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Defendants are assessed these 
costs. 
Next, claimant is seeking costs in the amount of $1,000.00 for the June 17, 2024 
Dr. Fish report and costs in the amount of $350.00 for the February 6, 2025 Dr. Fish 
report. (CE 8, pp. 55-56) I find that these are appropriate costs under 876 IAC 4.33(6).  
Defendants are assessed these costs. 
Finally, claimant is seeking costs in the amount of $5,940.00 for the IME of Dr. 
Kuhnlein.  (CE 8, p. 57) This request as a cost is moot because the relevant portion of 
the IME was awarded under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Therefore, defendants are assessed costs totaling $1,478.75. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of three hundred sixty-four 
and 58/100 dollars ($364.58).   
Defendants shall pay healing period benefits from September 4, 2024 through 
September 8, 2024 and from February 12, 2025 through February 27, 2025. 
Defendants shall pay eighty-one point four (81.4) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on June 2, 2025. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.    
Defendants shall pay the past medical expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 5 
and 6.  Defendants shall make direct payment to claimant for past medical expenses 
paid through her health insurance and for her out-of-pocket expenses.  Defendants shall 
reimburse all other third-party payers or otherwise satisfy and hold claimant harmless 
for medical expenses as set forth in exhibits 5 and 6. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the IME in the amount of four thousand 
one hundred fifty-eight and 00/100 dollars ($4,158.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above.  

STUHR V. ADAIR COUNTY MUTUAL INS. ASSN. 
Page 20 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7.  
Signed and filed this __20th ___ day of October, 2025. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James M. Ballard (via WCES) 
Stephen W. Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
