Case Number: 5061293
Case Title:  SHAW, KEYATTA V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE AME
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Shaw Keyatta-5061293D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KEYATTA SHAW, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5061293 
AMERICAN INCOME LIFE 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  Head Note Nos.:  1100, 1108, 
 
 
  : 
          1803, 2001, 2002, 3001 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Keyatta Shaw, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from American Income Life Insurance Company, employer, and 
Zurich American Insurance Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result 
of an alleged injury sustained on January 11, 2018.  This matter came on for hearing 
before Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch.  The record in this 
case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 22, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5, 
Defendants’ Exhibits A through F, and the testimony of the claimant and Eric Cochran. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether an employer-employee relationship existed at the time of the alleged 
injury;  
2. Whether claimant sustained an injury on January 11, 2018 which arose out of 
and in the course of employment;  
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability;  
4. The extent of any industrial disability;  
5. The proper rate of compensation;  
6. Whether defendants are responsible for claimed medical expenses;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Aug-07  08:19:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 2 
 
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination; and 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of penalty benefits and, if so, how 
much. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant was 42 years of age at the time of hearing.  She resides in Des Moines, 
Iowa.  (Claimant's testimony)  Claimant attended high school through the ninth grade.  
She earned her GED in 1999.  Claimant’s early work history included housekeeping, 
server, retail, hotel customer service, assistant manager at fast food restaurant, and 
intake/registration coordinator at medical facilities.  (Claimant's testimony; CE3, pages 
51-53)  Claimant worked as a hemodialysis technician from 2007 to 2011, earning her 
hemodialysis technician certification in 2009.  (CE3, p. 53)  Thereafter, claimant worked 
as an assistant community manager and customer service representative at a financial 
institution.  Claimant returned to work as a hemodialysis technician in April 2014 at 
Fresenius Medical Care.  (CE3, p. 53)  From 2013 to 2016, claimant pursued nursing 
education at Des Moines Area Community College, but did not complete the program.  
She earned her advanced certified nursing aide certification in 2016. (Claimant's 
testimony; CE3, p. 51)  Her work history also includes seasonal tax preparation.  
(Claimant's testimony; CE3, p. 53) 
Claimant’s medical history is positive for back pain and fibromyalgia.  
In December 2007, claimant was seen at Broadlawns Medical Center 
(Broadlawns) emergency department with complaints of severe left-sided back pain 
after she caught her son during a fall the prior day.  She was diagnosed with back pain 
and muscle spasms, and treated with Toradol and physical therapy.  (JE1, pp. 1-2)  In 
January 2010, she was seen at Broadlawns for a flare of fibromyalgia after being 
diagnosed six months prior.  She sought to establish care with a primary care provider 
and obtained a pain medication refill.  (JE2, pp. 3-4)  In June 2011, claimant presented 
to Broadlawns with moderate low back pain after cleaning a shed two days prior.  She 
was treated with Toradol and Valium.  (JE3, pp. 5-6)   
From 2013 through 2015, the medical records in evidence indicate claimant 
received more frequent care of back and fibromyalgia complaints.  In April 2013, 
claimant was seen at Mercy South Family Practice (Mercy South) by Nancy Thurtell, 
ARNP, in follow up of a motor vehicle accident.  She was the seat-belted driver at a 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 3 
 
 
stoplight, struck from behind at a speed of 45 to 50 miles per hour.  Ms. Thurtell 
assessed mid-back pain and treated claimant with opioid pain medication and 
prednisone.  (JE4, pp. 7-8)  In July 2013, claimant saw Ms. Thurtell at Broadlawns.  She 
complained of sudden onset moderate bilateral lower back pain and was treated with 
medication.  (JE4, pp. 9-11)  In October 2013, claimant was seen at Mercy South with 
complaints of severe acute pain throughout her trunk region.  The provider assessed 
fibromyalgia and chronic pain.  She was treated with Toradol injection, nerve pain 
medication and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories.  (JE5, pp. 12-14)  Approximately one 
week later, claimant returned to Mercy South with an acute flare of low back pain after 
lifting heavy boxes.  She was treated with Toradol injection and 
hydrocodone/acetaminophen.  (JE5, pp. 15-16)  In December 2013, claimant sought 
emergent care for lumbar pain after a slip and fall on ice.  She was treated with muscle 
relaxers.  (JE6, pp. 17-19)   
In February 2014, claimant presented to Mercy South and requested medication 
for low back pain with radiation down legs.  The provider declined to add additional 
medication due to concern of medication interaction, as claimant was already taking 
amitriptyline, Cymbalta, and meloxicam for fibromyalgia, and deferred to an upcoming 
appointment with rheumatologist.  (JE7, pp. 20-21)  Shortly thereafter, claimant 
presented to Broadlawns complaining of low back pain with radiation down her legs.  
Lab studies and lumbar spine x-rays were undergone; she was treated with 
hydrocodone/acetaminophen, gabapentin, and a course of physical therapy.  (JE8, pp. 
22-27)  In May 2014, claimant presented to Mercy South in follow up of recent 
hospitalization for gastritis and hiatal hernia.  At that time, she also complained of back 
pain and fibromyalgia.  The provider noted that while hospitalized, claimant underwent 
diagnostic studies which showed evidence of osteoarthritis and some malformation at 
T10 level.  Claimant was referred for a pain management consult relative to back pain 
complaints.  (JE9, pp. 28-30) 
As a result of the referral, on July 16, 2014, claimant presented to Broadlawns 
Pain Center and was examined by Mohammad Iqbal, M.D.  Claimant complained of 
bilateral low back pain into the left hip and buttock.  Dr. Iqbal noted a history of left hip 
pain with left leg radicular pain for prior 12 months, with numbness and tingling in the S1 
nerve distribution.  He opined an MRI showed mild levoscoliosis and early degenerative 
changes at L5-S1 level.  Examination revealed a positive straight leg raise test on the 
left side.  Dr. Iqbal performed an epidural steroid injection (ESI) at the left S1 level.  
(JE10, pp. 31-35)  In November 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Iqbal and reported a 
recent return of pain.  Dr. Iqbal performed a repeat ESI at left S1.  (JE10, pp. 36-41)  In 
January 2015, claimant informed her physician at Broadlawns that her chronic back 
pain was severe enough to return to Dr. Iqbal for repeat injection.  (JE11, pp. 56, 59)  
As a result, claimant returned to Dr. Iqbal on March 3, 2015 and underwent a repeat ESI 
at left S1.  (JE10, pp. 42-47)  One week later, claimant was seen in the emergency 
department for a fibromyalgia flare; she was treated with oxycodone and Valium.  
(JE12, pp. 62-64)  In May 2015, claimant was again seen in the emergency department 
for fibromyalgia and back pain; she was treated with oxycodone and Lyrica.  (JE14, pp. 
69-73) 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 4 
 
 
At evidentiary hearing, claimant admitted to experiencing preexisting back 
symptoms.  Claimant testified her back could hurt after certain movements of her back; 
she also reported muscle spasms.  Despite ongoing pain complaints, claimant testified 
she last received medical attention for these complaints in May 2015.  Claimant testified 
she was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in approximately 2007 or 2008.  During 
fibromyalgia flares, claimant reported experiencing most symptoms in her hips, knees, 
shoulders, and hands.  Claimant denied receiving ongoing medical treatment for 
fibromyalgia and testified her last such care took place a “few years” prior to hearing.  
(Claimant's testimony) 
In addition to her back pain and fibromyalgia complaints, claimant received 
treatment for a work-related right ankle injury on April 6, 2015.  On September 2, 2016, 
claimant underwent an independent medical examination (IME) with board certified 
occupational medicine physician, Sunil Bansal, M.D.  Dr. Bansal evaluated complaints 
relative to the April 6, 2015 work-related injury to her right ankle, as well as worsening 
back pain.  (JE15, pp. 79-80)  Dr. Bansal ultimately opined claimant suffered work-
related posterior tibial tendinitis and peroneal tendinitis with traction injury to the 
superficial peroneal nerve.  He found insufficient basis to relate claimant’s worsened 
back complaints to the work injury.  (JE15, pp. 83-84)  Dr. Bansal opined claimant 
suffered permanent impairment of 20 percent lower extremity; he opined claimant did 
not demonstrate ratable impairment to her back.  (JE15, pp. 84-85)  Dr. Bansal 
recommended permanent restrictions of: no lifting greater than 10 pounds occasionally 
or 5 pounds frequently with the left arm; avoidance of multiple stairs, steps, or ladders; 
and avoid work on uneven ground or ladders.  (JE15, p. 86) 
Claimant initiated a workers’ compensation claim regarding her April 6, 2015 
work injury1.  By an arbitration decision dated December 8, 2016, a deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner found claimant to be a credible witness and further found 
her to be honest and sincere.  (DEF, pp. 43, 48)  The deputy ultimately opined claimant 
suffered a 10 percent loss of her right leg as a result of the ankle injury.  He also found 
claimant suffered a 20 percent loss of earning capacity and was entitled to benefits from 
the Second Injury Fund of Iowa, as a combined result of the right leg injury and a prior 
left arm injury.  (DEF, pp. 45, 48) 
Claimant pursued a career selling life insurance.  In order to work as a life 
insurance agent, claimant was required to pass a test and earn her insurance license 
from the State of Iowa.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On November 27, 2017, claimant signed defendant-employer’s agent contract, 
with accompanying special notice acknowledgement.  The agent contract specifically 
states an agent is not an employee, but rather, is an independent contractor.  The 
contract indicates an agent may choose the time and manner in which services were 
performed, did not have fixed work hours, and would not be eligible for unemployment 
                                                 
1  The agency assigned File No. 5053578 to claimant’s claim for benefits related to the April 6, 
2015 work injury. 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 5 
 
 
or workers’ compensation benefits.  (DEA, p. 3)  The contract further states an agent is 
responsible for all expenses, specifically including transportation, any place of business, 
advertisements, form letters, letterheads, circulars, or retained assistants.  However, the 
contract states experienced agents would be available to assist and at times, there may 
be optional training and/or sales meetings.  (DEA, p. 1)  An agent’s pay was identified 
as commission-based, with the potential for advanced commissions which must be 
repaid.  (DEA, pp. 1-2)  Claimant and Eric Cochran, identified as state general agent, 
signed the contract on November 27, 2017.  (DEA, p. 4)      
The accompanying special notice acknowledgement was also signed by claimant 
on November 27, 2017.  (DEA, p. 6)  The acknowledgement specifically states an agent 
would not be considered an employee, but would be considered an independent 
contractor.  It states the agent would control the manner and means of work, set the 
work schedule, and choose the manner in which work was performed.  Further, the 
agent would be responsible for providing equipment, materials, and supplies.  The 
acknowledgement indicates that from time to time, training and/or sales meetings may 
be made available to agents by defendant-employer.  In terms of compensation, the 
acknowledgment states an agent would be paid on a commission-only basis and would 
not be eligible for unemployment or workers’ compensation benefits.  (DEA, p. 5)  
Eric Cochran testified at evidentiary hearing.  Mr. Cochran has since retired, but 
previously served as the Iowa state director/state general agent for defendant-employer.  
In that role, Mr. Cochran operated five offices throughout Iowa.  His duties involved 
hiring, training, and growing the base of agents in the state.  He was considered an 
independent contractor in his role.  Mr. Cochran testified a prospective agent is 
interviewed and offered a standing contract which goes into effect after the individual 
passes the state insurance licensure test.  (Mr. Cochran’s testimony)  
In early January 2018, claimant obtained her Iowa life insurance license.  (CE3, 
p. 51)  At that time, claimant began a training program for defendant-employer.  
Claimant testified Sarah Acker acted as her “supervisor.”  Claimant testified she and 
Ms. Acker would meet at the office and go see clients in their homes.  (Claimant's 
testimony)  Claimant testified Ms. Acker advised claimant she would earn $600.00 per 
week during a 90-day training period.  Claimant understood that after this 90-day period, 
she would be an independent contractor and her earnings would be based on 
commission.  (Claimant's testimony; CE5, pp. 69-70)   
Mr. Cochran testified after an agent passes their insurance test, they are 
assigned a mentor and provided a suggested schedule.  If the suggested schedule is 
followed, the agent can be trained within approximately two weeks.  The suggested 
schedule can be modified based on the availability of the new agent.  Mr. Cochran 
testified most agents utilized the free office space he provided through the Cochran 
Agency, the entity he utilized in his contract relationship with defendant-employer.  
Similarly, he provided materials and supplies for agents to use, free of charge to the 
agent.  The only supply he did not provide was a laptop computer; he testified a laptop 
is not required to perform agent duties.  (Mr. Cochran’s testimony)      

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 6 
 
 
Mr. Cochran testified the role of the mentor is to teach new agents to be 
proficient in various insurance products and to ensure the new agents use proper 
language so as to not misrepresent or mislead customers regarding products.  
Defendant-employer provided a previously-prepared presentation for agents to use via 
their laptops.  In the event a customer is misled, Mr. Cochran indicated a customer may 
file a claim with the Iowa Insurance Commissioner and Mr. Cochran would be liable for 
the misstep of any agent contracted to him.  If such an event were to transpire, Mr. 
Cochran possessed the ability to terminate the agent contract or institute some form of 
contract probation.  (Mr. Cochran’s testimony)   
Mr. Cochran indicated the training program included a period of observation of 
the mentor by the agent, of the agent by the mentor, and concluded after a “release 
meeting” with Mr. Cochran.  The release meeting consisted of a conversation between 
himself, the mentor, and the agent, to ensure the agent is ready to act on their own.  It is 
following this meeting that the agent is “released from their mentor” and may choose 
their work hours and begin setting appointments.  While Mr. Cochran cannot prohibit an 
agent from selling insurance without passing the “release meeting,” he can withhold the 
customer leads he possesses.  Mr. Cochran testified the Cochran Agency never paid 
wages or commissions to agents; any compensation came from defendant-employer.  
Mr. Cochran testified claimant never passed her “release meeting” during her 
engagement with defendant-employer.  Mr. Cochran admitted he was not privy to the 
details of conversations between claimant and Ms. Acker involving any assigned work 
schedule, duties, or compensation.  Mr. Cochran believed Ms. Acker served as an 
independent contractor and was not an employee of defendant-employer.  (Mr. 
Cochran’s testimony) 
On January 11, 2018, claimant and another agent-in-training were riding in Ms. 
Acker’s car on the way to a client’s home when they were involved in a motor vehicle 
accident.  Claimant testified Ms. Acker told claimant to meet her at the office, so that 
claimant could observe client meetings that afternoon.  Claimant testified she had 
observed Ms. Acker give presentations to clients on more than one occasion prior to 
January 11, 2018.  Claimant testified she did not believe she had a choice regarding 
attending Ms. Acker’s appointments and if she wanted her job, she needed to mimic Ms. 
Acker’s hours and work schedule.  Claimant testified she did not believe she had the 
option to decline to attend these appointments or perform work in some manner other 
than that directed by Ms. Acker.  At the time of the motor vehicle accident, claimant 
testified Ms. Acker was driving her own vehicle and claimant was seated in the backseat 
when the vehicle was struck from behind.  They were en route to a customer’s home to 
complete updates relative to her insurance coverage.  After the impact, claimant 
experienced pain in her neck, face, shoulders, back, hips, and pelvis.  Additionally, 
claimant testified she experienced nausea, memory loss, and headaches.  (Claimant's 
testimony) 
Police responded to the scene of the accident.  An officer’s report denotes Ms. 
Acker was the driver of the vehicle and following the accident, she complained of head 
and neck pain.  The officer identified Kyla Smith as the front seat passenger and 
claimant as a back seat passenger, with both individuals complaining of head and neck 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 7 
 
 
pain after the impact.  (CE4, pp. 59, 61)  The Des Moines Fire Department also 
responded to the accident scene.  An incident report noted claimant was found belted in 
the backseat of the car and the car that struck the vehicle reported driving 5 miles per 
hour at the time of impact.  The report noted claimant complained of pain and was 
transported to the hospital via ambulance.  (JE16, pp. 99-100) 
EMS transported claimant to the emergency department at Mercy Medical 
Center, where claimant was evaluated by Stephanie Turcotte, D.O.  Dr. Turcotte’s 
records denote a history of minor motor vehicle accident, where claimant was a belted 
backseat passenger in a vehicle rear-ended at low speed.  Claimant complained of 
neck, back, and jaw pain, as well as bilateral ringing in her ears.  (JE17, p. 101)  
Claimant underwent normal CT scans of the brain and cervical spine.  Dr. Turcotte 
found no neurologic deficits on exam and opined the CT scans were unremarkable, 
without evidence of injury or fracture.  (JE17, p. 105)  Dr. Turcotte assessed cervical 
and thoracic strains and discharged claimant with prescriptions for tramadol and 
cyclobenzaprine.  Claimant was excused from work and advised to follow up at 
Broadlawns.  (JE17, p. 106) 
Claimant presented to Broadlawns on January 16, 2018 in follow up of the motor 
vehicle accident.  Claimant reported she was unrestrained in the back seat of a vehicle 
which was rear-ended at “neighborhood speed.”  Claimant reported continued pain in 
her neck, as well as increasing lower back and bilateral hip pain.  (JE18, p. 109)  
Following examination and x-rays, Marc Baumert, PA-C, assessed acute bilateral low 
back pain without sciatica and bilateral hip pain.  Claimant received a Toradol injection 
and was advised to continue use of the previously prescribed muscle relaxer and 
tramadol.  Claimant was issued a work excuse and a prescription for physical therapy.  
(JE18, pp. 113-114) 
On January 19, 2018, claimant returned to Broadlawns for evaluation by primary 
care provider, Rebecca Bollin, D.O.  Claimant reported experiencing low back pain 
since the motor vehicle accident, with movement triggering pain.  The pain was 
described as localized in the low back, radiating to the right leg.  (JE19, p. 119)  Dr. 
Bollin assessed back pain.  (JE19, p. 123)  Claimant received a repeat Toradol 
injection; Dr. Bollin issued a prescription for gabapentin.  (JE19, p. 122)   
On January 22, 2018, claimant underwent a physical therapy evaluation at 
Broadlawns with William Fellows, PT.  Mr. Fellows noted a primary complaint of sharp, 
shooting low back pain, with secondary pain into the bilateral hips and lower cervical 
spine.  Claimant reported a history of lower back pain, as well as prior injections with Dr. 
Iqbal which resulted in relief.  Mr. Fellows assessed left low back pain, poor core 
strength, and mechanical low back pain.  He recommended therapy sessions 1 to 2 
times per week, for 4 weeks.  (JE18, pp. 115-117)    
Claimant filed an Original Notice and Petition in arbitration on February 1, 2018, 
alleging she sustained an injury while performing employment duties on January 11, 
2018.  Defendants filed an answer on February 26, 2018, thereby asserting defendant-

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 8 
 
 
employer was not claimant’s employer and further, that claimant was acting as an 
independent contractor at the time of the alleged injury.  (Agency File) 
On February 2, 2018, claimant returned to Broadlawns and was evaluated by 
Tara Brockman, D.O.  Claimant reported increased low back pain following a motor 
vehicle accident.  Claimant reported she was attending physical therapy and was 
scheduled for pain clinic evaluation.  She requested an ibuprofen refill.  (JE20, p. 125) 
Dr. Brockman assessed back pain, as well as an upper respiratory infection.  To treat 
the back pain, Dr. Brockman refilled a prescription for ibuprofen and encouraged 
claimant to continue physical therapy and attend the pain clinic evaluation.  (JE20, p. 
128) 
Claimant presented to Dr. Iqbal on February 15, 2018.  Dr. Iqbal noted he last 
saw claimant for an ESI on March 3, 2015 and claimant was “well” until a motor vehicle 
accident on January 11, 2018.  Claimant reported she initially had aches and pains all 
over her body, but current symptoms included continued low back pain with radiation to 
the left hip and front of pelvis.  (JE10, p. 49)  Dr. Iqbal performed a lumbar ESI.  (JE10, 
pp. 49, 53) 
Claimant never returned to work duties at defendant-employer following the 
January 11, 2018 accident.  She did not receive payment for the $600.00 per week 
represented by Ms. Acker.  Claimant testified she may have received small advance 
commission checks from defendant-employer.  Defendant-employer did not issue 
claimant a 1099 for the 2018 taxable year.  (Claimant's testimony)  Commission ledger 
statements from defendant-employer were introduced into evidence, bearing dates of 
January 24, February 24, and March 24, 2018.  The miscellaneous summaries reveal 
claimant received three small sums of compensation, each totaling less than $250.00.  
The initial January 24, 2018 statement denotes claimant received $218.13 in prepaid 
commissions.  (DEB, pp. 7-16)  Mr. Cochran testified he possessed these “paychecks” 
and provided them to claimant following the motor vehicle accident.  (Mr. Cochran’s 
testimony) 
In late February 2018, claimant began work as a life insurance agent at 
Primerica.  She was paid on commission and received a 1099 at the end of the calendar 
year.  (Claimant's testimony; CE3, p. 54)  In March 2018, claimant obtained a position at 
Aetna Insurance as a care management associate.  She initially performed these duties 
in addition to life insurance sales at Primerica, but ultimately chose to focus upon her 
employment at Aetna Insurance and the stable income it provided.  (Claimant's 
testimony)  In her position as a care management associate, claimant works from home, 
processing medical documentation.  Claimant remained in this position at the time of 
evidentiary hearing.  At the time of hire, claimant worked full time and earned $17.50 
per hour.  At the time of evidentiary hearing, claimant worked 40 to 48 hours per week 
and earned $17.85 per hour.  The work is sedentary in nature and she is able to 
alternate between sitting and standing, as needed.  Claimant testified she loves her 
work at Aetna Insurance.  (Claimant's testimony; CE3, p. 54) 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 9 
 
 
On March 12, 2018, claimant presented to Dr. Brockman and reported the recent 
ESI provided relief for approximately two weeks, but back pain then returned.  Claimant 
stated Dr. Iqbal desired a low back MRI prior to proceeding with additional injections.  
Claimant also reported increasing knee pain over the prior couple of weeks, currently 
worse on the left side.  Dr. Brockman ordered knee x-rays, performed a Toradol 
injection of the left glut, and recommended continued follow up with pain management.  
(JE20, pp. 130-133)  
Per Dr. Iqbal’s recommendation, claimant underwent a lumbar spine MRI on 
March 22, 2018.  A prior June 27, 2011 lumbar spine MRI was used for comparison.  
The reading physician opined the results revealed development of a small L5-S1 left 
foraminal disc protrusion which contacted the exiting left L5 nerve root and produced 
mild left neural foraminal stenosis.  (JE21, pp. 135-136)  
On April 6, 2018, Dr. Iqbal performed an ESI at left L5-S1 to treat claimant’s back 
pain and an intraarticular injection of the left knee joint due to left knee pain.  (JE10, p. 
55) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Iqbal on April 24, 2018.  Dr. Iqbal noted claimant’s leg 
pain improved, but back pain remained.  Dr. Iqbal opined that after diagnostic lumbar 
facet joint injections bilaterally at L4-5 and L5-S1, claimant was positive to proceed with 
lumbar facet denervation.  (JE10, p. 55) 
Claimant continued to receive periodic care of her right ankle/lower extremity 
related to the April 6, 2015 work injury.  Bryan Trout, DPM opined claimant achieved 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) with respect to the right ankle injury, with 
subsequent surgical intervention, effective March 22, 2018.  On May 24, 2018, Dr. Trout 
opined claimant sustained permanent impairment of 5 percent lower extremity and 
imposed permanent restrictions limiting claimant to sedentary duty only.  (JE22, p. 137)   
On May 25, 2018, defendants filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing 
claimant was not an employee of defendant-employer and was, instead, an independent 
contractor.  Claimant resisted.  A distinct deputy commissioner issued a ruling denying 
defendants’ motion on June 11, 2018, finding defendants were not entitled to judgment 
as a matter of law.  (Agency File) 
On January 30, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Bansal for an IME related to the 
alleged January 11, 2018 work injury.  (JE15, p. 87)  Dr. Bansal performed a medical 
records review.  His summary did not identify his prior IME of claimant, but did detail 
claimant’s medical care, including care related to claimant’s right ankle condition.  
(JE15, pp. 88-93)  Dr. Bansal also took a history from claimant regarding the motor 
vehicle accident and resulting pain.  She reported preexisting back problems, but 
denied ongoing low back pain immediately preceding the motor vehicle accident.  
Claimant reported continued low back pain with radiation into her hips and legs.  (JE15, 
p. 93)  Dr. Bansal performed a physical examination.  (JE15, pp. 94-95) 
Following records review, interview, and examination, Dr. Bansal issued a report 
containing his findings and opinions dated February 9, 2019.  Thereby, he diagnosed 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 10 
 
 
cervical strain and aggravation of lumbar spondylosis related to the January 11, 2018 
motor vehicle accident.  (JE15, p. 95)  Dr. Bansal opined the mechanism of impact from 
the motor vehicle accident was consistent with aggravation of preexisting lumbar 
spondylosis.  (JE15, p. 96)  He opined claimant shared elements of a DRE Lumbar 
Category II impairment.  Based upon the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, Table 15-3, Dr. Bansal opined claimant suffered a 7 percent 
whole person impairment for radicular complaints, loss of range of motion, guarding, 
and continued pain.  He recommended permanent restrictions of no lifting greater than 
15 pounds, no frequent bending or twisting, and no prolonged sitting or standing greater 
than 30 minutes at a time.  In terms of further care, Dr. Bansal opined claimant may 
benefit from intermittent epidural injections, facet injections, radiofrequency ablation, 
pain medication, or other modality recommended by a pain specialist.  (JE15, p. 97)   
At the time of evidentiary hearing, claimant testified she continued to experience 
back pain and that back pain formed the basis of her claim for benefits.  Claimant 
testified she is pain-free on some days, but on other days, is unable to roll over in bed 
due to pain.  She described ongoing nerve pain and muscle spasms.  Claimant also 
experienced difficulty lifting heavy objects, lifting items from the floor, sweeping, and 
shoveling.  She testified any prior complaints of neck, facial, shoulder, hips, or pelvic 
pain resolved, as did any headaches and memory problems.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant incurred medical bills in treatment of injuries related to the alleged 
January 11, 2018 injury.  A summary of the expenses is included in Claimant’s Exhibit 
2, with the supportive bills found in Claimant’s Exhibit 1.  (See CE1, pp. 1-49; CE2, p. 
50)  Defendants did not provide or pay for any of the incurred medical expenses.  She 
recently began seeing a chiropractor due to back pain complaints, but her symptoms 
are not severe enough to warrant a return to Dr. Iqbal.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant’s testimony was clear and consistent as compared to the evidentiary 
record and her deposition testimony.  Claimant was personable and sincere.  Her eye 
contact and demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing were excellent and gave the 
undersigned no reason to doubt claimant’s veracity.  Claimant is found credible. 
Mr. Cochran’s demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing gave the undersigned 
no reason to doubt his veracity.  Mr. Cochran’s testimony appeared genuine, without an 
intention to mislead.  That being said, his testimony was somewhat circuitous and on 
occasion, he did not provide direct answers on cross-examination.  Mr. Cochran is 
found credible. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether an employer-employee relationship 
existed at the time of the alleged injury. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 11 
 
 
The workers' compensation act provides coverage for “all personal injuries 
sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the employment.”  Iowa 
Code section 85.3(1).  Section 85.61(11) provides, in part: 
"Worker" or "employee" means a person who has entered into the 
employment of, or works under contract of service, express or implied, or 
apprenticeship, for an employer . . . . 
It is claimant's duty to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that claimant 
or claimant's decedent was an employee within the meaning of the law.  Where claimant 
establishes a prima facie case, defendants then have the burden of going forward with 
the evidence which rebuts claimant's case.  The defendants must establish, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, any pleaded affirmative defense or bar to 
compensation.  Nelson v. Cities Serv. Oil Co., 259 Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261 (1966). 
Section 85.61(11)(c)(2) states an independent contractor is not deemed a worker 
or employee.  In construing these legislative definitions, our courts have indulged a 
“measure of liberality” and “doubt as to whether a claimant was an employee or 
independent contractor is resolved in favor of the former status.”  Stark Constr. v. 
Lauterwasser, 847 N.W.2d 612 (Iowa Ct. App. 2014); See Daggett v. Nebraska-Eastern 
Exp., Inc., 107 N.W.2d 102, 105 (Iowa 1961); see also Usgaard v. Silver Crest Golf 
Club, 127 N.W.2d 636, 639 (Iowa 1964) (noting act is “liberally construed to extend its 
beneficent purpose to every employee who can fairly be brought within it”). 
“When the issue is whether an individual is an employee or an independent 
contractor, many factors are relevant.”  Iowa Mut. Ins. Co. v. McCarthy, 572 N.W.2d 
537, 542 (Iowa 1997); See Nelson.  The Iowa Supreme Court has considered numerous 
factors through a series of “rather elusive tests or indicia by which an employer-
employee relationship and status as an independent contractor may be determined.”  
Nelson at 264. 
In Nelson, the Iowa Supreme Court stated: 
The often cited cases of Mallinger v. Webster City Oil Co., 211 Iowa 847, 
851, 234 N.W. 254, 256, contains this statement: “An independent 
contractor under the quite universal rule may be defined as one who 
carries on an independent business and contracts to do a piece of work 
according to his own methods, subject to the employer's control only as to 
results. The commonly recognized tests of such a relationship are, 
although not necessarily concurrent or each in itself controlling: (1) The 
existence of a contract for the performance by a person of a certain piece 
or kind of work at a fixed price; (2) independent nature of his business or 
of his distinct calling; (3) his employment of assistants with the right to 
supervise their activities; (4) his obligation to furnish necessary tools, 
supplies, and materials; (5) his right to control the progress of the work, 
except as to final results; (6) the time for which the workman is employed; 
(7) the method of payment, whether by time or by job; (8) whether the 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 12 
 
 
work is part of the regular business of the employer.” See also Usgaard v. 
Silver Crest Golf Club, 256 Iowa 453, 456, 127 N.W.2d 636. 
And as revealed in Hassebroch v. Weaver Construction Co., 246 Iowa 
622, 628, 67 N.W.2d 553: “The principal accepted test of an independent 
contractor is that he is free to determine for himself the manner in which 
the specified results shall be accomplished.” 
Then in Hjerleid v. State, 229 Iowa 818, 826-827, 295 N.W. 139, 143, this 
court pointed out the accepted criteria by which to determine whether an 
employer-employee relationship exists, are as follows: “* * * (1) (t)he right 
to selection, or to employ at will; (2) responsibility for the payment of 
wages by the employer; (3) the right to discharge or terminate the 
relationship; (4) the right to control the work; and (5) is the party sought to 
be held as the employer the responsible authority in charge of the work or 
for whose benefit the work is performed.” See also section 85.61(2), Code, 
1962, and Usgaard v. Silver Crest Golf Club, 256 Iowa 453, 455-456, 127 
N.W.2d 636. 
Also, in Schlotter v. Leudt, 255 Iowa 640, 643, 123 N.W.2d 434, 436, we 
said: “The most important consideration in determining whether a person 
giving service is an employer or an independent contractor is the right to 
control the physical conduct of the person giving service. If the right to 
control, the right to determine, the mode and manner of accomplishing a 
particular result is vested in the person giving service he is an 
independent contractor, if it is vested in the employer, such person is an 
employee.” 
Finally in this connection we called attention in the Usgaard and 
Hassebroch cases, both supra, to another possible element which, when 
applicable, might be used with others as an aid in determining whether 
one person is or is not the employee of another, to-wit: the intention of the 
parties as to the relationship created or existing. Standing alone this may 
be somewhat misleading. 
But as explained in Restatement, Agency 2d, comment m., under section 
220: “It is not determinative that the parties believe or disbelieve that the 
relation of master and servant exists, except insofar as such belief 
indicates an assumption of control by the one and submission to control 
by the other. However, community custom in thinking that a kind of 
service, such as household service, is rendered by servants, is of 
importance.” 
Nelson at 264-265. 
At the time of the January 11, 2018 motor vehicle accident, claimant was 
participating in a training program implemented to benefit defendant-employer’s 
business.  During the training program, she was shadowing an existing agent in her 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 13 
 
 
duties, as prescribed by the mentorship arrangement.  No dispute has been presented 
which would lead to the conclusion claimant was not rendering services to defendant-
employer. 
Accordingly, the burden shifts to defendants to establish claimant was an 
independent contractor, as opposed to an employee of defendant-employer.  In support 
of this position, defendants rely heavily upon the signed agent contract and special 
acknowledgement notice designating claimant as an independent contractor.  
Defendants further argue any oversight utilized by defendant-employer was minimal and 
only designed to ensure agents complied with applicable insurance laws and 
regulations.  Claimant argues the language of the contract is not controlling and the 
facts of claimant’s employment scenario contradicts the contract terms.   
The contracts signed by claimant specifically state an agent is an independent 
contractor, not an employee.  They further state agents are paid on a commission basis.  
Claimant acknowledged that, as an agent, she understood she would be an 
independent contractor and paid on a commission-basis.  These factors strongly 
support a conclusion that an employer-employee relationship is not applicable to agents 
of defendant-employer.  However, the specific facts of this case draw that conclusion 
into question.   
The contracts make no mention of a training period wherein claimant’s daily 
activities were overseen by a mentor or supervisor.  Despite contentions to the contrary, 
this training period involved oversight more extensive than simply insuring agent 
compliance with applicable insurance laws and regulations.  Mr. Cochran testified that 
during the training period, trainees learned about products, observed mentor 
presentations, and were observed by mentors.  During the training period, claimant was 
required to, at minimum, coordinate her work hours to match those of her mentor, Ms. 
Acker.  While claimant may have possessed the ability to state she could not attend 
certain meetings or presentations, Ms. Acker controlled whether claimant progressed 
through her training program and progress could not be made without claimant 
attending appointments scheduled by Ms. Acker.  Under the facts of this case, it can 
more accurately be stated that Ms. Acker set claimant’s hours and duties.  Claimant 
credibly testified Ms. Acker advised her the training period would last 90 days; Ms. 
Acker did not testify to refute this testimony.  While Mr. Cochran testified the trainees 
possess flexibility in setting their schedules and training schedules were generally 
shorter, he admitted he was not privy to the training details set by Ms. Acker.   
This training period did not end until trainees passed a release meeting with their 
mentor and Mr. Cochran, after which trainees were released from their mentors and 
could perform tasks as agents without immediate oversight.  Mr. Cochran testified 
trainees could technically sell insurance without participating in this training period and 
release meeting; however, it is clear that the training period and release meeting were 
expectations for all trainees hoping to act as an agent within the framework set forth by 
the Cochran Agency.  It was logical for claimant to rely upon these clear expectations as 
requirements of her employment arrangement.  These limitations upon claimant’s ability 
to act as an insurance agent are not consistent with the idea that claimant, as an 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 14 
 
 
independent contractor, ran her business independently, by her own means and 
methods. 
A certain level of oversight over insurance agents is acceptable and prudent, as 
the individuals who purchase such products are relying upon agents to provide 
insurance designed to meet their specific needs.  The consequences to a customer if an 
agent were to misrepresent these products could be staggering.  Mr. Cochran testified 
the Iowa Insurance Commission would direct any complaints for the actions of his 
contracted agents to him specifically and he would be liable for missteps.  In those 
instances, he possessed the power to terminate or suspend agent contracts.  Given 
these ramifications, it is clear why Mr. Cochran valued training of prospective agents; 
however, the level of control exerted over workers during this training period is 
inconsistent with an independent contractor relationship.  
The contract terms were further inconsistent with the manner in which business 
at the Cochran Agency was managed.  The contracts outline that agents held 
responsibility for furnishing supplies and materials.  Mr. Cochran testified the Cochran 
Agency provided such supplies for trainees and agents.  The only exception was 
procurement of a laptop, which Mr. Cochran indicated made presentations easier, but 
was not required.  The contracts further indicate agents are responsible for providing 
their own workspace; Mr. Cochran testified the vast majority of contracted agents used 
the office space provided by the Cochran Agency, at no cost to the agent. 
Also relevant to consideration is the compensation arrangement.  The contracts 
state agents were paid on a commission-only basis; however, claimant was not yet truly 
acting as an independent agent.  The contracts also state claimant could receive 
advance commissions, but such sums must be repaid.  In this case, it appears 
defendant-employer issued claimant payments categorized as prepaid commissions; 
however, claimant was never asked to repay these sums.  Defendant-employer did not 
issue claimant a 1099 for the 2018 tax year.  Claimant testified Ms. Acker advised her 
she would receive $600.00 per week during a 90-day training period.  Mr. Cochran 
testified defendant-employer generally did not pay wages during a training period; 
however, he admitted he was not privy to specific discussions between claimant and 
Ms. Acker.  Claimant is a credible witness; Ms. Acker did not testify at hearing to 
contradict claimant’s testimony.  Further, it is rational for claimant to expect some form 
of compensation during a training period that could last 90 days, during which her work 
schedule and duties were directly overseen by Ms. Acker.        
Based on the facts of this case, claimant was not yet acting as an independent 
agent for defendant-employer at the time of the January 11, 2018 motor vehicle 
accident.  Claimant was working under the direction of Ms. Acker and the oversight of 
Mr. Cochran during an effectively mandatory training period.  She had not clearly been 
entrusted with the independent ability to sell insurance for defendant-employer.  Her 
work schedule and duties were set by Ms. Acker and Mr. Cochran required a release 
meeting before claimant was free to act as an agent.  The level of control over the day-
to-day performance of duties was inconsistent with premise of claimant carrying on her 
own enterprise.  Claimant’s unrebutted testimony indicates she was to be paid a set 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 15 
 
 
amount of $600.00 per week during a training period; a compensation schedule different 
than that outlined in the agent contract.  What compensation claimant did receive was 
paid by defendant-employer as advanced commissions, but claimant was never asked 
to repay such commissions, as outlined in the signed contracts.  Importantly, defendant-
employer did not mount a defense alleging claimant was an employee of the Cochran 
Agency, as opposed to defendant-employer. 
After consideration of the above and all other relevant factors, it is determined 
defendants have failed to prove claimant was acting as an independent contractor at the 
time of the January 11, 2018 motor vehicle accident.  Claimant has proven she was 
rendering services in benefit of defendant-employer.  Claimant is therefore considered 
an employee of defendant-employer as of January 11, 2018.  This result is fact-specific 
and by no means stands for the precedent that all insurance agents or any prospective 
agent participating in a training program is an employee.  However, the specific facts of 
this case and liberal construction in favor of finding an employee-employer relationship 
yield a determination that claimant was an employee of defendant-employer on 
January 11, 2018. 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury on 
January 11, 2018 which arose out of and in the course of employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
On January 11, 2018, claimant was involved in a motor vehicle accident while 
riding in a vehicle driven by her mentor.  The mentor was transporting herself, as well as 
claimant and another trainee, to the home of a customer.  The group travelled to the 
location in order to complete updates to existing insurance coverage with defendant-
employer.  No argument was presented that the motor vehicle accident occurred 
outside the scope of the employment relationship.  It is determined the injury of 
January 11, 2018 arose out of and in the course of claimant’s employment. 
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
permanent disability. 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 16 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
At the time of evidentiary hearing, claimant testified her only residual, ongoing 
complaints were related to her low back.  She credibly testified to complaints of back 
pain and spasms that waxed and waned, which impacted her ability to perform certain 
tasks.  Dr. Bansal opined claimant sustained a 7 percent whole person impairment due 
to radicular complaints, loss of range of motion, guarding, and continued pain.  He 
recommended permanent restrictions of: no lifting greater than 15 pounds; no frequent 
bending or twisting; and no prolonged sitting or standing for greater than 30 minutes.  
Interestingly, Dr. Bansal performed a preinjury evaluation of claimant in an unrelated 
workers’ compensation claim.  In conjunction with that evaluation, Dr. Bansal opined 
claimant had sustained no ratable permanent impairment relative to back complaints.  
Claimant relies upon her own credible testimony and the opinion of Dr. Bansal in 
support of her claim of permanent disability.  
Defendants did not offer a medical opinion to rebut the opinions of Dr. Bansal.  
Rather, defendants argue claimant’s back complaints are a result of a preexisting 
condition and challenge Dr. Bansal’s opinions on the argument he did not consider 
claimant’s history of preexisting conditions.   
Claimant does not dispute she has suffered with back complaints for a number of 
years.  However, the medical records in evidence reveal claimant last received medical 
care of any preexisting complaints in May 2015.  No records establish any ongoing care 
or complaints severe enough to warrant medical care from May 2015 until January 
2018, after the work-related motor vehicle accident.   

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 17 
 
 
Following the motor vehicle accident, claimant has continued to experience back 
complaints.  These complaints and limitations formed the basis of Dr. Bansal’s 
impairment rating.  While Dr. Bansal did not restate each element of claimant’s medical 
history, his failure to restate each element does not render his opinions inaccurate.  Dr. 
Bansal did not miss any material elements of claimant’s medical history.  He was aware 
of claimant’s preexisting back complaints and evaluated these preexisting complaints on 
another occasion; the fact he did not recount this event in his report does not warrant 
disregarding his opinion.  Defendants have not presented a battle-of-the-experts 
scenario where Dr. Bansal’s opinion could be weighed against the opinion of another 
medical provider to determine whose opinion is based upon a more accurate history.  
Rather, Dr. Bansal’s opinion is unrebutted. 
Based upon the entirety of the evidentiary record, I find claimant has proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the work injury of January 11, 2018 is a cause of 
permanent disability.   
The next issue for determination is the extent of any industrial disability.  
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(u).   
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Claimant credibly testified of continued, waxing and waning, back complaints.  
She testified these symptoms impact performance of activities.  Dr. Bansal’s unrebutted 
medical opinion found claimant sustained a 7 percent whole person impairment.  He 
also imposed permanent restrictions of no lifting over 15 pounds, no frequent bending or 
twisting, and no prolonged sitting or standing over 30 minutes.  Work restrictions have 
previously been imposed relative to claimant’s right ankle condition.  Dr. Bansal 

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 18 
 
 
recommended the following restrictions following a 2016 evaluation: no lifting greater 
than 10 pounds occasionally or 5 pounds frequently with the left arm; avoidance of 
multiple stairs, steps, or ladders; and avoid work on uneven ground or ladders.  Dr. 
Trout also imposed a sedentary work restriction relative to the ankle injury; his opinion 
was issued following claimant’s January 2018 work injury.  Claimant continued to 
perform sedentary work, consistent with these opinions.  Following the January 11, 
2018 work injury, claimant’s work restrictions have expanded to include consideration of 
her back condition, but claimant remains capable of sedentary employment.  Although 
she did not return to work at defendant-employer, claimant did return to life insurance 
sales with another company shortly following the work injury.  Claimant subsequently 
obtained a position at Aetna Insurance; this position brought her consistent, full time 
wages of $17.85 per hour.  Claimant’s earnings have not decreased as a result of the 
work injury.   
Following consideration of the above and all other relevant factors of industrial 
disability, it is determined claimant has suffered a 20 percent industrial disability as a 
result of the work injury of January 11, 2018.  This award entitles claimant to 100 weeks 
of permanent partial disability benefits (20 percent x 500 weeks = 100 weeks), 
commencing on the stipulated date of January 12, 2018. 
The next issue for determination is the proper rate of compensation.  
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
Under section 85.36(7), the gross weekly earnings of an employee who has 
worked for the employer for less than the full 13 calendar weeks immediately preceding 
the injury are determined by looking at the earnings of other similarly situated 
employees employed over that full period, but if earnings of similar employees cannot 
be determined, by averaging the employee's weekly earnings computed for the number 
of weeks that the employee has been in the employ of the employer. 
At the time of the work injury of January 11, 2018, claimant had been in the 
employ of defendant-employer for less than 13 weeks.  The evidentiary record is devoid 
of earnings of similarly situated employees.  The best evidence of claimant’s earnings is 
found in claimant’s unrebutted testimony.  Claimant testified Ms. Acker guaranteed she 
would earn $600.00 per week during her 90-day training period.  Given this testimony is 
the best evidence of claimant’s intended wages at the time of the injury, I adopt $600.00 
as claimant’s gross average weekly wage.  The parties stipulated claimant was married 
and entitled to 2 exemptions at the time of the work injury.  The proper rate of 
compensation is therefore, $403.05.  

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 19 
 
 
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
claimed medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975). 
Claimant suffered a work-related injury on January 11, 2018.  Defendants did not 
authorize, provide, or pay for any medical care; defendants denied liability for claimant’s 
claim.  Claimant obtained medical treatment of her injuries and incurred expenses, 
found in Claimant’s Exhibits 1 and 2.  The treatment was reasonable and necessary in 
treatment of the compensable, work-related injury and the responsibility for this care 
should be borne by defendants.  Defendants are hereby found responsible and shall 
hold claimant harmless for the medical expenses detailed in Claimant’s Exhibits 1 and 
2.  
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of an independent medical examination. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Claimant underwent an independent medical examination with Dr. Bansal, for 
which Dr. Bansal charged $2,674.00: $580.00 for an examination and $2,094.00 for the 
written report.  (JE15, p. 98)  In order to be entitled to reimbursement of an IME, there 
must first have been an evaluation of permanent disability by an employer-retained 
physician.  In this case, no employer-provided physician ever opined as to the extent of 
permanent disability.  Defendants’ denial of claimant’s claim is not tantamount to a zero-
percent impairment rating.  Accordingly, claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of Dr. 
Bansal’s IME expense.   

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 20 
 
 
The final issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to an award of 
penalty benefits and, if so, how much. 
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 86.13 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 
555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  
Delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable investigation is 
not unreasonable.  Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 (Iowa 1995).   
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  An issue of law is fairly debatable if 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 
(Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which 
would support a finding favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 
637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).  
An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
Iowa Code 86.13, as amended effective July 1, 2009, states:  
4. a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that 
were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse.  
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts:  
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits.  

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 21 
 
 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
benefits.  
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse under paragraph "b", an excuse shall satisfy all of the following 
criteria:  
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits 
were owed to the employee.  
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation 
were the actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits.  
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of 
benefits.  
By this decision, the undersigned determined claimant suffered a 20 percent 
industrial disability, entitling claimant to an award of 100 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits.  Defendants have not paid any permanent disability benefits; claimant 
has therefore, established a delay in payment of benefits.  Although such benefits 
commenced on the stipulated date of January 12, 2018, no physician opined claimant 
suffered permanent disability or required permanent restrictions until Dr. Bansal’s report 
dated February 9, 2019.  By that date, defendants had already filed an answer and a 
motion for summary judgment denying liability for claimant’s claim on the argument 
claimant was an independent contractor.  Claimant was represented by counsel and 
served with copies of both items.  Accordingly, the basis of the denial was 
communicated to claimant prior to any evidence being obtained which would indicate 
claimant did suffer permanent impairment.  Defendants’ contention that claimant was an 
independent contractor was reasonable and the issue of whether claimant was an 
employee of defendant-employer was fairly debatable.  On these bases, I find no 
penalty benefits are warranted.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant one hundred (100) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing January 12, 2018 at the weekly rate of four 
hundred three and 05/100 dollars ($403.05).  

SHAW V. AMERICAN INCOME LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Page 22 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant’s prior medical expenses submitted by claimant at 
the hearing as set forth in the decision.  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.  Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a 
lump sum together with interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File 
No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33. 
Signed and filed this       7th      day of August, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Randall P. Schueller (via WCES) 
Jason A. Kidd (via WCES) 
Garrett A. Lutovsky (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERICA J. FITCH 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
