Case Number: 5050221
Case Title:  UNDERWOOD, MARY BETH V. TEKSYSTEMS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Underwood MaryBeth-5050221d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARY BETH UNDERWOOD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5050221 
ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a 
  : 
TEKSYSTEMS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY   : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 Head Note Nos.: 1100, 1108, 1402.40,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
        3001 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Mary Beth Underwood, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Allegis Group, Inc. d/b/a Teksystems, employer, and 
Indemnity Insurance Company of North America, insurance carrier, both as defendants, 
as a result of an alleged injury sustained on November 11, 2013.  This matter came on 
for hearing before Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch.  The 
record in this case consists of joint exhibits 1 through 40, claimant’s exhibits 1 through 
22, defendants’ exhibits A through L, and the testimony of the claimant. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on November 11, 2013;  
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability and, if so, 
whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from January 16, 
2014 through February 7, 2014;  
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and, if so, the 
extent of any industrial disability;  
 
4. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if ordered;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Apr-08  12:07:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 2 
 
 
 
5. The rate of compensation; 
 
6. Whether defendants are responsible for medical expenses found in Exhibits 
19 and 22, as well as medical mileage found in Exhibit 17; 
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination performed by Dr. Bansal;  
 
8. Whether defendants are entitled to credit under Iowa Code section 85.34(7);  
 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits under Iowa Code section 
86.13 and, if so, how much; and 
 
10. Specific taxation of costs. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant was 47 years of age on the date of hearing.  She is single and the 
mother to an adult son.  She resides in Adel, Iowa, with her father.  Claimant graduated 
high school in 1990.  (Claimant’s testimony)  Claimant earned a bachelor’s degree in 
psychology in 1994.  She subsequently participated in continuing education courses to 
maintain her social work license.  Thereafter, claimant took a number of computer, 
project management, and office management related coursework; she did not earn any 
particular certifications.  Claimant also successfully completed an accelerated course in 
Microsoft engineering; she did not take the test required to earn a certification.  
(Claimant’s testimony; DEF, pp. 27-28)  In 2001, claimant began work in the IT field and 
proceeded to hold various positions as an IT analyst, project coordinator, and business 
system analyst.  (DEF, pp. 32-33)     
Claimant’s relevant medical history is extensive and the evidentiary record is 
voluminous, despite efforts by counsel to limit the number of records submitted to only 
those which were most relevant.  Over the years, claimant has treated with two personal 
physicians: Gregory McKernan, D.O. and Jose Angel, M.D.  She also regularly was 
evaluated by Laura Dankof, ARNP, a nurse in Dr. Angel’s practice.  (Claimant's 
testimony)  In addition to conditions unique to claimant personally, claimant’s family 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 3 
 
 
history is positive for schizophrenia in her mother and one brother.  (JE29, pp. 306-307; 
JE35, p. 364) 
In 2005, claimant was struck in the head at work by what she described as a 
stress ball with a hard inner core.  (Claimant's testimony)  The evidentiary record 
denotes the date of injury as July 12, 2005.  She initially sought medical care with Scott 
Fackrell, D.O., on July 13, 2005.  (JE19, p. 266) 
At a follow up appointment on July 15, 2005, Dr. Fackrell noted claimant had 
been struck near the left ear by a “very soft and very light” ball.  She complained of 
disorientation, nausea, and dizziness, which Dr. Fackrell described as “way out of 
proportion” to the type of injury which could have resulted from being struck by the ball 
claimant brought to show him.  He described the ball as so light and soft that it was 
“almost incapable” of causing injury.  Dr. Fackrell indicated claimant may, however, 
have sprained muscles in her neck when startled by the ball striking her.  Following 
examination, Dr. Fackrell assessed a cervical strain with headache out of proportion to 
any injury she could have sustained.  He ordered a CT scan, which revealed an 
incidental finding of arachnoid cyst in the left temporal area.  Dr. Fackrell opined he was 
certain the cyst was not the cause of claimant’s pain.  He recommended observation 
and time; if symptoms persisted, a neurological consult would be ordered.  (JE19, p. 
266) 
Claimant continued to follow up with Dr. Fackrell and also underwent consultation 
with neurologist, Muhammad Shoaib, M.D., on July 20, 2005.  On July 21, 2005, 
claimant returned to Dr. Fackrell, who noted claimant presented with a “host of 
symptoms which become more and more bizarre as time goes by.”  Dr. Fackrell 
assessed possible conversion hysteria.  He expressed reservation making such a 
diagnosis, but indicated the case was “becoming more bizarre as time goes by.”  He 
indicated claimant was struck by a very soft, light object, which he did not believe could 
have done serious damage to claimant’s head.  He opined claimant may have suffered 
some muscular injuries, but her symptoms were out of proportion to any type of injury 
she could have suffered.  Dr. Fackrell opined claimant displayed anxiety which required 
treatment; he prescribed alprazolam.  Otherwise, he deferred to specialist, Dr. Shoaib.  
(JE19, p. 267) 
On August 3, 2005, claimant presented to neurosurgeon, David Boarini, M.D.  Dr. 
Boarini reviewed claimant’s MRI and opined it revealed a small arachnoid cyst.  Despite 
claimant’s symptoms, Dr. Boarini opined he did not believe the cyst was symptomatic or 
otherwise related to the “minor head injury.”  Dr. Boarini informed claimant that the cyst 
did not require treatment beyond a follow up scan in six to eight months.  Given 
claimant’s pain symptoms, Dr. Boarini did recommend a pain clinic evaluation.  (JE20, 
p. 268) 
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 4 
 
 
Claimant was evaluated by neurosurgeon, Matthew Howard, M.D.  Dr. Howard 
opined claimant suffered a minor closed head injury which led to identification of an 
incidental arachnoid cyst.  Dr. Howard opined claimant’s symptoms were not related to 
the cyst and declined to recommend surgery.  (JE24, p. 276) 
On February 15, 2008, Mayo Clinic neurosurgeon, Frederic Meyer, M.D., 
reviewed claimant’s head imaging and opined the results were consistent with a benign 
left temporal arachnoid cyst.  Dr. Meyer also opined the cyst was not causing any 
pressure on claimant’s brain.  He indicated he would “never” recommend surgery for 
this issue, as arachnoid cysts in this location were not uncommon.  Dr. Meyer further 
opined it was quite uncommon for such a cyst to cause symptoms.  (JE29, p. 290)  
Claimant subsequently provided additional information for Dr. Meyer to consider.  Dr. 
Meyer authored a second medical note on March 5, 2008.  Thereby, Dr. Meyer 
indicated he would be quite reluctant to recommend surgery due to concern that surgery 
would not improve any of claimant’s described symptoms.  (JE29, p. 291) 
Claimant sought further evaluation of the arachnoid cyst, including seeking with 
California-based physician, Hrayr Shahinian, M.D.  On March 27, 2008, claimant 
underwent surgical intervention at Brotman Medical Center in Culver City, California.  
Dr. Shahinian performed left supraorbital craniotomy and endoscopic resection of 
claimant’s arachnoid cyst.  (JE22, pp. 272-273) 
Claimant testified her symptoms returned several months following surgery.  
(Claimant's testimony) 
On September 30, 2008, claimant underwent neuropsychological evaluation with 
Jim Andrikopoulos, Ph.D.  Dr. Andrikopoulos assessed neuropsychological findings 
indicative of some difficulties with motor strength and fine motor dexterity of the left 
hand, but no cognitive difficulties.  Dr. Andrikopoulos found no cognitive impairment.  He 
opined claimant’s personality testing indicated gross over-reporting of physical 
symptoms.  (JE23, pp. 274-275) 
On October 14, 2008, claimant returned to Dr. Howard.  Dr. Howard noted 
claimant had undergone surgical intervention on the arachnoid cyst.  Thereafter, her 
symptoms reportedly improved until August 2008, at which point all her symptoms 
returned.  Symptoms included fatigue, dizziness, vertigo, head and neck pain, hand 
numbness, puffiness, neck stiffness, difficulty concentrating, and periods of inability to 
move.  Dr. Howard opined imaging of September 10, 2008 revealed recurrence of the 
cyst, which was of similar size as it had been in 2005.  Dr. Howard found a normal 
neurological examination.  Thereafter, he opined claimant’s symptoms were not 
referable to the cyst and declined to recommend surgery.  He recommended a 
neurology consultation, as well as a second opinion from a neurosurgeon at the Mayo 
Clinic.  (JE24, p. 276) 
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 5 
 
 
Claimant again sought evaluation of the cyst in California.  On December 22, 
2008, claimant underwent surgical intervention on the recurrent arachnoid cyst at 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.  John Yu, M.D., performed a craniotomy with arachnoid 
cyst removal.  (JE25, p. 277)  Claimant testified the surgeon cut a nerve and blood 
vessel during surgery, causing hemorrhage and resulting in brain damage and 
trigeminal neuralgia.  (Claimant's testimony)   
Claimant subsequently required treatment for resulting symptoms.  On May 7, 
2009, claimant presented to physiatrist, Karen Keinker, M.D.  Dr. Keinker recommended 
physical therapy of the left side of claimant’s face and head, due to continued swelling, 
drainage, and pain.  She also referred claimant to psychologist, Dr. David Beeman, for 
his brain retraining program.  (JE26, pp. 279-280)  Claimant returned to Dr. Keinker in 
follow up on December 31, 2009.  Dr. Keinker noted claimant had learned of recurrence 
of the arachnoid cyst in July 2009 and reported fatigue, nausea, headaches, left temple 
swelling, tightness and sensitivity of her face, slow cognition, balance difficulties, and 
intracranial pressure.  (JE26, p. 281)  Dr. Keinker ordered continued facial therapy and 
recommended increased physical activity, specifically walking.  (JE26, p. 282) 
Claimant continued to receive periodic care and evaluation related to the 
arachnoid cyst.  Ms. Dankof referred claimant to neurologist, Paul Babikian, M.D., for 
evaluation.  Claimant presented to Dr. Babikian on May 11, 2011 with complaints of 
headache, memory and concentration difficulties, numbness, swelling and decreased 
sensation of the left side of her head, cramps, tremors, imbalance, dizziness, loss of 
smell, trouble walking, and muscle weakness.  (JE27, p. 284) After history and 
neurologic examination, Dr. Babikian assessed: gait disturbance of unclear etiology; 
abnormal brain MRI with arachnoid cyst, for which he was uncertain if surgery was 
indicated; and complaints of memory and cognitive difficulties, for which 
neuropsychological testing was warranted.  Dr. Babikian recommended obtaining 
claimant’s prior medical records and ordered a new brain MRI, EEG, and neurocognitive 
testing.  (JE27, p. 285)  Claimant underwent the recommended EEG on May 27, 2011, 
which was read as abnormal, with intermittent infrequent focal slowing in both 
hemispheres.  (JE32, p. 327) 
At hearing, claimant testified she believed being struck by the stress ball “created 
a secondary arachnoid cyst” on her brain.  She testified her understanding was that the 
incident caused the cyst.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
On October 24, 2011, claimant began work at defendant-employer as a quality 
assurance analyst II.  (CE10, p. 73; DEF, p. 33)  Her work primarily involved software 
testing, performed seated at a computer.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On August 27, 2012, claimant was involved in a rear-end motor vehicle accident.  
Claimant was seen in the emergency department, where she was diagnosed with 
cervical/cardiothoracic sprain.  (JE36, pp. 369-371) 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 6 
 
 
On August 31, 2012, claimant presented to Ms. Dankof in follow up of the motor 
vehicle accident.  Claimant complained primarily of pain from her left shoulder 
blade/neck down to her low back, primarily on the left side.  Other complaints included 
dizziness, headache, and nausea.  (JE31, p. 314)  Ms. Dankof noted claimant was not 
taking the Naprosyn prescribed in the emergency room.  She issued prescriptions for 
cyclobenzaprine and physical therapy.  (JE31, p. 316)   
At Ms. Dankof’s referral, claimant was seen by Kurt Smith, D.O., for orthopedic 
evaluation of back and neck pain.  Dr. Smith examined claimant on November 1, 2012, 
at which time claimant reported onset of mid and low back pain, as well as neck pain.  
The onset of symptoms was noted as a rear-end motor vehicle accident two months 
prior.  (JE28, p. 287)  Following examination, Dr. Smith assessed sprain/strains of the 
cervical, lumbar, and thoracic spines; unspecified myalgia; and acute pain due to 
trauma.  He opined claimant’s existing treatment regimen was appropriate and should 
continue.  (JE28, p. 289)   
 
At the referral of Dr. Angel, claimant presented to the Mayo Clinic neurology 
department on February 7, 2013 and was evaluated by Daniel Drubach, M.D.  Dr. 
Drubach found a normal neurological examination.  He opined many of the described 
symptoms were consistent with a diagnosis of postconcussive syndrome.  He ordered a 
repeat MRI to evaluate the arachnoid cyst, issued a neurosurgical referral, referred 
claimant to the brain rehabilitation program, and referred to an internist for evaluation of 
hypertension.  (JE29, p. 294)  
 
That same date, claimant was evaluated by Billie Schultz, M.D., of the brain 
rehabilitation program at Mayo Clinic.  Following examination, Dr. Schultz opined 
claimant presented with significantly elevated blood pressure and agreed with Dr. 
Drubach’s referral for additional evaluation.  She also recommended an overnight 
oximetry due to difficulty with sleep and fatigue.  Dr. Schultz agreed claimant’s 
complaints were consistent with postconcussive type symptoms; she desired to await 
the findings of the additional referrals prior to making treatment recommendations.  Dr. 
Schultz did order a neuropsychologist evaluation to determine if and what treatment 
would be indicated.  (JE29, pp. 298-299) 
 
On February 12, 2013, claimant presented to Dr. Angel in follow up of the Mayo 
Clinic appointments.  Claimant reported more frequent ringing in her ears and 
headaches, as well as recent development of abdominal pain with nausea and diarrhea.  
Dr. Angel noted claimant’s blood pressure was high.  Dr. Angel opined claimant’s 
cognitive difficulties, hypertension, fatigue, low stamina, and heat intolerance were all 
related to the arachnoid cyst.  (JE31, p. 317) 
 
On February 15, 2013, claimant returned to the Mayo Clinic.  She was evaluated 
by Jeffrey Smigielski, Ph.D.  Following examination and records review, Dr. Smigielski 
opined claimant’s presentation was suggestive of postconcussive symptoms.  When he 
presented this opinion to claimant, claimant expressed a “strong opinion” her symptoms 
were related to a “rare symptomatic” arachnoid cyst.  After discussing causation at 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 7 
 
 
length, Dr. Smigielski noted claimant held her opinion quite strongly and appeared to 
dismiss alternative explanations.  Dr. Smigielski opined claimant might benefit from 
cognitive rehabilitation, but did not believe such care was essential or appropriate long-
term.  (JE29, p. 301)   
 
That same day, claimant was evaluated by internist, Jason Szostek, M.D.  
Following history and examination, Dr. Szostek assessed: hypertension; arachnoid cyst; 
and fixed medical ideas.  He noted claimant associated her arachnoid cyst with 
concerns for brain swelling and hypertension.  Dr. Szostek explained there was no 
evidence of brain swelling at that time and opined he did not attribute claimant’s 
hypertension to any intracranial process.  Dr. Szostek informed claimant that her 
hypertension represented a major medical concern; he expressed concern for 
claimant’s well-being.  As a result, he ordered laboratory testing and recommended 
evaluation by a hypertension expert.  (JE29, p. 307) 
 
Also on February 15, 2013, claimant was evaluated by neurosurgeon, Richard 
Marsh, M.D.  Following records review, Dr. Marsh informed claimant he did not believe 
the arachnoid cyst was responsible for her symptoms and did not require further 
surgical intervention.  Dr. Marsh noted claimant expressed “very fixed and clear ideas” 
about the cyst, specifically that it caused elevated pressure in her head and in turn, 
hypertension and other symptoms.  Dr. Marsh rejected claimant’s opinions.  He offered, 
however, to review all MRI and CT scans and contact claimant thereafter.  (JE29, p. 
308) 
 
After undergoing this series of evaluations on February 15, 2013, claimant 
returned to Dr. Drubach.  Dr. Drubach assessed: cognitive disorder, not otherwise 
specified; arachnoid cyst, status post two surgical treatments; and possible 
postconcussional syndrome.  Dr. Drubach noted Dr. Schultz felt claimant’s symptoms 
could be attributable, at least in part, to postconcussional syndrome.  He also noted Dr. 
Marsh did not relate claimant’s symptoms to the cyst.  Dr. Drubach indicated claimant 
expressed strong disagreement with Dr. Marsh’s opinion and questioned his experience 
with such cysts.  Dr. Drubach expressed belief many of claimant’s symptoms could be 
explained by her history of traumatic brain injury.  He indicated he was personally 
uncertain whether the cyst could be contributing, but expressed significant respect for 
Dr. Marsh’s opinion.  Dr. Drubach ultimately opined no further workup was necessary.  
(JE29, p. 309) 
 
On February 28, 2013, claimant presented to Dr. Angel in follow up of a recent 
emergency department visit due to uncontrolled hypertension.  Claimant also 
complained of headaches, lethargy, fatigue, and decreased concentration.  Dr. Angel 
assessed hypertension, probably secondary to the arachnoid cyst.  He ordered a series 
of labs and recommended evaluation by claimant’s previous surgeon.  (JE31, pp. 319-
320)  Claimant continued to follow up with Dr. Angel, including a visit on March 14, 
2013, when he prescribed Lisinopril for hypertension and again recommended 
consultation with her surgeon.  (JE31, pp. 321-322) 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 8 
 
 
 
On August 8, 2013, claimant presented to Ms. Dankof with primary complaints of 
back pain, ranging from the neck to hip.  Claimant also complained of head pain, face 
swelling, blurred vision, memory problems, nausea, and dizziness.  Claimant indicated 
she suffered with all these symptoms since the motor vehicle accident of August 2012 
but they had recently worsened.  Ms. Dankof issued a physical therapy order for the 
neck and back complaints.  (JE31, pp. 323, 325)  Claimant resumed physical therapy 
sessions.  (JE34, pp. 344-351) 
 
On August 14, 2013, claimant engaged in a telephone consultation with Dr. 
Shahinian.  He ordered an MRI flow study.  (JE30, p. 312)  Claimant underwent the 
recommended brain MRI on August 30, 2013.  The radiologist read the results as stable 
compared to the November 2012 study and specifically noted encephalomalacia was 
again seen, likely representing residue of prior surgery or trauma.  (JE31, p. 326; JE32, 
p. 329)   
 
Claimant returned to Dr. McKernan on August 29, 2013 with complaints of 
headaches, onset one year prior due to motor vehicle accident.  Additional complaints 
included back pain, dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea, and weakness.  (JE37, p. 380)  
Dr. McKernan assessed headache, back pain, and neck pain; he performed osteopathic 
manipulation.  (JE37, pp. 382-383)   
 
On October 25, 2013, claimant returned to Dr. McKernan.  On this occasion, she 
reported a primary complaint of memory loss onset 1 ½ years prior, as well as 
associated headaches.  (JE37, p. 384)  Dr. McKernan recommended a decrease in T3 
treatment, with claimant to return in two weeks for evaluation of back and head 
symptoms.  (JE37, p. 386)  Claimant returned to Dr. McKernan on October 28, 2013 
with complaints of fatigue and back pain.  (JE37, p. 387)  Dr. McKernan performed 
osteopathic manipulation.  (JE37, p. 389)   
Throughout summer and fall 2013, claimant pursued acupuncture treatment of 
complaints of left-sided head pain.  (See JE33, pp. 332-334)  Claimant also continued 
physical therapy sessions, up through and including, November 7, 2013.  (JE34, p. 351)  
Claimant testified her symptoms related to the August 2012 motor vehicle accident 
improved over this time.  She denied having any permanent work restrictions.  
(Claimant's testimony) 
On November 11, 2013, claimant was leaving work at defendant-employer after 
completing her shift.  As she walked to her car, she slipped on a patch of ice and fell to 
the ground.  Claimant testified her left leg bent behind her.  She was able to sit up, but 
could not stand.  She called to coworkers, who were able to help her stand and get into 
her vehicle.  Claimant testified she drove home, where she applied ice to both knees, 
ankles, and her left low back.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant reported the event to defendant-employer on November 12, 2013.  
(CE8, p. 65)  Supervisor, Dennis Young, authored an incident notice, noting claimant 
slipped and fell on ice while leaving work the prior day.  He further noted there were no 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 9 
 
 
witnesses to the fall itself, but claimant was observed on the ground thereafter.  (CE9, p. 
67)  Three coworkers authored witness statements indicating they heard claimant call 
for help and went over to help claimant stand.  (CE9, pp. 68-70) 
At the time of the alleged injury, claimant continued to work for defendant-
employer as a quality assurance analyst II, earning $38.60 per hour.  (CE10, p. 73; 
DEF, p. 33)  Claimant’s weekly hours worked varied.  (See CE15, p. 86) 
Claimant argues her gross average weekly wage is $1,447.50.  To reach this 
computation, claimant reviewed the 13 weeks preceding the alleged injury and excluded 
4 of those weeks as unrepresentative.  During those 4 weeks, claimant worked 28.75, 
30.50, 28.50, and 28.00 hours.  During the remaining 9 weeks utilized in the 
computation, claimant worked 34.00 to 40.00 hours per week.  (CE15, p. 86) Claimant 
seeks to exclude 4 of the 13 weeks preceding the alleged injury from computation of her 
gross average weekly wage.  She seeks to exclude 31 percent of the 13 weeks, arguing 
working between 28 and under 34 hours is unrepresentative.   
Defendants argue claimant’s average weekly wage is $1,345.801.  Defendants 
used claimant’s earnings in each of the 13 weeks prior to the alleged work injury.  
Defendants did not exclude any weeks, arguing all the included weeks are 
representative.  (DED, p. 21)   
Claimant’s payroll register with check dates from August 9, 2012 through 
December 12, 2013 was included in evidence.  Review of the ledger reveals that over 
the 66 weeks preceding claimant’s alleged injury, claimant’s weekly paid hours ranged 
from 12 to 40 hours.  (DEB, pp. 2-15)  Review of the payroll ledger reveals claimant 
frequently worked greater than 28, but less than 34, hours per week.  During the 20 
weeks prior to claimant’s alleged injury, claimant worked in that range of hours 40 
percent of the time (8 weeks).  During the 66 weeks prior to claimant’s alleged injury, 
claimant worked in that range of hours 36 percent of the time (24 weeks).  (See DEB, 
pp. 2-15)       
On November 13, 2013, claimant authored an email to naturopathic pharmacist, 
Ned Looney, NMD.  Thereby, claimant detailed a history of two brain injuries in the prior 
eight years: when she was struck in the head by a ball which “created a cyst” on her 
brain and required two surgeries; and a motor vehicle accident which caused whiplash 
injuries to her neck and back muscles.  Claimant indicated a cousin had suggested she 
contact Dr. Looney to determine if he had any treatment options to “wake up” her brain 
or otherwise begin the healing process.  (JE6, p. 138)  
                                            
1 The approved hearing report denotes defendants believe claimant’s average weekly wage is 
$1,350.80.  Defendants’ Exhibit D, page 21, argues an average weekly wage of $1,345.80.  Review of the 
specific rate calculation corresponds with an average weekly wage of $1,345.80.  Therefore, I conclude 
the hearing report contains a scrivener’s error and defendants’ average weekly wage computation is 
$1,345.80. 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 10 
 
 
As a result of the November 11, 2013 incident, defendants authorized care with 
Concentra Medical Centers (Concentra).  On November 14, 2013, Judith Nayeri, D.O., 
evaluated claimant and noted a history of injury November 11, 2013.  Claimant reported 
she slipped on ice and injured both legs, neck, and back.  Claimant reported an 
immediate onset of pain, described as chronic, mild, and sore.  Claimant also 
complained of dizziness and nausea, which Dr. Nayeri opined was probably related to 
claimant’s blood pressure.  (JE1, p. 1)  On examination, Dr. Nayeri noted: no apparent 
distress; normal gait; normal hip range of motion in all planes, with negative FABERE 
and Figure 4 test; normal hip exam bilaterally; normal cervical range of motion in all 
planes, but slight pain with rotation to the left; tenderness to palpation of the left 
paraspinous area; mildly positive diffuse lower back pain of the left L4-L5 paraspinous 
area; and positive straight leg test bilaterally in the supine position.  (JE1, pp. 1-3)   
Following history and examination, Dr. Nayeri assessed: lumbar strain; cervical 
strain; and knee contusion.  Claimant was directed to use ibuprofen or Naprosyn and 
apply ice to the affected areas.  Dr. Nayeri indicated claimant could not participate in 
physical therapy until her blood pressure was under control; Dr. Nayeri indicated 
claimant “may call” once blood pressure levels were under control.  (JE1, p. 4)  Dr. 
Nayeri indicated claimant was not released from care, but could perform regular duties.  
(JE1, pp. 5, 9) 
Later the same day, November 14, 2013, claimant presented to Dr. McKernan, 
with complaints of an ongoing headache, onset three days prior.  He noted additional 
findings of decreased energy, dizziness, nausea, vision change, and weakness.  Dr. 
McKernan noted a trigger of trauma, falling on ice; he also noted increasingly frequent 
episodes of hypertension due to pain from the fall.  He also noted a trigger of arachnoid 
cyst.  (JE2, p. 32)  Additional reported symptoms included neck and back pain.  (JE2, p. 
33)  Dr. McKernan authored a list of “[p]roblems,” including: back pain, onset August 15, 
2013; headache due to old concussion, onset August 29, 2013; neck pain, onset August 
29, 2013; hypertension due to intracranial pressure; motor vehicle accident; seizure 
disorder; subarachnoid cyst, onset June 25, 2013; and tremor, onset October 25, 2013.  
(JE2, pp. 35-36)  Following examination, Dr. McKernan performed osteopathic 
manipulation.  (JE2, p. 34)  He recommended recheck following improvement in pain 
levels.  (JE2, p. 35)  
Claimant returned to Dr. McKernan on November 21, 2013.  Claimant 
complained of hypertension, lumbar pain, and mid-neck pain, which Dr. McKernan 
noted began several years prior.  (JE2, p. 37)  Dr. McKernan performed osteopathic 
manipulation and prescribed enalapril maleate to treat claimant’s high blood pressure.  
(JE2, p. 39)  
On November 21, 2013, claimant sought evaluation with Dr. Looney.  Claimant 
reported she sought evaluation due to “slow thinking” and the feeling that “her brain was 
never fully awake.”  Dr. Looney noted claimant’s history of concussion, seizures, 
arachnoid cyst with surgical intervention, whiplash from motor vehicle accident, thyroid 
condition, and fall on ice in November 2013.  Dr. Looney assessed lymphatic 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 11 
 
 
congestion and possible heavy metal toxicity of the pituitary.  He recommended a plan 
encouraging adrenal and lymphatic drainage.  (JE6, p. 137) 
On December 6, 2013, claimant returned to Dr. Nayeri.  Claimant reported 
improvement in symptoms, but continued left lumbosacral pain.  Dr. Nayeri noted she 
previously held off on prescribing physical therapy due to high blood pressure; however, 
claimant had continued the course of physical therapy she was participating in due to a 
prior motor vehicle accident, as the same body parts were injured.  (JE1, p. 11)  On 
examination, Dr. Nayeri noted: negative straight leg testing; normal lumbar range of 
motion; improved lumbar range of motion; mildly positive diffuse lower back pain at left 
L5; and normal cervical range of motion.  (JE1, pp. 11-12)  Dr. Nayeri placed claimant at 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) and released claimant from care, without 
restrictions, to return as needed.  (JE1, pp. 12, 14, 16) 
Claimant resigned her employment with defendant-employer effective December 
15, 2013 for a business analyst position at Quality Consulting, Inc. (QCI).  In that role, 
claimant earned $50.00 per hour.  (CE10, p. 73; DEA, p. 1; DEC, p. 18; DEF, p. 34)  
Claimant represented her employment with defendant-employer ended on December 6, 
2013, after her project was placed on hold and contractors were being let go.  (DEF, p. 
33)  Claimant’s QCI pay stub with a check date of January 3, 2014 is in evidence and 
reveals claimant worked 64.50 hours; however, the pay period start and end date are 
both listed as January 3, 2014.  (DEC, p. 18; DEK, p. 1)   
On January 3, 2014, claimant presented to Dr. McKernan with complaints of neck 
pain and back pain.  Claimant reported an onset of neck symptoms two months’ prior; 
no trigger was noted.  Additional symptoms included fatigue, diaphoresis, occasional 
headache, memory loss, myalgias, and restricted range of motion of the cervical spine.  
(JE2, pp. 42-43)  Claimant also reported undergoing multiple treatments with “her 
Naturopath” for adrenal fatigue and muscle aches.  Claimant reported relief with use of 
T3.  Dr. McKernan performed osteopathic manipulation.  (JE2, p. 45)  
At physical therapy on January 9, 2014, claimant reported she was “miserable” 
after starting a new job, with increased stress causing a return of dizziness and nausea.  
She also complained of left-sided back pain.  (JE34, pp. 352-353) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Nayeri for recheck on January 15, 2014 due to reported 
lack of further improvement.  Claimant complained of low back, neck, and bilateral knee 
pain, particularly noticeable in the left low back and left knee.  (JE1, p. 17)  Following 
examination, Dr. Nayeri assessed a lumbar strain and left knee contusion.  She 
prescribed ibuprofen 800 mg, Skelaxin, and a course of physical therapy.  She released 
claimant to regular duties.  (JE1, p. 18)   
On January 16, 2014, claimant presented to Ms. Dankof.  Claimant reported a 
history of three traumatic brain injuries within the last eight years, the most recent of 
which during a November 2013 fall on ice.  Claimant reported back and neck pain, as 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 12 
 
 
well as increased insomnia, memory loss, dizziness, nausea, weakness, and fatigue.  
Ms. Dankof noted claimant’s blood pressure was not controlled.  (JE3, p. 76) 
Following examination, Ms. Dankof noted claimant’s history of traumatic brain 
injury and arachnoid cyst.  She described claimant as more symptomatic over the prior 
few weeks, following the November fall; but also indicated claimant denied striking her 
head during the fall.  Additionally, Ms. Dankof noted increased stress after claimant 
recently started a new job.  Ms. Dankof opined claimant’s recent symptoms were 
concerning for worsening of the cyst or possible seizure disorder.  Due to the complex 
nature of claimant’s case, Ms. Dankof recommended MRI and EEG testing, followed by 
neurological evaluation.  To address claimant’s high blood pressure, Ms. Dankof 
recommended a trial of chlorthalidone.  She directed claimant not to drive until a seizure 
disorder could be ruled out.  (JE3, p. 80)  Ms. Dankof subsequently excused claimant 
from work from January 16, 2014 through January 31, 2014.  (CE21, p. 214) 
Per Ms. Dankof’s order, claimant underwent a brain MRI on January 28, 2014.  
Results were read as stable compared to a brain MRI of August 30, 2013.  (JE3, p. 81; 
JE4, p. 97)  That same date, claimant underwent a normal EEG.  (JE4, p. 99)   
Claimant returned to Ms. Dankof on January 31, 2014 to review her test results.  
At that time, Ms. Dankof opined claimant’s MRI was stable and assessed: arachnoid 
cyst; cerebromalacia; fatigue; memory lapses or loss; staring spells; and 
tingling/paresthesia.  Following receipt of claimant’s EEG results, Ms. Dankof opined the 
test was normal.  Claimant was released to return to work while awaiting neurological 
evaluation.  (JE3, p. 86)   
Claimant testified she was off work per Ms. Dankof’s orders from January 16, 
2014 through February 6, 2014.  (Claimant's testimony)  Claimant’s pay stubs from QCI 
all follow the same format: the pay period start date, end date, and check date are the 
same.  (DEK, pp. 2-3)  Claimant’s QCI pay stub with a check date of January 17, 2014 
reveals claimant was paid for 72.75 hours for the period with start and end dates of 
January 17, 2014.  (DEK, p. 2)  The pay stub with a check date of January 31, 2014 
revealed claimant was paid for 62.25 hours for the period with start and end dates of 
January 31, 2014.  (DEK, p. 3)  Claimant disputed she worked during the claimed period 
and testified her pay from QCI was issued one month behind when she worked the 
hours.  (Claimant's testimony)    
At physical therapy on February 13, 2014, claimant reported she had been 
feeling “awful.”  Claimant indicated she recently returned to work six hours per day after 
being off for two weeks.  Claimant indicated she was suffering with a number of 
symptoms she related to her “head injury,” such as dizziness, high blood pressure, and 
inability to concentrate.  (JE34, p. 353)  The outpatient questionnaire from this visit 
noted an onset of symptoms on August 27, 2012 after claimant’s vehicle was rear-
ended, resulting in a whiplash injury.  (JE34, p. 354)    

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 13 
 
 
On February 14, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Nayeri.  On that date, claimant 
complained of low back pain and spasms, going into the hip area.  Dr. Nayeri noted 
claimant had been receiving treatment with her own physician and physical therapist.  
She opined claimant had a “significant history which may account for some of the 
issues” and recommended obtaining claimant’s old medical records.  In the progress 
note portion of Dr. Nayeri’s record, the described hip pain is localized to the right hip; 
however, the history portion of the note localizes the pain to the left lower back, lumbar 
region, and SI joint.  (JE1, p. 24)  The nursing notes localize the pain to claimant’s left 
hip.  (JE1, p. 28)  
On examination, Dr. Nayeri noted mildly positive diffuse lower back pain to 
palpation of the left L5 and sciatic area.  Dr. Nayeri described the examination findings 
as “overreaction” and inconsistent with prior examination.  (JE1, p. 25)  Dr. Nayeri 
assessed a lumbar strain and left sciatica.  She released claimant to regular duty, 
prescribed physical therapy, recommended assignment of a case worker, and return 
within one month.  (JE1, pp. 25-27)   
Due to headache complaints, claimant presented to personal neurologist, Heike 
Schmolck, M.D., of Mercy Ruan Neurology Clinic.  On February 19, 2014, Dr. Schmolck 
noted a history of fall on the ice in November, with claimant denying she struck her 
head.  Dr. Schmolck noted claimant “certainly had a whiplash injury,” as well as injured 
her back and hip.  Claimant complained of headaches, light and sound sensitivity, 
difficulty with focus and attention, and nausea with fatigue.  Dr. Schmolck noted 
claimant had not adjusted well to her new job position and became “so stressed out” in 
January that she had taken two weeks off.  Claimant also reported involvement in a 
motor vehicle accident several months prior to the November fall, but reported she had 
recovered well, stopped physical therapy, and had been “practically headache free.”  
Claimant denied any cognitive symptoms related to the motor vehicle accident.  Dr. 
Schmolck also noted claimant’s 2005 head injury and discovery of an arachnoid cyst.  
(JE5, p. 100) 
Following neurological examination, Dr. Schmolck assessed: memory lapses or 
loss; cognitive skills – attention and concentration activities; and chronic tension-type 
headache.  Dr. Schmolck opined the whiplash injury with fall accounted for claimant’s 
unresolved headaches and neck pain.  Dr. Schmolck described claimant’s cognitive 
symptoms as “more difficult to explain.”  (JE5, p. 103)  Dr. Schmolck indicated such 
symptoms had been studied in the context of whiplash injuries and also acknowledged 
a likely component or stress and anxiety.  Ultimately, Dr. Schmolck opined there was 
“no doubt” in her mind that claimant’s symptoms were causally related to the November 
fall.  In her analysis, she highlighted the near resolution of prior symptoms before the 
fall.  She further expressed belief the arachnoid cyst was not relevant, nor likely to 
become relevant, as the cyst was most likely congenital in nature.  Dr. Schmolck 
prescribed Gabapentin and cognitive rehabilitation.  (JE5, p. 104)   
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 14 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Looney on March 3, 2014.  Claimant reported she 
utilized Gabapentin for pain and sleep, but it yielded side effects of drowsiness and poor 
thinking into the following day.  Dr. Looney instead recommended use of Gaba Calm to 
help initiate sleep.  He recommended physical assessment by Michael Jackson, M.D.  
(JE6, p. 136)    
On March 10, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Schmolck.  Claimant’s primary 
complaint was of significant fatigue and the feelings of being overworked and 
overwhelmed at work.  Claimant confirmed she had been undergoing cognitive therapy.  
She reported that use of Gabapentin resulted in sedation and potentially increased pain.  
Dr. Schmolck noted claimant also complained at length regarding “several smaller 
issues.”  (JE5, p. 105)  Following examination, Dr. Schmolck ordered a lower dosage of 
Gabapentin and continued cognitive therapy.  (JE5, p. 108) 
Due to continued complaints, defendants referred claimant for evaluation with 
Michael Jackson, M.D.  Claimant initially presented to Dr. Jackson on March 19, 2014.  
At that visit, Dr. Jackson noted chief complaints of exhaustion, dizziness, nausea, 
weakness, and head pain.  Claimant indicated she had experienced these symptoms 
since a fall on the ice on November 11, 2013.  During the fall, claimant indicated she 
also injured her bilateral knees and right shin, as well as “’reinjured’” her back and neck 
which had been previously injured in a motor vehicle accident.  Dr. Jackson detailed 
claimant’s motor vehicle accident in August 2012 and subsequent physical therapy.  He 
noted that just as claimant had reached a point of doing well post-accident, she suffered 
the November 11, 2013 fall and re-aggravated her symptoms.  Dr. Jackson also noted 
claimant’s history of arachnoid cyst, status post two surgeries.  (JE6, p. 119)  
At the time of evaluation with Dr. Jackson, claimant reported cognitive activities 
resulted in increased exhaustion and she was unable to tolerate more than 
approximately four hours of work per day, down from six hours per days a couple weeks 
prior.  Additional reported symptoms included: decreased memory; inability to 
concentrate; intermittent numbness and tingling of the right upper and lower extremity; 
stabbing pain in the head, with occasional numbness and pins and needles sensation; 
low back pain; and neck pain.  (JE6, p. 120)   
On examination, Dr. Jackson noted: tenderness to palpation in the left cervical 
paraspinals; minimal pain on palpation of the upper trapezius, rhomboids, and levator 
scapulae musculature; and slight tenderness to palpation of the mid left thoracic 
paraspinals.  He assessed cervicothoracolumbar strain/sprain secondary to slip and fall, 
and history of previous head injury and arachnoid cyst.  Due to claimant’s exhaustion 
and fatigue, Dr. Jackson imposed a four-hour per day work restriction for the remainder 
of the week and then removed claimant from work for two weeks, corresponding to the 
period of March 24 through April 7, 2014.  During this time, Dr. Jackson recommended 
focus upon cognitive therapy and increased the frequency of such sessions to thrice 
weekly.  He recommended claimant continue to use Gaba Calm and ordered a trial of 
Duexis for headaches.  (JE6, pp. 121, 125-126)    

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 15 
 
 
Due to Dr. Jackson’s removal of claimant from work, defendants commenced 
payment of temporary total disability benefits.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On March 27, 2014, a prescription was authored for physical therapy of 
cervicothoracolumbar strain/sprain secondary to slip and fall.  The prescription appears 
to bear the signature of Dr. Jackson.  (JE7, p. 139) 
On April 3, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Jackson for follow up appointment.  
Claimant reported continued headaches with associated nausea, as well as episodes of 
left eye blindness.  She relayed improvement of neck pain with physical therapy, but 
slower progress with back complaints.  Additionally, claimant’s fatigue complaints 
persisted and she lacked readiness to return to work.  Claimant indicated she had a 
consultation scheduled with Dr. Shahinian to evaluate the arachnoid cyst.  Following 
examination, Dr. Jackson expressed agreement with the pending consultation with Dr. 
Shahinian and also ordered neuropsychiatric evaluation.  In the interim, Dr. Jackson 
recommended continued medication use and removed claimant from work for an 
additional two weeks.  (JE6, p. 127)  
Claimant presented to Mercy Ruan Neurology Clinic on April 16, 2014 and was 
seen by Meghan Kinnetz, NP.  Claimant complained of continued cognitive impairment, 
physical fatigue, and headaches.  Ms. Kinnetz noted claimant was receiving evaluation 
and care of her complaints by multiple medical providers and had recently been taken 
off of Gabapentin due to intolerable side effects.  Ms. Kinnetz noted claimant was 
placed on a 50 percent work schedule at her last visit with Dr. Schmolck, but another 
physician had provided a full duty work release.  (JE5, p. 109)  As claimant was 
receiving care from multiple physicians regarding her complaints, Ms. Kinnetz indicated 
her care would focus upon the assessed chronic tension-type headaches.  She 
recommended use of B2, magnesium, and butterbur herbal supplement.  She deferred 
to the other treating providers regarding any need for work restrictions.  (JE5, p. 112) 
On April 17, 2014, claimant authored email correspondence to Arnold Menezes, 
M.D., professor and vice chairman of the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
(UIHC) Department of Neurosurgery.  She detailed her history of arachnoid cyst with 
surgical intervention, as well as described subsequent injuries and existing symptoms.  
She inquired whether it would be of benefit for her to make an appointment at UIHC or 
whether she should seek to return to Cedar Sinai in California.  Dr. Menezes replied and 
commented that arachnoid cysts were notorious for recurring and noted claimant 
appeared to demonstrate both neurological and other comorbidities.  While UIHC was a 
tertiary neurosurgical center, Dr. Menezes recommended claimant reach out to Cedar 
Sinai, as the providers already possessed an understanding of claimant’s conditions.  
(JE8, pp. 140-141)   
On April 18, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Jackson with continued reports of 
fatigue.  Claimant had not yet undergone neuropsychological evaluation, but had 
undergone consultation with Dr. Shahinian, with test results pending.  Dr. Jackson 
opined claimant was doing very well in terms of her neck and low back, noting claimant 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 16 
 
 
seemed to have made a breakthrough in her treatment of these symptoms.  
Examination revealed only mild tenderness to palpation of the left upper thoracic 
paraspinals; no significant tenderness of the cervical or lumbar paraspinous 
musculature was found.  Dr. Jackson noted spinal range of motion within functional 
limits and noted no complaints of SI joint pain.  Following examination, Dr. Jackson 
recommended: continued evaluation with Drs. Shahinian and Looney; continued 
medication use; neuropsychological evaluation; and continued off work status.  (JE6, 
pp. 129-130) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Jackson on May 2, 2014.  Dr. Jackson noted that 
following evaluation, Dr. Shahinian did not recommend further surgery and instead 
recommended claimant take time to heal from her accumulative brain trauma, 
specifically beginning with the December 2008 surgery and damaged further in the 2012 
motor vehicle accident.  Dr. Jackson noted claimant continued to benefit from physical 
therapy of her cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine.  Claimant reported some 
improvement in fatigue until a recent increase, with accompanying nausea, loss of 
balance, and dizziness.  Claimant indicated she spoke to a representative of the AMEN 
Clinic, who recommended a SPECT scan and hyperbaric oxygen treatment to promote 
brain healing.  Dr. Jackson recommended continued off work status while he sought to 
review all of claimant’s medical records.  He noted that a causation opinion needed to 
be made and this would be done following review of medical records.  (JE6, p. 131)  
Claimant’s employment with QCI ended in early May 2014.  (CE10, p. 73; DEC, 
p. 19)  Per a QCI representative, claimant had been hired to provide services to a 
particular client and that client no longer needed her services.  As a result, claimant’s 
employment was separated.  She did not quit, nor did QCI fire her for cause.  (DEC, p. 
20) 
Claimant returned to Ms. Dankof on May 12, 2014 regarding chronic fatigue.  Ms. 
Dankof noted claimant’s fatigue had worsened over the prior year “following whiplash 
and then a fall.”  Ms. Dankof recommended further evaluation of cortisol levels, as well 
as potential gluten sensitivity.  (JE3, p. 91) 
Following a session on May 27, 2014, claimant’s physical therapist indicated it 
would be appropriate to discontinue physical therapy, as claimant’s back symptoms had 
resolved.  If symptoms flared, physical therapy could resume.  (JE3, p. 356)  
On May 30, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Jackson.  He noted claimant had 
recently been discharged from physical therapy after meeting all goals.  Claimant 
reported some weakness, as well as unchanged fatigue and skin rashes of unknown 
etiology.  Claimant expressed interest in pursuing hyperbaric oxygen treatments for 
brain healing.  Dr. Jackson noted claimant had follow up evaluations scheduled with a 
neurologist and a specialist in Iowa City.  (JE6, p. 135)  Following examination, Dr. 
Jackson placed claimant at MMI from her cervical, thoracic, and lumbar sprain/strains.  
He released claimant to work without restrictions with respect to her musculoskeletal 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 17 
 
 
injuries.  Dr. Jackson discharged claimant from his care and referred her to neurology 
regarding ongoing cognition and fatigue complaints.  (JE6, pp. 133, 135) 
On June 11, 2014, claimant returned to Ms. Kinnetz at Mercy Ruan Neurology 
Clinic in follow up of headache complaints.  Ms. Kinnetz indicated claimant was 
“extremely interested” in pursuing hyperbaric oxygen therapy, but was unable to find a 
physician to issue such a referral.  Claimant reported she had undergone cognitive 
therapy, but was deemed too high functioning to continue, per her therapist.  Ms. 
Kinnetz noted claimant was scheduled for neurocognitive testing the following month.  
Claimant also reported she had lost her job due to her physical and cognitive complaints 
and was struggling financially.  (JE5, p. 113) 
Ms. Kinnetz noted claimant was previously placed on B2, magnesium, and 
butterbur, but had discontinued their use on advise of another practitioner who was 
attempting to identify the cause of a rash on claimant’s body.  Claimant declined 
additional pharmacological interventions for headaches.  (JE5, p. 113, 116)  Ms. Kinnetz 
expressed belief depression contributed to claimant’s symptoms; claimant expressed 
resistance to this concept and denied need for antidepressant medication.  Ms. Kinnetz 
encouraged claimant to continue cognitive therapy, potentially with another therapist.  
She also recommended claimant reach out to the Brain Injury Alliance regarding 
additional resources.  Claimant was advised to follow up with Dr. Schmolck following 
neurocognitive testing, if desired.  (JE5, p. 116)     
On June 12, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Angel and requested to discuss 
hyperbaric therapy and a referral to endocrinology.  (JE3, p. 92)  Following examination, 
Dr. Angel assessed: fatigue; nausea; arachnoid cyst; episode of memory loss; and 
hypertension.  (JE3, p. 95)  Dr. Angel noted claimant’s history of arachnoid cyst, 
diagnosis of postconcussive syndrome, and documented low cortisol levels.  He opined 
claimant exhibited “cognitive deficits that [were] fairly consistent with executive 
processes.”  Dr. Angel opined claimant’s “functional status deteriorated” following the 
November 2013 fall.  He recommended referral for neurocognitive testing and to Dr. 
Bhargava, due to the possibility of pituitary dysfunction.  (JE3, p. 96) 
On July 3, 2014, Dr. Jackson authored an updated work-status form.  Thereby, 
he opined claimant remained at MMI and could work without restrictions with respect to 
her musculoskeletal injuries.  He recommended continued follow up with neurology 
regarding cognition and fatigue.  (JE6, p. 134) 
At defendants’ referral, on July 30, 2014, claimant presented to 
neuropsychologist, Daniel Tranel, Ph.D., of UIHC, for an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) related to the November 2013 fall.  Dr. Tranel reviewed extensive 
medical records and summarized those records in his 32-page August 4, 2014 report.  
(DEI, pp. 64-85)  Dr. Tranel noted claimant’s medical records after the November 2013 
fall revealed she did not strike her head, did not lose consciousness, and did not 
experience posttraumatic amnesia.  He found no medical evidence that claimant 
sustained a traumatic brain injury or concussion in the incident and further opined the 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 18 
 
 
mechanism of fall was “not plausible for a significant brain injury.”  He found no 
evidence claimant sustained a permanent neurological injury in the incident.  (DEI, pp. 
62, 94)  
Dr. Tranel administered a neuropsychological evaluation, including clinical 
interview, tests, and procedures.  (DEI, pp. 86-92)  He opined claimant’s performances 
fell within normal expectations on symptom validity.  (DEI, p. 92)  Dr. Tranel opined the 
evaluation results yielded normal cognitive performances.  He identified many of 
claimant’s abilities were above average, with average to superior intellectual abilities, as 
well as normal memory, speech and language, perception, construction, attention, 
concentration, orientation, and executive functioning.  (DEI, pp. 62, 92-93, 94)  He 
opined these results were consistent with the prior neuropsychological assessments of 
Dr. Campbell in 2006 and Dr. Andrikopolous in 2008.  Dr. Tranel opined the 
neuropsychological examination confirmed claimant had intact, normal neurological 
status, without indication of brain damage related to the November 2013 fall.  He further 
opined claimant did not present with any cognitive or behavioral deficits related to the 
incident.  (DEI, pp. 62, 94) 
Dr. Tranel opined claimant self-reported a level of symptoms consistent with 
minimal depression and anxiety.  On a broader measure, Dr. Tranel identified a profile 
“notable for profound overemphasis and over-reporting of symptoms.”  Clinical scale 
elevations yielded results significant for intense somatic focus and emotional turmoil.  
(DEI, p. 93)   
Following evaluation, Dr. Tranel opined claimant’s medical records indicated 
claimant had a somatic symptom disorder of longstanding nature, predating the 
November 2013 fall by many years.  He opined this condition directly contributed to a 
number of medical events and outcomes over the preceding decade.  Dr. Tranel 
highlighted the July 2005 work injury where claimant developed a number of physical, 
cognitive, and psychiatric symptoms despite being struck by a ball “so soft and light that 
it was entirely implausible” for it to have caused a head injury or traumatic brain injury.  
He noted contemporaneous imaging revealed an incidental arachnoid cyst, which local 
providers opined was asymptomatic and did not require surgery.  Despite these 
opinions, claimant located willing surgeons in California and during the second surgery, 
a complication arose, namely a hemorrhage, that produced parenchymal injury in the 
left frontal and temporal regions.  He opined these represented the only areas of 
parenchymal damage in claimant’s brain.  (DEI, pp. 63, 94-95)  
From a neuropsychological standpoint, Dr. Tranel opined claimant’s primary 
diagnosis was somatic symptom disorder, which predated the incident.  Dr. Tranel 
ultimately opined claimant “does not have any diagnosis or condition related to” the fall 
in November 2013.  He further opined the incident did not aggravate any preexisting 
conditions.  He opined claimant had achieved MMI and would have done so within 
approximately one week of the incident, on or about November 18, 2013.  Dr. Tranel 
expressed belief claimant did not demonstrate any problems, nor did she require any 
further testing or treatment, related to the incident.  He believed claimant capable of 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 19 
 
 
working at the same level as prior to the November 13, 2013 fall and she did not require 
restrictions related to the incident.  (DEI, pp. 63, 95)  Dr. Tranel further recommended:  
[Claimant] should be firmly disabused of any notion that she has 
permanent brain damage or dysfunction related to the 11/11/13 incident.  
She is susceptible to iatrogenic influences from well-intentioned experts, 
and it is critical that she be provided accurate information that is based on 
facts in the medical record (and not her self-report).  Conservative 
management with reassurance and support are indicated.   
(DEI, pp. 63, 95)  
Following receipt of Dr. Tranel’s report, defendants denied further liability and 
thereafter, declined authorization of additional medical care.  Following notice, 
defendants ceased payment of temporary total disability benefits.  (Claimant's 
testimony)   
On August 6, 2014, pursuant to a referral from Dr. Angel, claimant presented to 
Teck Khoo, M.D., for evaluation of potential pituitary dysfunction.  Dr. Khoo indicated he 
was uncertain why claimant was being seen from a hormonal standpoint.  Following 
examination, Dr. Khoo assured claimant there was no radiologic or biochemical 
evidence of hormonal problems.  (JE38, pp. 393-395)   
Claimant was involved in a motor vehicle accident on August 8, 2014.  At the 
time of the accident, claimant was sitting at a stop sign and her vehicle was struck from 
behind.  She was transported to the emergency room with complaints of a stiff neck, 
headache, and dizziness.  (JE9, p. 152; JE36, pp. 372-374)  Claimant underwent a 
cervical spine CT, which revealed no fracture or dislocation.  (JE9, p. 154)  A head CT 
yielded stable results as compared to a prior February 2013 exam.  (JE9, p. 155)  
Claimant was diagnosed with no serious injury following the motor vehicle accident.  
(JE36, p. 374)   
At the orders of Dr. Angel, claimant underwent a cervical MRI on August 11, 
2014, which revealed mild degenerative changes without significant central canal or 
neural foraminal compromise.  (JE9, p. 156)  Claimant returned to Dr. Angel the 
following day, August 12, 2014.  At that time, claimant reported mild increase in 
headache and increased fatigue.  (JE10, p. 160)  Dr. Angel examined claimant and 
reviewed the imaging results.  He opined claimant was stable and no intervention was 
required.  (JE10, pp. 163-164) 
Claimant testified her physical and neurological symptoms worsened following 
the motor vehicle accident.  She testified her neurological symptoms returned to 
baseline after approximately three weeks.  (Claimant's testimony)  
On October 9, 2014, claimant presented to UIHC neurologist, E. Torage 
Shivapour, M.D.  Claimant sought evaluation of pain, vertigo, fatigue, nausea, memory 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 20 
 
 
loss, and numbness/weakness of the extremities.  Dr. Shivapour detailed claimant’s 
history of being struck in the head in 2005, arachnoid cyst with surgical intervention, 
2012 motor vehicle accident, partial seizure events, and November 2013 fall on ice.  
During the November 2013 fall, claimant reported no loss of consciousness and that 
she did not strike her head.  Claimant also disclosed involvement in an August 2014 
motor vehicle accident and subsequent worsening of her symptoms.  (JE8, pp. 147-148)  
Following review of testing and neurologic examination, Dr. Shivapour opined the cause 
of claimant’s neurological status was unclear.  He indicated the location of the 
arachnoid cyst did not explain her symptoms.  Dr. Shivapour indicated he had no further 
treatment or testing to provide; he advised claimant to seek other opinions due to her 
expressed interest in undergoing functional imaging such as a SPECT or PET scan.  
(JE8, p. 151)  
At the referral of Ms. Dankof, on October 15, 2014, claimant presented to Iowa 
Ortho.  Kurt Smith, D.O., evaluated claimant for complaints of mid and low back pain, 
radiating to the left thigh.  Dr. Smith noted the context of complaints as a motor vehicle 
accident in August 2014.  (JE11, p. 223)  Dr. Smith performed a physical examination 
and reviewed claimant’s prior diagnostic studies.  Thereafter, he assessed a lumbar 
sprain/strain.  Dr. Smith ordered continued therapy and a lumbar spine MRI.  (JE11, pp. 
235-236)  Per the orders of Dr. Smith, claimant underwent a lumbar spine MRI on 
October 22, 2014.  The results were read as revealing: mild degenerative changes in 
the lower lumbar spine with mild disc bulging at L4-L5 and L5-S1, without visible focal 
disc herniation or high-grade central canal or neural foraminal stenosis; and atrophy of 
the posterior paraspinals musculature.  (JE9, p. 157) 
At the referral of Dr. Angel, on October 22, 2014, claimant presented to UIHC 
endocrinologist, Joseph Dillon, M.D., due to concern of pituitary damage following 
multiple head traumas.  (JE8, p. 142)  Following physical examination and laboratory 
tests, Dr. Dillon found no evidence of hormonal dysfunction and opined no follow up 
appointment was required.  (JE8, pp. 145-146) 
On October 28, 2014, claimant presented to the University of Nebraska Medical 
Center (UNMC) for evaluation of pituitary/hypothalamic dysfunction with Andjela Drincic, 
M.D.  Dr. Drincic noted claimant’s history of 2005 head injury, arachnoid cyst with 
surgical intervention, 2012 motor vehicle accident, and November 2013 fall on ice.  Dr. 
Drincic described the November 2013 fall as a cervical whiplash injury, without reported 
head injury.  Claimant reported progressively worsening fatigue dating to 2012; she also 
noted some cognitive dysfunction, memory issues, and difficulty learning.  (JE12, p. 
245)   
Dr. Drincic performed a physical examination and reviewed claimant’s laboratory 
results and recent brain MRI.  Dr. Drincic indicated claimant’s cognitive complaints 
could possibly be due to traumatic brain injury or hypopituitarism.  (JE12, pp. 246-247)  
She opined claimant’s complaints were common consequences of traumatic brain 
injury, which is best treated by an interdisciplinary team.  Dr. Drincic ordered a pituitary 
hormone panel and glucagon stimulation testing.  She referred claimant for 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 21 
 
 
neurosurgical evaluation of the arachnoid cyst and psychiatry for care specific to 
traumatic brain injury.  Dr. Drincic indicated she would try to obtain claimant’s 
neurocognitive testing results and discuss her treatment options with other providers.  
(JE12, p. 248)  
Claimant thereafter returned to Dr. Smith on November 5, 2014.  Dr. Smith 
opined claimant’s MRI revealed degenerative changes of the lower lumbar region.  He 
opined claimant’s back and gluteal symptoms were related to a muscular strain and 
should improve with time.  Dr. Smith indicated claimant could follow up as needed.  
(JE11, pp. 239) 
On November 10, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Drincic for glucagon stimulation 
test.  Dr. Drincic noted the initial laboratory results were not suggestive of major pituitary 
dysfunction.  (JE39, p. 401)  Dr. Drincic expressed belief claimant’s symptoms were part 
of traumatic brain injury symptomatology.  She issued a referral to Dr. Travis Groft, 
described as a specialist in the neuropsychiatric consequences of traumatic brain injury.  
(JE39, p. 403) 
On December 9, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Angel with continued complaints 
of headaches, nausea, inability to sleep, fatigue, and memory issues.  Claimant 
reported an ability to read, but inability to recall details.  (JE10, p. 165)  Following 
examination, Dr. Angel assessed subarachnoid cyst, multiple closed head injuries, and 
symptoms out of proportion to MRI findings.  He noted claimant had been evaluated by 
neurology and no intervention was recommended; he indicated claimant was treated 
more as a headache patient during that evaluation.  (JE10, p. 168)  Dr. Angel indicated 
UIHC recommended a referral to the Cleveland Clinic, which he described as not an 
option.  Dr. Angel opined claimant’s workup at UNMC showed mild nonspecific 
neuroendocrine changes and referred for neurosurgical evaluation.  Dr. Angel also 
mentioned evaluation for traumatic brain injury and consult with Madonna Lincoln 
Roscoe, as potential next steps.  Dr. Angel limited claimant to 4-hour work days, 5 days 
per week.  He noted claimant was a possible candidate for Social Security Disability 
benefits and indicated a second opinion from a disability physician could be an option.  
(JE10, p. 169)  
At the referral of Dr. Drincic, on December 11, 2014, claimant presented to 
psychologist, Roger Riss, Psy.D., of Madonna Rehabilitation.  Mr. Riss opined his 
findings were largely consistent with those of Dr. Tranel and other providers which 
identified overall intact neurocognitive abilities.  (JE35, p. 36)  He recommended 
psychological counseling as a component of claimant’s medical care.  (JE35, p. 368) 
On December 16, 2014, claimant’s former attorney authored a letter to Dr. Angel.  
Thereby, counsel detailed opinions claimant indicated had been expressed by Dr. Angel 
at a December 9, 2014 medical appointment.  The opinions included: the fall of 
November 11, 2013 represented a significant and material aggravation of the brain cyst 
with worsened symptomatology; the symptoms Dr. Angel had treated since that date 
were attributable to the aggravation; and all said treatment and referrals for care were 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 22 
 
 
reasonable and necessary in treatment of the aggravation.  Permanent restrictions were 
also denoted as: working 4 to 6 hours per day, 4 to 5 days per week; the need to take 2 
to 3 hour breaks as needed; and it is best to work in a low stress environment.  Dr. 
Angel signed the letter, indicating his agreement with the expressed opinions.  (CE4, p. 
59)   
At the referral of Dr. Drincic, claimant presented to the UNMC neurosurgery 
department on December 17, 2014.  At that time, claimant was examined by Leslie 
Hellbusch, M.D. and Melissa Rasmussen, PA.  Claimant reported a history of 2005 
head injury and arachnoid cyst with two surgical interventions.  Claimant reported 
redevelopment of related symptoms and progressive worsening of complaints over the 
prior three to four years.  Claimant attributed the worsening to multiple head injuries 
“from motor vehicle accident and slipping and falling on ice.”  Claimant also disclosed a 
history of three partial seizures.  (JE13, p. 249)  Dr. Hellbusch ordered an updated brain 
MRI, but informed claimant a number of her symptoms were related to endocrine 
abnormalities rather than the arachnoid cyst.  Dr. Hellbusch indicated claimant could 
return following receipt of the MRI, her endocrine studies, prior neuropsychological 
testing, and sleep study.  (JE13, p. 251) 
Claimant underwent a sleep study on January 7, 2015 at the direction of Dr. 
Angel.  (JE14, p. 253)  Per the orders of Dr. Angel, claimant underwent a brain MRI on 
January 22, 2015.  The radiologist observed little interval change as compared to the 
January 2014 study.  (JE9, p. 158; JE10, p. 170)  Claimant returned to Dr. Angel on 
February 5, 2015 for MRI review.  Dr. Angel reviewed the MRI and opined it revealed 
little interval change.  He noted a copy of the disc containing the MRI films and the 
accompanying report would be sent to UNMC.  Dr. Angel indicated he would defer to 
the evaluating neurosurgeon.  (JE10, pp. 171, 175) 
On March 2, 2015, Dr. Angel and claimant discussed hyperbaric oxygen therapy.  
Claimant indicated she intended to participate in a Louisiana State University (LSU) 
study.  Dr. Angel expressed belief this was a “good idea.”  (JE10, p. 176)  On March 13, 
2015, claimant returned to Dr. Angel in follow up of neuralgia complaints.  Claimant had 
not begun use of previously prescribed medication and stated she felt more fatigued 
than usual, but would be starting hyperbaric treatments and should not begin a new 
medication at this time.  Dr. Angel expressed support for claimant’s pursuit of hyperbaric 
treatment and held off on a new medication regimen.  (JE10, p. 177) 
On June 16, 2015, claimant underwent a SPECT study.  The reading physician 
identified a pattern of defect which could be compatible with traumatic brain injury and 
recommended correlation to anatomic imaging.  (JE15, p. 254)  Claimant underwent 
repeat SPECT study on October 19, 2015.  The results were read as similar to the prior 
examination, with the exception of a slightly more depressed right basal ganglion.  
(JE15, p. 255)  
Paul Harch, M.D., reviewed claimant’s SPECT studies of June and October 
2015.  In review of the June 2015 scan, Dr. Harch observed a constellation of findings 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 23 
 
 
consistent with history of traumatic brain injury and resection of arachnoid cyst.  (JE17, 
p. 264)  Dr. Harch also reviewed the October 2015 scan and compared it to the study of 
June 2015.  He offered an impression of homogenous, near normal, SPECT brain blood 
flow scan, with marked improvement after hyperbaric oxygen therapy.  (JE17, p. 263)   
Claimant presented to Ms. Dankof on March 4, 2016 in follow up of a February 
2016 fall at home.  Complaints of increased “[traumatic brain injury] symptoms,” 
including headaches, fatigue, dizziness, and nausea were noted.  (JE10, p. 186)  Due to 
claimant’s history of head injuries and increase in symptoms, Ms. Dankof ordered a 
brain MRI.  (JE10, p. 190)    
Per the orders of Ms. Dankof, claimant underwent a head MRI on March 22, 
2016.  The radiologist opined the study revealed stable encephalomalacia changes of 
the left temporal and left inferior frontal lobes, probably posttraumatic, but no new 
abnormalities.  (JE9, p. 159; JE10, p. 191) 
Following the brain MRI, claimant returned to Dr. Angel on April 7, 2016.  Dr. 
Angel noted increased and persistent complaints of fatigue, dizziness, nausea, and 
headaches following the February 2016 fall.  (JE10, p. 192)  Following examination and 
review of claimant’s hyperbaric treatment records, Dr. Angel opined claimant 
demonstrated an arachnoid cyst with “recent small injury” which likely caused a flare in 
symptoms.  He indicated claimant appeared to be responding positively to hyperbaric 
oxygen treatments.  (JE10, p. 195) 
On April 13, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. McKernan.  Dr. McKernan noted 
claimant presented for care of her neck and back pain and had suffered a fall at home in 
February 2016.  During that fall, claimant struck her knees and face, causing a black 
eye, swollen nose, left eye hemorrhage, and a cracked bone and blood vessel damage 
around the right eye.  (JE2, p. 54)  In discussion of symptoms, claimant complained of 
muscle pain, decreased range of motion, stiffness, neck pain, back pain, and hip pain.  
(JE2, p. 55)  Dr. McKernan performed osteopathic manipulation.  (JE2, p. 56) 
Dr. Angel authored a letter dated May 10, 2016, whereby he opined claimant had 
been compliant with treatment.  (CE5, p. 61)  He opined claimant was not capable of 
working full time and demonstrated decreased processing, which worsened under high 
stress situations.  With unpredictable waxing and waning symptoms, Dr. Angel noted 
periods where claimant was almost completely incapacitated from cognitive function.  
He also noted claimant suffered from acute episodes of fatigue with intermittent pain, 
which improved following breaks of 10 to 15 minutes.  (CE5, p. 62)   
Claimant returned to Dr. Angel on September 22, 2016.  Claimant reported a 
number of improvements in her symptomatology following hyperbaric oxygen treatment.  
(JE10, p. 197)  Dr. Angel opined claimant’s condition had improved.  (JE10, p. 201) 
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 24 
 
 
On October 11, 2016, claimant presented to Dr. McKernan with reports of left hip 
and back pain.  The back pain was denoted as localized in the left lower back, radiating 
down the left leg.  (JE2, p. 60)  Dr. McKernan performed osteopathic manipulation and 
recommended application of moist heat packs.  (JE2, pp. 62-63) 
Claimant returned to Dr. McKernan on February 7, 2017 with complaints of left 
hip, buttock, and low back pain.  Dr. McKernan assessed low back pain and cervicalgia; 
he performed osteopathic manipulation.  (JE37, pp. 390-392) 
Claimant applied for Social Security Disability benefits, alleging disability 
beginning March 24, 2014.  Her claim was denied initially in November 2014 and again 
on reconsideration in March 2015.  Claimant filed a request for hearing and a hearing 
was held on February 9, 2017.  Thereafter, claimant’s application for Social Security 
Disability benefits was denied by an administrative law judge’s decision, issued March 
30, 2017.  (DEG, pp. 35, 38)  The presiding administrative law judge authored an 18-
page decision, by which he determined claimant demonstrated the following severe 
impairments: cervicalgia; coronary artery disease; hypersomnia; trigeminal neuralgia; 
somatoform disorder; and history of traumatic brain injury.  (DEG, p. 40)  He ultimately 
found claimant had not been under a disability within the meaning of the Social Security 
Act.  (DEG, pp. 38, 55)  Claimant requested review of the administrative law judge’s 
decision and submitted reasons she disagreed with the decision.  Following review, the 
appeals council determined the supplied reasons did not provide a basis for changing 
the decision and denied claimant’s request for review.  (DEG, p. 56)  
From April 26, 2017 through July 21, 2017, claimant underwent outpatient 
speech therapy treatment with speech-language pathologist Courtney Huber of On With 
Life Outpatient Neurorehabilitation.  Treatment centered on cognitive-communication 
deficits related to a medical diagnosis of post-concussive syndrome.  At the time of her 
discharge, claimant had begun volunteering at a parish, completing clerical work.  
Claimant tracked her fatigue and stamina symptoms from July 20, 2017 through August 
22, 2017 and provided those logs to Ms. Huber for review.  Ms. Huber did so and 
authored a status note on August 28, 2017.  Thereby, Ms. Huber noted a shift of three-
hour length exacerbated claimant’s symptoms of exhaustion, weakness, dizziness, and 
nausea, to a degree she was forced to cancel her next volunteer shift.  As a result, Ms. 
Huber recommended claimant limit her shift length to 1.5 hours, which could be 
gradually increased in the event claimant’s symptoms improved.  (CE7, p. 64)   
On February 16, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. Angel.  Claimant indicated she 
finished hyperbaric oxygen treatment in December and had since noticed increased 
fatigue, dizziness, and headaches.  (JE10, p. 202)  Dr. Angel prescribed medication for 
encephalomalacia.  He raised the possibility in cognitive therapy due to “problems with 
executive processing.”  Dr. Angel also expressed concern about achieving control of 
claimant’s hypertension.  (JE10, p. 206) 
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 25 
 
 
On April 3, 2017, claimant telephoned Dr. Angel’s office with complaints of SI 
joint pain.  Claimant reported her hip popped during physical therapy the prior day and 
her muscles were now so tight she could not walk.  Dr. Angel prescribed Skelaxin.  
(JE10, pp. 207-208)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Angel on April 17, 2017 to discuss cognitive 
rehabilitation.  (JE10, p. 209)  Following examination, Dr. Angel opined the arachnoid 
cyst was stable and he did not recommend an additional MRI or surgical intervention.  
Due to worsened cognitive deficits, he referred claimant to On With Life for speech and 
occupational therapy.  He also recommended recheck of claimant’s blood pressure two 
to three times per week due to hypertension.  (JE10, p. 213)  
On June 23, 2017, claimant returned to Ms. Dankof with complaints of “major 
fatigue,” dizziness, balance issues, ringing in ears, and shakiness.  (JE10, p. 214)  Ms. 
Dankof ordered a series of laboratory studies.  (JE10, pp. 218-219)  Claimant returned 
to Dr. Angel on June 30, 2017.  Claimant reported improvement, but continued fatigue.  
Dr. Angel noted claimant’s blood pressure had increased over the previous months.  
(JE10, p. 220)  Dr. Angel ordered medication to treat hypertension, as well as hormone 
testing per Ms. Dankof.  He also recommended claimant continue cognitive therapy.  
(JE10, pp. 223-224) 
Claimant sought vocational assistance with Iowa Workforce Development.  
(Claimant's testimony)  By a determination dated August 18, 2017, Iowa Vocational 
Rehabilitation Services placed claimant in the “most significantly disabled” waiting list 
category.  (CE6, p. 63)  She was released from the program in December 2017, as she 
was unable to tolerate the required 20 hours of work per week.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On September 7, 2017, claimant presented to Dr. Angel.  Claimant reported 
suffering with “ice pick” headaches with associated dizziness and impacted balance.  
(JE10, p. 225)  Claimant reported improvement in headaches compared to three years 
prior.  Dr. Angel indicated claimant had failed multiple hypertensive medications and 
prescribed a trial of verapamil.  (JE10, pp. 225, 229) 
On January 24, 2018, claimant telephoned Ms. Dankof’s office with questions 
about her progesterone dosage.  Ms. Dankof opined the dosage was not too high and 
recommended endocrinology evaluation given claimant’s lab findings and history of 
head injuries.  (JE10, p. 230)  Pursuant to Ms. Dankof’s referral, on February 8, 2018, 
claimant was seen by Nancy Kane, M.D., for evaluation of possible pituitary issues. 
Following examination, Dr. Kane assured claimant her testing revealed no radiologic or 
biochemical evidence of hormonal issues.  (JE38, pp. 396-399) 
Claimant returned to Dr. McKernan on March 6, 2018.  Claimant reported 
recurrent left low back pain with left leg radiation which dissipated, but returned due to 
fatigue.  (JE2, p. 66)  Osteopathic manipulation was again performed.  (JE2, p. 68) 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 26 
 
 
At the referral of her attorney, claimant underwent an independent 
neuropsychological evaluation with clinical neuropsychologist, David Demarest, Ph.D., 
of On With Life.  As elements of the evaluation, claimant participated in clinical interview 
and comprehensive neuropsychological testing on May 23 and May 25, 2018.  Dr. 
Demarest performed a review of claimant’s medical records.  He noted he did not have 
copies of neuropsychological evaluations previously performed by Dr. Susan Andrews.  
(CE3, pp. 46-48) 
Dr. Demarest interviewed claimant independently and in conjunction with her 
father and son.  Claimant also underwent a battery of neuropsychological testing over a 
two-day period.  Dr. Demarest noted his time in evaluation, interview, records review, 
testing, feedback, and report writing, at no less than 15.5 hours.  (CE3, p. 48)  Dr. 
Demarest noted the clinical interviews lasted 3 hours; he detailed the content of said 
interviews.  (CE3, pp. 48-52)   
Dr. Demarest opined validity testing did not indicate frank malingering or less 
than optimal effort.  (CE3, p. 52)  Dr. Demarest opined claimant’s test scores fell in the 
moderate clinical depression range, as well as the severe clinical anxiety range.  (CE3, 
pp. 53-54)  He found claimant’s intellectual status fell no lower than average, with some 
skills falling in or above the high average range.  (CE3, pp. 53-56)  Dr. Demarest opined 
he found “very little, and not compelling data… for postulation of organic memory 
dysfunction.”  He further opined there was not data to support findings of cognitive 
impairment or postconcussional syndrome.  (CE3, p. 56)   
Dr. Demarest opined the inclusion of traumatic brain injury in claimant’s medical 
records was not well-established.  He posited the inclusion had perhaps resulted from 
practitioners’ opining without the benefit of all the evidence.  Dr. Demarest opined 
neuropsychologists hold the unique position of making such determinations after review 
of all the relevant data.  He identified consistency amongst four evaluating 
neuropsychologists in opining there was, or may well be, psychological overlay in 
claimant’s case.  He further opined that factors such as sleep disturbance, mood 
disturbance, and pain might be relevant in understanding claimant’s cognitive 
inefficiency.  Dr. Demarest noted evidence of brain dysfunction on MRI/CT scans, but 
opined the findings appeared to reflect chronic and stable encephalomalacia following 
cyst removal.  (CE3, p. 57)   
Dr. Demarest expressed belief claimant appeared “convinced” she suffered with 
brain injury, despite neuropsychological data which “broadly” did not support her 
conclusion.  (CE3, p. 58)  Dr. Demarest referenced an email authored by claimant in 
support of his opinion.  Therein, claimant referred to herself as a “BI (brain injury) 
survivor with a history of at least six brain injuries from various accidents.”  (CE3, p. 57) 
Dr. Demarest opined claimant’s mood, pain, and sleep difficulties did not help 
claimant’s cognitive efficiency and required intervention.  He also recommended 
discussion of psychotropic medication to treat anxiety and depression, as it also related 
to pain and cognitive functioning.  While frank malingering was not indicated on 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 27 
 
 
examination, Dr. Demarest recommended consideration of possible conversion 
disorder.  He described malingering as measuring more conscious factors, as opposed 
to unconscious psychological factors.  (CE3, p. 57)    
On June 1, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. McKernan with complaints of left low 
back pain, worsening over the prior six days.  Dr. McKernan also noted radiation to the 
left leg. (JE2, p. 71)  Dr. McKernan performed osteopathic manipulation and 
recommended stretching and ice massage.  (JE2, p. 73)  
Claimant’s counsel arranged for claimant to undergo an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) with board certified occupational medicine physician, Sunil Bansal, 
M.D.  Dr. Bansal examined and interviewed claimant on July 5, 2018; he authored a 
report containing his findings and opinions dated July 17, 2018.  (See CE1)  
As an element of his evaluation, Dr. Bansal performed a records review and 
authored an extensive summary of records, nearly 39 pages in length.  (CE1, pp. 1-39)  
In the subjective portion of his report, Dr. Bansal noted claimant suffered an injury on 
November 11, 2013 when she slipped on ice, landing on her “back and left side.”  Dr. 
Bansal noted the fall resulted in injuries to claimant’s head, neck, back, and left hip.  
(CE1, p. 39)  Claimant reported continued and worsened fatigue, daily headaches, 
difficulty with concentration and memory, impacted balance and sleep, dizziness, and 
increased neurological problems following the injury.  Claimant also reported constant 
left-sided neck pain, constant back pain radiating down her left leg, numbness of the left 
leg and foot, and constant left hip pain.  (CE1, p. 40) 
Dr. Bansal performed a physical examination.  On examination, he found: 
tenderness to palpation over the left cervical paraspinals musculature, greater on the 
left; spasms over the left cervical paraspinals; tenderness to palpation over the lower 
lumbar paraspinals; tenderness to palpation into the left greater trochanter; positive 
McCarthy sign in internal and external rotation of the left hip; left trochanteric bursal 
swelling; and loss of sensory discrimination over the left 4th and 5th toes.  Dr. Bansal 
also denoted measurements for range of motion of claimant’s neck, back, and left hip.  
(CE1, pp. 41-42) 
Following records review, interview, and examination, Dr. Bansal responded to 
discussion questions posed by claimant’s counsel.  Dr. Bansal was asked to focus upon 
conditions of claimant’s head, neck, back, and left hip.  In response to inquiry as to 
whether claimant had achieved MMI and if so, the extent of any permanent impairment, 
Dr. Bansal only addressed claimant’s left hip.  (CE1, p. 42)   
With respect to causal connection between claimant’s work injury and impacted 
body parts, Dr. Bansal opined: 
In my medical opinion, [claimant] presents as a complex case with 
significant prior and interim history related to a series of falls and 
accidents, resulting in significant neurologic, cervical spine, and lumbar 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 28 
 
 
spine related disability.  The left hip has a clear etiologic relationship to the 
November 11, 2013 injury.  This is based on a temporal relationship as 
well as mechanistic as she landed on her left side during the fall. 
(CE1, p. 43) 
Dr. Bansal opined claimant demonstrated swelling of the trochanteric bursa, 
consistent with trochanteric bursitis, as well as examination findings consistent with a 
labral tear.  He opined the November 11, 2013 fall “onto her left side” was a significant 
contributing factor in claimant’s left hip condition.  Dr. Bansal further opined claimant’s 
left hip condition was work-related.  (CE1, p. 43)  He recommended a diagnostic MRI of 
claimant’s left hip, with the results potentially indicating a need for cortisone injections, 
physical therapy, and/or surgical intervention.  Absent further treatment, placed claimant 
at MMI as of the date of his examination on July 5, 2018.  (CE1, pp. 42, 44)   
Dr. Bansal opined claimant sustained permanent impairment due to decrements 
in hip range of motion.  By his charted findings, Dr. Bansal noted a 2 percent whole 
person impairment for external rotation; his narrative report denotes a total 4 percent 
whole person impairment.  (CE1, p. 43)  Dr. Bansal recommended restrictions of: no 
frequent bending, squatting, climbing, or twisting; no prolonged standing or walking 
greater than 60 minutes at a time; and avoidance of multiple steps, stairs, or ladders.  
He opined claimant’s left hip condition did not prevent her from returning to her former 
work.  (CE1, p. 44) 
An invoice for Dr. Bansal’s IME identifies a physical examination cost of $607.00 
and a report cost of $3,361.00, for a total IME cost of $3,968.00.  (CE18, p. 100) 
Defense counsel provided updated medical records to Dr. Tranel for review.  
Following review, Dr. Tranel authored a supplemental report dated July 28, 2018.  
Thereby, Dr. Tranel noted claimant had undergone two comprehensive 
neuropsychological evaluations, with Dr. Riss and Dr. Demarest, since the date of his 
evaluation on July 30, 2014.  He summarized the findings and opinions of these 
providers.  Following review, Dr. Tranel opined their findings and conclusions were 
consistent with those he previously expressed.  He noted both found essentially intact 
cognitive functioning and evidence of elevated somatic symptom reporting.  (DEI, pp. 
96-97)   
Dr. Tranel indicated claimant’s medical history contained five neuropsychological 
evaluations, all of which concluded claimant did not have cognitive impairments, but did 
have elevated somatic symptom reporting.  He noted three evaluations had been 
performed post-November 2013 fall and made it “clear beyond any reasonable doubt” 
that claimant did not have any neuropsychological dysfunction related to the incident.  
(DEI, p. 97)  Dr. Tranel went on: 
In fact, I would go so far as to say that in my many decades of practice as 
a clinical neuropsychologist, I have almost never seen this degree of 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 29 
 
 
replication and consistency in documentation of intact cognitive 
functioning by many different providers on many different occasions.  The 
evidence for intact cognitive functioning is, in a word, incontrovertible. 
(DEI, p. 97)    
Dr. Tranel indicated his opinions remained unchanged from those expressed in 
his 2014 report.  He opined claimant’s medical records definitively and unequivocally 
documented claimant did not sustain any neuropsychological injury in the November 
2013 fall.  Accordingly, he found no basis to causally relate any subsequent 
neurologically-related treatment to the incident.  (DEI, p. 97)  Specifically, Dr. Tranel 
opined none of the neurological treatment since November 11, 2013 was causally 
related to the injury on that date, including hyperbaric treatment, care at On With Life, 
and any psychological/psychiatric treatment.  (DEI, pp. 97-99)  He also opined 
claimant’s perceived endocrine problems or fatigue related to “brain injury” were not 
causally related to the November 2013 incident.  (DEI, p. 98)  Dr. Tranel opined, with 
increased certainty, that claimant had a somatic symptom disorder and presented as a 
“prototype, textbook example” of such.  (DEI, p. 99)  
Defendants’ counsel conferenced with Dr. Jackson regarding claimant’s care and 
the opinions offered by Dr. Bansal.  Thereafter, on August 2, 2018, defense counsel 
authored a letter to Dr. Jackson purporting to summarize the content of their 
conference.  Dr. Jackson signed the letter the same day, expressing agreement with the 
contained statements.  By the letter, Dr. Jackson confirmed: he treated claimant for 
musculoskeletal complaints from March 19, 2014 to July 3, 2014; claimant was placed 
at MMI on May 30, 2014; and claimant sustained no permanent impairment and 
required no restrictions from a musculoskeletal standpoint.  Dr. Jackson expressly 
disagreed with Dr. Bansal’s opinion that claimant sustained a left hip injury as a result of 
the November 2013 fall which resulted in permanent impairment and a need for 
permanent restrictions.  Dr. Jackson stated claimant did not complain of left hip pain or 
problems during the course of his treatment, nor did he find any left hip issues on 
physical examination.  Dr. Jackson indicated diagnosis and treatment of hip conditions 
represented a significant component of his medical practice and accordingly, he would 
have identified such a condition if it existed at the time of his treatment.  He therefore 
opined claimant did not injure her left hip as a result of the November 2013 fall and that 
if such complaints currently exist, they were not related to the alleged work injury.  
(DEH, pp. 60-61) 
At the referral of Ms. Dankof, claimant returned to Dr. Smith on August 3, 2018 
with reports of low back and neck pain.  Claimant complained of worsening low back 
pain with radiation to the left buttock, calf, and foot.  Claimant also reported worsened 
bilateral lateral and posterior neck pain.  (JE11, p. 240)  Dr. Smith ordered MRIs of the 
cervical and lumbar spines.  (JE11, p. 244)  Claimant underwent a lumbar spine MRI on 
August 14, 2018.  Results were read as revealing: multilevel spondylosis, greatest at 
L4-L5 and L5-S1; and atrophy of the posterior paraspinals musculature.  (JE18, p. 265) 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 30 
 
 
Claimant’s counsel provided Dr. Bansal with additional medical records for 
review.  After reviewing said records, Dr. Bansal authored a supplemental report dated 
September 5, 2018.  (CE2, pp. 45-45A)  Dr. Bansal noted a question had arisen 
regarding whether claimant had reported her left hip symptoms during her course of 
treatment with Dr. Jackson.  Dr. Bansal indicated he could not say whether Dr. Jackson 
had addressed claimant’s left hip; instead, he noted claimant reported hip complaints in 
a February 19, 2014 appointment with Dr. Schmolck.  Dr. Bansal stood by the opinions 
included in his original IME report and again opined claimant’s examination findings 
were consistent with labral pathology.  (CE2, pp. 45A-45B)    
Dr. Jackson authored a letter in response to Dr. Bansal, dated September 25, 
2018.  Dr. Jackson reviewed all his records regarding claimant’s treatment.  He 
indicated claimant did not report any complaints of hip pain, did not indicate hip pain on 
the questionnaire she completed, and no hip pathology was found on physical 
examination.  Dr. Jackson again opined claimant did not injure her left hip or sustain a 
labral tear as a result of the November 2013 fall.  He expressly disagreed with Dr. 
Bansal’s opinion that claimant presented with such pathology attributable to the work 
injury, on the basis that a labral injury would have yielded immediate pain complaints.  
(DEL, p. 1)   
Claimant has not worked since March 2014.  (Claimant's testimony)  By 
claimant’s testimony, all her symptoms and conditions worsened or intensified following 
the November 11, 2013 incident.  As of the date of hearing, claimant’s primary 
complaint was of fatigue.  With cognitive or physical activities, claimant testified she 
develops headaches, nausea, insomnia, and lack of balance.  She also complained of 
back pain and hip pain, with the hip coming out of alignment.  Claimant expressed belief 
that during her course of treatment, Dr. Jackson found her left hip was out of place.  
She testified that standing or walking for extended periods causes back and hip pain, as 
well as nerve pain in her feet and lower legs.  Sitting results in left low back pain.  
(Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant underwent significant medical treatment which she argues is related to 
the alleged work injury of November 11, 2013.  Claimant submitted a medical expense 
summary with corresponding medical bills at Claimant’s Exhibit 19, encompassing care 
from November 2013 to the date of hearing.  The detailed expenses relate to care not 
authorized by defendants, totaling $107,539.98.  (CE19, pp. 101-212)  Claimant also 
submitted a summary of out-of-pocket expenses she incurred.  Such expenses spanned 
the period of January 31, 2014 through January 4, 2017 and totaled $18,567.47.  
(CE22, pp. 215-224)  Claimant also submitted an extensive request for medical mileage 
reimbursement, found in Claimant’s Exhibit 17. The request encompasses both 
authorized and unauthorized care with providers from November 14, 2013 to the date of 
hearing.  The grand total of requested mileage reimbursement is $8,775.98.  (CE17, pp. 
88-99)  
Claimant’s testified at length during evidentiary hearing.  On direct examination, 
claimant displayed extensive and specific knowledge regarding her medical history and 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 31 
 
 
conditions.  On cross examination, however, claimant’s testimony was much less clear; 
particularly, it seemed, when confronted with medical records which did not coincide 
with her specific recollections.  Claimant’s demeanor at hearing was acceptable and did 
not indicate a lack of veracity or intent to mislead.   
Claimant’s pattern of testimony is reconcilable with a broader pattern of behavior 
in her medical care, even predating the alleged November 11, 2013 work injury.  
Following the 2005 stress ball incident, Dr. Fackrell described claimant’s complaints as 
out of proportion and bizarre; he raised the possibility of conversion hysteria.  Despite 
specialists opining the discovered arachnoid cyst was incidental, claimant repeatedly 
expressed belief the stress ball incident caused the cyst.  During her course of care 
following the August 2012 motor vehicle accident, claimant was evaluated at the Mayo 
Clinic.  Three evaluating physicians noted claimant demonstrated clear, fixed medical 
ideas.  Dr. Smigielski noted claimant held her opinions quite strongly and appeared to 
dismiss alternative explanations.  Dr. Szostek opined claimant demonstrated fixed 
medical ideas.  Dr. Marsh, similarly, noted very fixed and clear ideas.  When 
neurosurgeon, Dr. Marsh, disagreed with claimant’s opinions, she questioned his 
experience in treating arachnoid cysts.     
Claimant has also undergone a number of neuropsychological evaluations, each 
yielding consistent results.  In 2008, Dr. Andrikopoulos opined claimant demonstrated 
gross over-reporting of symptoms.  Following the alleged November 11, 2013 injury, 
claimant was evaluated by Drs. Tranel and Demarest.  Dr. Tranel noted profound 
overemphasis and over-reporting of symptoms.  He diagnosed somatic symptom 
disorder of a longstanding nature; he described claimant as a prototype, textbook 
example of that diagnosis.  He further opined claimant’s diagnosis directly contributed to 
a number of medical events and outcomes over the preceding decade.  He also 
described claimant as susceptible to iatrogenic influence from well-intentioned experts.  
Dr. Demarest raised the possibility of a conversion disorder and noted claimant 
appeared convinced she suffered with brain injury, despite neuropsychological data 
which broadly did not support her conclusion.  
Given this medical and neuropsychological background, I am unable to find 
claimant a credible witness.  While I do not find any intentional action on the part of 
claimant to mislead this court or her medical providers, her testimony cannot be relied 
upon absent external corroboration.     
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of employment on November 11, 2013. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6). 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 32 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
Defendants do not dispute that claimant fell while leaving work on November 11, 
2013.  Claimant reported the fall the day after the event and three witnesses authored 
statements that they observed claimant on the ground and helped her to stand.  
Defendants, however, contest the incident resulted in any injury to claimant.  Review of 
the medical records authored by authorized providers, Drs. Nayeri and Jackson, refute 
defendants’ contention.  Three days after the fall, Dr. Nayeri assessed lumbar and 
cervical strains, as well as a knee contusion; she began a course of care. Ultimately that 
course of care led to Dr. Jackson.  Dr. Jackson assessed cervicothoracolumbar 
strain/sprain and offered care, including removing claimant from work.  Dr. Jackson 
ultimately opined claimant achieved MMI on May 30, 2014 for cervical, thoracic, and 
lumbar sprains/strains. 
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 33 
 
 
The medical records of these authorized providers establish claimant sustained 
musculoskeletal injuries as a result of the undisputed fall on November 11, 2013.  It is 
therefore determined that claimant met her burden of proving she sustained an injury on 
November 11, 2013, arising out of and in the course of her employment.   
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
temporary disability and, if so, whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability 
benefits from January 16, 2014 through February 7, 2014. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of 
recuperation from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker 
is entitled to temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is 
disabled by the injury.  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work, or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar 
to the work performed at the time of injury.  Section 85.33(1).  
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 34 
 
 
extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor 
an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the 
healing period. 
Defendants paid claimant temporary disability benefits in accordance with Dr. 
Jackson’s off work restriction, beginning in March 2014.  There is no dispute with 
respect to these benefits.  The dispute in this matter pertains to whether defendants are 
responsible for an additional, prior period of temporary disability benefits: January 16, 
2014 through February 7, 2014.  Therefore, I must determine if the work injury was a 
cause of temporary disability during the claimed period and, if so, whether claimant is 
entitled to temporary disability benefits during that period. 
Claimant alleges she was off work from January 16, 2014 through February 7, 
2014 pursuant to the order of personal provider, Ms. Dankof.  Review of Ms. Dankof’s 
contemporaneous medical record reveals she removed claimant from work due to 
neurological/cognitive symptoms.  I must, therefore, determine if claimant has proven 
the neurological/cognitive symptoms were causally related to the work injury of 
November 11, 2013. 
Ms. Dankof did not opine as to any causal relationship between the neurological 
symptoms and the work injury.  Her contemporaneous record denotes multiple possible 
bases for the symptoms, including elevated blood pressure, traumatic brain injury after 
a fall, stress of a new job, possible cyst worsening, and possible seizure disorder.   
Claimant argues the opinions of Drs. Schmolck and Angel are entitled to greatest 
weight.  Claimant presented to neurologist, Dr. Schmolck on February 19, 2014.  Dr. 
Schmolck’s record indicates claimant missed work due to job-related stress.  Dr. 
Schmolck opined claimant suffered a whiplash-type injury in the November 11, 2013 
fall, which caused headaches and neck pain.  She described claimant’s cognitive 
symptoms as more difficult to explain, but ultimately opined the symptoms were also 
related to the whiplash-type fall.  In her analysis, Dr. Schmolck highlighted a resolution 
of any of claimant’s symptoms and denial of cognitive symptoms prior to the work injury.  
Dr. Angel, for his part, opined via a letter dated December 16, 2014, that the fall on 
November 11, 2013 was a significant and material aggravation of the arachnoid cyst, 
with worsened symptomatology. 
I award no weight to Dr. Schmolck’s opinions, as they are largely based on 
claimant’s reports regarding the event and medical history.  As set forth supra, I do not 
find claimant to be a credible witness.  Additionally, claimant denied suffering cognitive 
symptoms following the 2012 motor vehicle accident.  However, the medical records 
establish neurological symptoms were evaluated by a number of physicians during this 
time, including at the Mayo Clinic, with potential etiologies of postconcussive syndrome 
or arachnoid cyst.  I also award no weight to the summary opinions of Dr. Angel, as he 
lacks any specialty in care of the brain, such as neurosurgery, neurology, or 
neuropsychology.  No such provider opined claimant’s injury resulted in aggravation of 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 35 
 
 
the arachnoid cyst.  Furthermore, throughout his care of claimant, Dr. Angel regularly 
offered opinions which support claimant’s beliefs, but run contrary to the opinions of 
specialists.  For these reasons, I award no weight to Dr. Angel’s opinions.   
Instead, I award greatest weight to the opinions of Drs. Tranel and Demarest, as 
supported by the findings of Dr. Riss.   
Per the recommendation of Dr. Jackson, defendants sent claimant to Dr. Tranel 
in July 2014 for neuropsychological evaluation.  Thereafter, Dr. Tranel opined there was 
no evidence of traumatic brain injury or concussion in the November 2013 fall and 
further, that the fall was not a plausible cause of significant brain injury.  Dr. Tranel 
found: no evidence of permanent neurological injury in the fall; intact, normal 
neurological status, without indication of brain damage; and no cognitive or behavioral 
deficits related to the fall.  He diagnosed somatic symptom disorder.  Dr. Tranel 
specifically found no diagnosis or condition related to the fall and also opined the fall did 
not aggravate any preexisting conditions.  He opined claimant would have achieved 
MMI by November 18, 2013. 
Claimant was referred to Dr. Riss by her own providers.  Dr. Riss opined 
claimant’s neuropsychological testing revealed overall intact neurocognitive abilities.  
Dr. Demarest, claimant’s chosen independent neuropsychologist, opined the data did 
not support findings of cognitive impairment or postconcussional syndrome.  He opined 
the inclusion of a traumatic brain injury diagnosis was not well-established and the 
dysfunction seen on MRI/CT scans reflected chronic and stable encephalomalacia 
following cyst removal.  He noted claimant appeared convinced she suffered with brain 
injury, despite neuropsychological data which broadly did not support her conclusion.  
He raised the possibility of conversion disorder.   
Dr. Tranel reviewed the neuropsychological evaluations of both Drs. Riss and 
Demarest.  He described the resulting findings and opinions as consistent, with 
essentially intact cognitive functioning and evidence of elevated somatic symptom 
reporting.  Dr. Tranel opined the three evaluations post November 11, 2013 work injury 
established, beyond a reasonable doubt, that claimant did not have any 
neuropsychological dysfunction related to the fall.  He went on to opine claimant did not 
sustain any neuropsychological injury in the fall, there was no basis to causally relate 
subsequent treatment to the incident, and any allegation of endocrine or fatigue 
problems was not related to the fall.  Dr. Tranel described claimant as a textbook 
example of somatic symptom disorder.   
Drs. Tranel and Demarest are specialists who performed extensive 
neuropsychological evaluations.  These evaluations, as well as that of Dr. Riss, yielded 
consistent results.  Both Drs. Tranel and Demarest independently found claimant did not 
demonstrate neurological injury, but rather, endorsed diagnoses of somatic conditions.  
As I provide greatest weight to the opinions of Drs. Tranel and Demarest, I find claimant 
has failed to prove she sustained neurological/cognitive injury in the November 11, 2013 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 36 
 
 
fall.  As a result, any time off work to treat such conditions per the order of unauthorized 
provider, Ms. Dankof, is not defendant’s responsibility.   
Assuming arguendo, that claimant’s neurological symptoms were causally 
related to the work injury, claimant failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence 
that she was off work during the claimed period.  The record contains claimant’s 
paystubs from QCI, dated January 17, 2014 and January 31, 2014.  On those dates, 
claimant was paid for 72.75 and 62.25 hours, respectively.  While the stubs do not 
contain the specific pay period dates, it is claimant who bears the burden of proving she 
was off work during this period.  Claimant’s testimony that QCI paid one month behind 
and that she was off work during the claimed period is not sufficient to meet her burden.  
Claimant was not found to be a credible witness and offered no supportive 
documentation for her position, such as QCI payroll policies. 
Claimant has failed to prove entitlement to temporary disability benefits for the 
period of January 16, 2014 through February 7, 2014.   
The next issue for determination is whether the alleged injury is a cause of 
permanent disability and, if so, the extent of any industrial disability.   
Claimant has alleged injuries to four body parts as a result of the November 11, 
2013 work injury: neck, back, left hip, and head/neurological.  When considering the 
questions of causation and permanent impairment, the opinions of medical providers 
are of paramount importance, particularly in instances when the claimant is not found to 
be a credible witness.   
Claimant established she sustained temporary injuries to her neck and back as a 
result of the work injury.  However, Dr. Jackson opined the injuries resolved, without 
permanent impairment or need for permanent restrictions by May 30, 2014.  These 
opinions are unrebutted, including by claimant’s IME physician, Dr. Bansal.  
Accordingly, it is determined claimant has failed to prove the work injury was a cause of 
permanent disability to her neck and/or back, and no permanent disability benefits are 
awarded. 
Dr. Bansal did opine claimant suffered permanent impairment as a result of the 
alleged injury to claimant’s left hip.  However, his opinion is refuted by that of Dr. 
Jackson, who specifically opined claimant did not suffer with a left hip injury as a result 
of the November 11, 2013 fall.  I award the opinions of Dr. Jackson greater weight than 
those of Dr. Bansal.  Dr. Jackson provided contemporaneous evaluation of claimant’s 
musculoskeletal complaints and crafted a course of treatment for such complaints.  He 
represented he evaluated claimant’s left hip and found no conditions requiring 
treatment.  This contemporaneous evaluation and care entitles Dr. Jackson’s opinions 
to greater weight than those of Dr. Bansal, who evaluated claimant on only one 
occasion, over four years removed from the injury and subsequent to a number of 
potential intervening incidents.  As I award greater weight to the opinions of Dr. 
Jackson, it is determined claimant has failed to prove the work injury was a cause of 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 37 
 
 
permanent disability to claimant’s left hip and no permanent disability benefits are 
awarded. 
As set forth supra, claimant failed to prove a head/neurological injury as a result 
of the work injury.  Furthermore, Dr. Tranel specifically opined claimant sustained no 
permanent impairment as a result of any alleged neurological injury and claimant’s own 
IME physicians, Drs. Demarest and Bansal, did not quantify any permanent disability as 
a result of these symptoms. Accordingly, it is determined claimant has failed to prove 
the work injury was a cause of permanent neurological disability and no permanent 
disability benefits are awarded.   
Claimant has failed to prove the work injury of November 11, 2013 is a cause of 
permanent disability.  As claimant failed to establish an entitlement to permanent 
disability benefits, consideration of the issues of commencement date for permanent 
disability benefits and any credit under Iowa Code section 85.34(7) are unnecessary.  
The next issue for determination is the rate of compensation. 
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury.  Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings that fairly represent the employee’s customary earnings, however.  Section 
85.36(6). 
The parties dispute computation of claimant’s gross average weekly wage.  
Claimant’s calculation, as submitted at hearing, argues for a gross average weekly 
wage of $1,447.50.  To reach this figure, claimant uses earnings from 9 of the 13 weeks 
preceding the work injury.  She excludes 4 weeks, 31 percent of the 13 listed, as 
unrepresentative, as she only worked between 28 and 34 hours during those weeks and 
claimant believes they are not representative.    
After review of the entirety of the record, I adopt defendants’ calculation of 
claimant’s gross average weekly wage.  Claimant’s computation considers only 9 weeks 
of earnings; she does not substitute argued representative weeks for the ones she 
excluded.  Defendants, on the other hand, use 13 weeks in the computation, as 
statutorily outlined.  Additionally, after review of claimant’s enclosed pay records, I find 
the 13 weeks of earnings preceding the work injury are representative of claimant’s 
customary earnings.  Claimant’s earnings during the 13 weeks preceding the injury 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 38 
 
 
appear consistent with her prolonged pattern of work hours.  Over those 13 weeks, 
claimant worked between 28 and 34 hours 31 percent of the time.  Review of the 20 
weeks prior to injury reveals claimant worked in this range of hours 40 percent of the 
time.  In the 66 weeks prior to the injury, claimant worked in this range of hours 36 
percent of the time.  I, therefore, find the 13 weeks of earnings immediately preceding 
the injury are representative of claimant’s customary earnings.  
Claimant’s gross average weekly wage is found to be $1,345.80.  The parties 
stipulated claimant was single and entitled to one exemption.  The proper rate of 
compensation is therefore, $757.52.    
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
medical expenses found in Exhibits 19 and 22, as well as medical mileage found in 
Exhibit 17. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
When dealing with unauthorized care, to be entitled to payment, claimant must 
establish the care was rendered on a compensable claim.  That being established, 
claimant must establish that the care provided on the compensable claim was both 
reasonable and the outcome more beneficial than the care offered by the defendants.  
Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 206 (Iowa 2010). 
Defendants authorized care or evaluation with Concentra, Dr. Jackson, and Dr. 
Tranel.  Defendants are responsible and shall hold claimant harmless for any medical 
expenses causally related to this authorized medical care, including incidental medical 
mileage.   
Claimant failed to prove compensable injury to her left hip and/or 
head/neurological.  Any medical care and incidental expenses related to these 
conditions are not defendants’ responsibility.   
Claimant did prove she sustained temporary injury to her neck and back.  To the 
extent claimant requests payment of expenses related to unauthorized care of these 
compensable musculoskeletal conditions, claimant’s request fails.  Defendants provided 
reasonable and prompt care of these complaints and there is no evidence the 
unauthorized care sought by claimant was more beneficial than that already provided by 
defendants.  Accordingly, such expenses are not defendants’ responsibility. 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 39 
 
 
The expenses claimed by claimant and in evidence at Exhibits 17, 19, and 22, 
are extensive.  If claimant believes these exhibits include expenses which are the 
responsibility of defendants per this decision and those expenses remain unpaid, 
claimant shall serve an updated list of such expenses upon defendants within 10 days 
of the date of this decision.  If a dispute remains thereafter, either party may request a 
specific determination by a motion for rehearing.   
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of an independent medical examination performed by Dr. Bansal. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Claimant requests reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s IME expense.  Defendants 
deny claimant is entitled to reimbursement on the basis defendants previously paid for 
claimant’s IME with Dr. Demarest.     
Claimant is limited to one reimbursable IME under section 85.39.  Larson Mfg. 
Co., Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009).  Accordingly, claimant is not 
entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s IME, as defendants previously paid for 
claimant’s IME with Dr. Demarest in connection with this proceeding.   
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to penalty 
benefits under Iowa Code section 86.13 and, if so, how much. 
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 86.13 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 
N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  
Delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable investigation is 
not unreasonable.  Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 (Iowa 1995).   
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  An issue of law is fairly debatable if 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 40 
 
 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 
(Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which 
would support a finding favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 
N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).  
An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
Claimant argues entitlement to penalty benefits on the bases of underpaid 
temporary disability benefits and nonpayment of permanent disability benefits.  No 
additional temporary disability benefits were found owing by this decision and thus, 
there is no basis for penalty benefits.  Further, defendants prevailed on the issue of 
computation of gross average weekly wage; therefore, any alleged underpayment 
attributable to payment of temporary weekly benefits at a lesser rate of compensation 
was fairly debatable and does not support an award of penalty benefits.  Finally, this 
decision awarded claimant no permanent disability benefits and thus, there is no basis 
for an award of penalty benefits due to nonpayment of permanent disability benefits.   
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of the costs of: 
$100.00 filing fee; $6.74 service fee; $197.75 deposition fee; and $3,361.00 report fee 
of Dr. Bansal.  (CE20, p. 213)   
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 41 
 
 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).  
Claimant prevailed on her claim that she sustained an injury arising out of and in 
the course of her employment and as such, an award of costs is appropriate.  The costs 
of filing fee ($100.00), service fee ($6.74), and deposition fee ($197.75) are allowable 
costs and are taxed to defendants.  Claimant is not permitted to receive reimbursement 
for the full cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME as a practitioner’s report under rule 4.33.  Rather, 
the Iowa Supreme Court has ruled only the portion of the IME expense incurred in 
preparation of the written report can be taxed.  Des Moines Area Regional Transit 
Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015).  Dr. Bansal identified costs of 
$3,361.00 in conjunction with preparation of his written report.  However, I do not find 
this cost reasonable for taxation to defendants.  Dr. Bansal was asked to address four 
alleged conditions, yet his report only specifically addresses one of the conditions.  I find 
$1,000.00 of Dr. Bansal’s report fee is appropriate to tax to defendants as a 
practitioner’s report. 
Defendants are taxed with costs in the amount of $1,304.49 ($100.00 + $6.74 + 
$197.75 + $1,000.00 = $1,304.49). 
 
 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 42 
 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings by way of additional periods 
of temporary disability benefits or any permanent disability benefits.  
Defendants shall pay unto claimant the underpayment, if any, in temporary 
disability benefits resulting from a determination of claimant’s proper rate of 
compensation as seven hundred fifty-seven and 52/100 dollars ($757.52).   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.  Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a 
lump sum together with interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable 
and not paid when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due 
weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an 
annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. 
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants shall pay claimant’s prior medical expenses submitted by claimant at 
the hearing as set forth in the decision.  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33 as set forth in the 
decision.   
Signed and filed this __8th __ day of April, 2020. 
 
 
 
        ERICA J. FITCH 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

UNDERWOOD V. ALLEGIS GROUP, INC. d/b/a TEKSYSTEMS 
Page 43 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Robert Tucker (via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES)  
