Case Number: 5061882
Case Title:  DAVIS, MAGDALENA B V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Davis Magdalena-5061882D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MAGDALENA BARBARA DAVIS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                         File No. 5061882 
 
 
  : 
IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, 
  :                  ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  : 
STATE OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :                        Head Note:  2301 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Magdalena Davis, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Iowa State Penitentiary (ISP), employer and State of Iowa 
as insurer, both as defendants. 
This matter was heard on September 10, 2019 by Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Benjamin Humphrey, with a final submission date of 
October 22, 2019. 
By order of delegation of authority, Deputy Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner Jim Christenson was appointed to prepare the findings of fact and 
proposed decision in this case due to the unavailability of Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Humphrey.  As a part of that order of delegation, the 
parties were given 14 days to notify the undersigned if they believed that demeanor was 
a substantial issue in this matter, and whether a rehearing of the demeanor testimony 
was required. 
Neither party filed a request within 14 days identifying demeanor as a substantial 
issue in this case, or if a demeanor hearing was required.  Under 17A.15(2), and the 
Commissioner’s order of delegation, the undersigned performed a review of the 
evidentiary record in this case and issues this arbitration decision under the direction of 
the Commissioner. 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-20, 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-F, and the testimony of claimant and Dennis Davis. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Aug-20  15:11:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
Joint Exhibit 6 in the record is titled “Various Deposition Transcripts with 
Exhibits.”  Joint Exhibit 6 contains the depositions of Phyllis Porter, Abigail Heins, 
Cynthia Fedler, Amanda Dodson, Patti Watchtendorf and Tasha Whalen. 
The depositions for Joint Exhibit 6 contain exhibits that were used as a part of the 
depositions.  When Joint Exhibit 6 was initially filed, the exhibits to the depositions were 
not filed with each deposition, but were merely filed in a pile at the end of the exhibit. 
For clarity of the record, the undersigned requested Joint Exhibit 6 to be re-filed 
so the exhibits were with each deposition.  After several attempts, the depositions in 
Joint Exhibit 6 were finally filed with the correlating exhibits.  However, because the 
exhibits and depositions were paginated when initially filed, the pagination of the 
depositions and exhibits is not sequential.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
Whether the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation of Workers’ Compensation 
has subject matter jurisdiction regarding this matter. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
employment. 
Whether the injury is a cause of temporary disability. 
Whether the injury is the cause of a permanent disability; and if so, 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
Credit. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was 47 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant graduated from high 
school.  Claimant earned an associate’s degree in nursing.  (Transcript pages 11-12) 
Claimant has worked at a nursing home and a county health care center.  (Tr. 
pp. 11-12) 
Claimant started her job as an R.N. at ISP in June of 1994.  (Tr. p. 12)  
Claimant’s job duties included, but were not limited to, care of inmates in the infirmary, 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
emergency care, acute care, and hospice care.  Claimant also provided emergency 
care to employees at ISP Health Services.  (Tr. pp. 12-13) 
In 2008, claimant was accused of having sexual relations with an offender.  
Claimant was cleared of the charge.  Claimant testified that one of the people who 
made the allegations was Tasha Whalen, R.N.  Claimant said Ms. Whalen was made 
director of nursing (DON) in 2013.  (Tr. pp. 13-14) 
In 2009, claimant’s husband was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  (Tr. 
p. 14) 
In 2011, claimant found her brother in a car wreck.  Claimant’s brother was 
paralyzed after the accident.  (Tr. p. 15) 
In 2015, claimant’s father was killed in motor vehicle accident.  (Tr. p. 15) 
In 2016, claimant’s son was stabbed.  Claimant received a phone call regarding 
the incident at approximately 2:30 in the morning when he was life-flighted to Iowa City 
for care.  (Tr. pp. 74-75, 86) 
Claimant’s prior medical history is relevant.  Claimant was evaluated at the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) by Don St. John, PA-C for anxiety in 
August of 2013.  Claimant indicated a history of anxiety.  Stressors included finding her 
younger brother in a motor vehicle accident, her children, and her husband, who had 
lymphoma.  Claimant was assessed as having generalized anxiety disorder.  (Joint 
Exhibit 1, pp. 1-4) 
In October 2014 and January of 2015, claimant saw PA St. John for anxiety.  
Claimant’s stressors included building a new home and issues with her son.  (JE 1, pp. 
5-11) 
In April of 2016, claimant was evaluated by PA St. John for anxiety.  Claimant 
had been spending too much time in bed.  Stressors for claimant included her father’s 
death in a motor vehicle accident, and legal worries about her house.  (JE 1, p. 12) 
In November of 2016, claimant was treated by PA St. John for anxiety.  (JE 1, p. 
38)  In September 2017, claimant was seen by PA St. John for medication 
management.  Claimant indicated she was more anxious and had stopped seeing a 
mental health counselor.  Claimant also indicated she was making poor decisions, such 
as picking up a hitchhiker and speaking personally with inmates.  Claimant noted she 
was having difficulty at work getting along with others.  Claimant also noted more 
conflicts with her husband, mother and sister.  Claimant was recommended to restart 
with medication of buspirone and restart counseling.  (JE 1, pp. 46-48) 
On or about October 2, 2017, DON Whalen told nurses at ISP to begin flu shots 
the next day.  The following day, on or about October 3, 2017, Julie Woolover, R.N., at 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
ISP, told claimant the flu shots were not to be given and instead nurses were to follow 
CDC guidelines regarding which inmates would get flu shots.  Claimant disagreed with 
R.N. Woolover, based on earlier instruction, and an argument resulted.  (Tr. pp. 18-19; 
Ex. 1, p. 1) 
Between October 3, 2017 and October 10, 2017, claimant filed four reports with 
her employer regarding disagreements with R.N. Woolover.  (Exs. 1-4) 
On November 7, 2017, claimant saw PA St. John.  Claimant indicated her 
daughter and two-year-old grandson had moved in with her.  Claimant’s daughter was 
married three months prior and now was planning a divorce.  Claimant indicated stress 
from work and concerns with her daughter working at ISP.  Claimant was assessed as 
having symptom aggravation due to issues with sleep.  (JE 1, p. 54) 
Claimant returned to PA St. John on December 14, 2017.  Claimant had stress 
and conflicts at work.  Claimant had stress with her younger son coming home from 
school and staying out late partying.  (JE 1, pp. 56-58) 
On January 8, 2018, claimant went to get a sick call slip from ISP housing units.  
While getting the call slips, claimant stopped to talk with the staff psychologist about 
family issues.  Claimant returned to the nursing charting room.  At hearing, claimant 
testified she believed that two co-workers, Correctional Officer (C.O.) Roth and Amanda 
Dodson, R.N., were monitoring her on ISP cameras.  Claimant said she felt like she was 
being stalked.  (Tr. pp. 19-21) 
On January 10, 2018, claimant was put on FMLA leave for illness until 
January 23, 2018.  (Ex. D. p. 24) 
In a January 24, 2018 incident report, claimant indicated she returned to the 
nurse’s charting room on January 8, 2018 and overheard C.O. Roth tell Nurse Dodson 
that claimant was gone for an hour.  In an incident report, she confronted C.O. Roth and 
Roth told her “I don’t know what your daughter thought she heard, but she is a fucking 
liar.”  Claimant began to cry and reported the incident to DON Whalen.  Claimant 
indicated she felt she was being hunted, stalked, harassed and bullied.  (Ex. 5) 
On January 9, 2018, claimant was seen by William Schultz, M.D.  Claimant 
reported problems with depression and anxiety and requested time off from work.  
(JE 2, p. 142) 
Claimant said that on the night of January 23, 2018, she got a call from her 
daughter.  Her daughter said that she saw R.N. Dodson and a Sergeant Lobberecht go 
into a room and close the door and begin to talk.  Claimant’s daughter told claimant she 
thought that R.N. Dodson and Sergeant Lobberecht were talking about claimant.  (Tr. 
pp. 22-23) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
Claimant returned to work on January 24, 2018.  She said that on her return to 
work, DON Whalen accused claimant of making inappropriate statements in front of an 
inmate.  Claimant testified a co-worker told her that the work environment was toxic and 
that “. . . people were talking about things that had occurred in 2008, ten years ago, and 
she told me that I needed to remain in the lab for the rest of the day and not talk to 
anyone.”  (Tr. p. 24) 
Claimant said that on January 24, 2018, she wrote the complaint found at 
Exhibit 5.  The complaint concerns claimants’ allegations that C.O. Roth and Amanda 
Dodson, R.N., were monitoring claimant on ISP cameras and that C.O. Roth called 
claimant’s daughter, Abbie Heins, R.N., a liar. 
On January 25, 2018, claimant was evaluated at Fort Madison Community 
Hospital for anxiety and stress.  Claimant indicated problems with people watching her 
at work, based on what her daughter told her.  Claimant indicated problems with her 
home life, including relationship issues.  Claimant told staff that she bought alcohol, the 
night before, to drink while she drove and took Valium.  The work-relatedness of 
claimant’s mental health problems was undetermined as a staff psychiatrist thought 
claimant’s medication could be the cause of her increased anxiety, depression and 
paranoia.  Because claimant indicated she would take pills to self-harm, claimant was 
transferred to Blessing Hospital.  (JE 3, pp. 147-155) 
Claimant testified at hearing, that she was stressed at work, bought alcohol, and 
drank the alcohol.  She said she took prescription medication home and went to sleep.  
She testified that when she woke up the next day, she needed to see a workers’ 
compensation doctor, as she was stressed and feeling suicidal.  (Tr. p. 28) 
Claimant was discharged from Blessing on January 29, 2018 and recommended 
to seek outpatient psychiatric services and medication monitoring.  (JE 4, p. 168) 
On January 31, 2018, claimant had a psychotherapy session with Brandie 
Grinstead, LISW.  Claimant had returned to work and had a rough day.  This resulted in 
claimant calling human resources and telling them that she was going to take some 
pills.  Coping skills were discussed.  Claimant was told to figure out a plan to apologize 
to her husband for the choices made and work on the marriage.  (JE 5, pp. 169-170) 
On January 31, 2018, claimant complained she was being harassed at home 
when she received a text from a co-worker on her personal phone.  (Ex. D, p. 24) 
Claimant was seen by LISW Grinstead on February 4, 2018.  Claimant reported 
martial problems, including a possible affair and large age differences.  Claimant also 
had work-related stress.  (JE 5, pp. 171-172)  Claimant testified at hearing that she did 
not report an affair to Ms. Grinstead.  (Tr. pp. 63-64) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
On February 9, 2018, claimant was evaluated by PA St. John.  Claimant said she 
expected to be interviewed for an investigation upon her return to work.  Claimant was 
worried about her daughter working at ISP.  Claimant noted her husband’s lymphoma 
returned and he needed chemotherapy.  PA St. John recommended claimant gradually 
return to work.  (JE 1, p. 67) 
On February 28, 2018, claimant filed a complaint that inmates were telling her 
rumors and that a sergeant was constantly watching her and saying things in front of 
others about her.  (Ex. D, p. 24) 
On March 7, 2018, claimant returned in follow-up with LISW Grinstead.  Claimant 
reported feeling stressed with her return to work.  Claimant also had increased anxiety 
with her family, a potential death in the family, and her husband refusing chemotherapy.  
(JE 5, pp. 175)  (check cite) 
Claimant testified in hearing, that on or about March 9, 2018, she was 
investigated for “boundary” issues with an inmate.  Claimant said the investigation 
cleared her of any wrongdoing.  (Tr. pp. 32-33)  Claimant testified she returned to work 
on March 21 and March 22, 2018.  She said that on the evening of March 22, 2018, she 
got a call from DON Whalen that claimant was not allowed to return until further notice.  
(Tr. p. 34)  Claimant said she was anxious and stressed and tried to see healthcare 
providers.  She said that when she could not see healthcare providers, she began 
drinking.  (Tr. pp. 36-38) 
On March 23, 2018, claimant was seen at the Fort Madison Emergency Room for 
alcohol intoxication.  Claimant indicated she had problems at work.  Claimant indicated 
that to forget about her problems at work, she began to drink a bottle of vodka.  
Claimant was released to her husband’s care.  (JE 3, p. 159-163) 
On March 23, 2018, claimant was informed she was told not to report to work 
due to mental distress.  Claimant commented “You guys will feel really bad if I do 
something to myself.”  (Ex. D, p. 25) 
Claimant saw PA St. John on March 26, 2018.  PA St. John indicated claimant 
could return to work full time but that a more gradual return to work would be preferred.  
(JE 1, p. 77) 
Claimant returned in follow-up with PA St. John on April 13, 2018.  Claimant was 
stressed about a brother who was in the hospital with a life-threatening illness.  
Claimant wanted to return to work.  Claimant had been spending more time with 
grandkids, which she indicated was stressful.  (JE 1, pp. 79-81) 
Claimant saw PA St. John on May 10, 2018.  Claimant indicated she returned to 
work four days a week.  She noted some workers were guarded with her, but she was 
getting along well with others.  (JE 1, pp. 85-87) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
On May 30, 2018, claimant filed a complaint with the Department of 
Administrative Services (DAS) with the State of Iowa, alleging that the actions of R.N. 
Woolover violated the State Violence-Free Workplace Policy.  (Ex. 13, p. 1) 
On June 5, 2018, claimant filed a Department of Corrections (DOC) 
discrimination complaint against Mary Burden, R.N.  (JE 5) 
In an August 2, 2018 report, DAS found that claimant’s disagreements with R.N. 
Woolover were in regards to what work should be done and not along the lines of 
workplace violence.  The investigation found insufficient evidence of a violation of 
Iowa’s Violence-Free Workplace Policy.  (Ex. 13) 
Claimant returned to PA St. John on June 13, 2018.  Claimant was preparing for 
a marathon in Las Vegas.  Claimant’s sleep and worrying were improving.  Claimant 
was released to return to work at 40 hours per week.  (JE 1, p. 93) 
Claimant saw PA St. John on June 15, 2018.  Claimant had not been able to 
meet with a therapist.  Claimant had stopped running due to a knee injury.  Claimant 
had conflicts with other nurses at work.  Claimant also noted a possible recurrence of 
her husband’s cancer.  (JE 1, pp. 100-104) 
In a July 31, 2018 letter, LISW Grinstead indicated that claimant was seen seven 
times between January 16, 2018 and June 14, 2018.  Claimant was seen for stress at 
work and marital distress at home.  During the time claimant was told not to return to 
work, claimant had increased drinking and poor coping skills.  Claimant’s marriage had 
improved.  Claimant continued to experience workplace stress.  (JE 5, p. 185) 
LISW Grinstead testified in deposition she first saw claimant in January of 2018.  
Claimant was assessed as having a generalized anxiety disorder at that time.  (JE 7 
Deposition, p. 5)  Ms. Grinstead testified claimant had anxiety for a good part of her life.  
(JE 7 Deposition, p. 6)  Ms. Grinstead testified that beginning in February of 2018, 
claimant’s records reflect workplace stress.  (JE 7 Deposition, p. 7)  Ms. Grinstead 
testified that she believed claimant’s anxiety disorder was exacerbated by her 
workplace stress.  (JE 7 Deposition, pp. 10-11) 
In November of 2018, claimant filed an incident statement complaining that RN 
Woolover was bullying her.  Claimant contended that when she reported the complaint 
to DON Whalen, no action was taken.  (Ex. 14) 
Claimant saw PA St. John on November 28, 2018.  Claimant was anxious after 
having an argument with a co-worker the past weekend.  Prior to that, claimant had 
been doing well.  Claimant was working half-time due to her knee surgery.  (JE 1, p. 
118) 
Claimant testified that once the investigation was completed, regarding the 
November 2018 complaint, found at Exhibit 14, claimant was told to avoid R.N. Burden 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
and R.N. Woolover and to only discuss work-related issues with them while at work.  
(Tr. p. 50) 
On December 6, 2018, claimant called her employer crying and saying “my life is 
in shambles.  I feel like I am going to pass out all the time because I never eat.  It’s 
probably going to happen on my way to work or at work.”  (Ex. D, p. 26) 
On December 12, 2018, claimant was issued a work directive regarding 
professional issues as an R.N. with the DOC.  Claimant was suggested not to discuss 
her legal issues at work.  (Ex. D, p. 26) 
Claimant returned to PA St. John on December 14, 2018.  Claimant was feeling 
anxious due to work-related stress.  Claimant was using alcohol every night for sleep.  
(JE 1, pp. 124-125) 
On or about December 16, 2018, claimant filed complaints with the Iowa Civil 
Rights Commission (ICRC) alleging discrimination based on mental illness.  (Ex. D, p. 
27) 
At hearing, claimant was asked if she had filed any civil rights complaints.  
Claimant testified as follows: 
Q.  You have filed some civil rights complaints; is that accurate? 
A.  Yes, ma’am. 
Q.  You’ve actually filed four of them; is that correct? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  The basis of those civil rights complaints are the same set of facts that 
you’ve testified regarding here today; would you agree with that? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  Those claims are ongoing, are they not? 
A.  No.  Actually, three of them have been denied the appeals, and I’m just 
waiting for a letter of right to sue, and the fourth is ongoing, yes. 
Q.  So you intend to request that right-to-sue letter and pursue those 
claims? 
A.  Yes.  I’ve already hired an attorney. 
(Tr. pp. 73-74) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
Records indicate claimant was placed on administrative leave on or about 
February 12, 2019, due to concerns regarding her mental health.  (Ex. D, p. 33) 
On February 14, 2019, claimant was seen by PA St. John on urgent follow-up.  
Claimant had been put on administrative leave due to acute anxiety episodes at work.  
Claimant had acute anxiety due to interactions with an inmate and supervisors.  
Claimant was told to discontinue alcohol use and continue psychotherapy.  (JE 1, pp. 
137-141) 
In deposition, PA St. John testified that before September 2017, claimant had a 
generalized anxiety disorder.  Claimant’s stress at that time included a brother having 
an accident and building a new home.  (JE 8, pp. 5-6) 
PA St. John testified that claimant’s anxiety was made worse by work-related 
stressors.  Claimant had significant exacerbation of anxiety by her work stressors.  
(JE 8 Deposition pp. 26-27) 
PA St. John said that people with anxiety disorders may be more sensitive to 
criticism.  He noted that any kind of investigation would have worsened claimant’s anxiety 
disorder.  (JE 8, pp. 29-30) 
PA St. John testified that claimant’s diagnosis has not changed.  He said that her 
symptoms have been exacerbated.  (JE 8, p. 30)  PA St. John said that claimant would 
have had stress with her daughter working at ISP, her husband’s cancer, and her 
daughter moving in with her.  (JE 8, pp. 31-32) 
On February 26, 2019, claimant underwent an independent psychological fitness 
for duty evaluation with Philip Ascheman, Ph.D.  The exam was performed at the request 
of the employer, related to concerns about claimant’s ability to safely fulfill the duties of 
her job as an R.N. at ISP.  (Ex. D, p. 23) 
Claimant indicated she had an upset stomach, insomnia, anxiety and that she 
constantly worried.  Claimant indicated she felt depressed and tired.  Claimant indicated 
she believed she had PTSD as a result of finding a family member after a car accident.  
Claimant indicated other stressors in her life included the death of her father in 2015 in a 
motor vehicle accident, a son being stabbed in 2016, another son being unjustly accused 
of rape in 2014.  (Ex. D, p. 34) 
Claimant indicated difficulties at work due to alleged bullying by a co-worker.  
(Ex. D, p. 34) 
Dr. Ascheman noted that claimant had an extensive history of mental health issues 
for the last ten years.  He assessed claimant as having a generalized anxiety disorder.  
Dr. Ascheman opined that claimant’s symptoms also supported a generalized anxiety 
disorder and a major depressive disorder, recurrent.  He indicated there were also 
suggestions of a paranoid personality characteristic.  (Ex. D, pp. 34-36) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
Claimant’s records indicated she had numerous complaints against co-workers 
and threatened litigation.  Claimant was argumentative with an office manager at 
Dr. Ascheman’s office.  Claimant initially made demands on how the psychological 
evaluation would proceed and when those demands were not met, claimant threatened 
to file a civil rights complaint.  (Ex. D, p. 36) 
Dr. Ascheman opined that, based upon the DAS job description and essential 
functions description, claimant did not appear to be able to keep her emotions under 
control and restrain negative behaviors when provoked while working under stress.  
Dr. Asheman opined that overall, claimant did not present with the required emotional 
stability or interpersonal qualifications necessary to complete the job requirements and 
was not fit to return to duty.  Dr. Ascheman did not believe that claimant’s mental health 
conditions could be accommodated, given the mix of mental health and behavioral issues.  
(Ex. D, p. 37)  Claimant testified she did not get along with Dr. Ascheman and had felt 
that she was not getting a fair exam from him.  (Tr. p. 57) 
In a March 26, 2019 letter, the State of Iowa indicated to claimant that, based on 
Dr. Ascheman’s report, there were no reasonable accommodations that could be made 
to allow claimant to return to work.  (Ex. E) 
In a May 1, 2019 letter, claimant was informed she was approved for long-term 
disability benefits through the State of Iowa group disability policy.  (Ex. F) 
Claimant testified she was involved in approximately 9 investigations during the 14 
months between 2017 and 2018 at ISP.  She testified that some of those investigations 
were prompted by the filing of her own complaints.  (Tr. pp. 59-60) 
Claimant testified that since leaving ISP, she has applied for other nursing jobs.  
(Tr. p. 73)  Claimant testified that she filed four other ICRC complaints.  Claimant testified 
that the basis of those civil rights complaints were the same set of facts regarding her 
workers’ compensation claim.  (Tr. pp. 73-74) 
Barry Davis testified that he is claimant’s husband.  He said that he worked as a 
correctional officer at ISP and retired in 2015.  (Tr. p. 81)  Mr. Davis testified that claimant 
began her treatment with PA St. John approximately 1.5 years after coming upon her 
brother in a car accident.  (Tr. p. 85) 
Mr. Davis said that he disagreed that claimant’s family life stressors led her to 
recurrent mental health issues.  (Tr. p. 87) 
Mr. Davis testified that Nurse Whalen and R.N. Woolover were close friends.  He 
said that his wife got tired of being intimidated by R.N. Woolover, who he considered a 
poor nurse.  (Tr. pp. 89-91) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
Phyllis Porter testified in deposition that she is an executive officer 1 at ISP.  In 
that position, Ms. Porter works as a liaison with supervisors in management to assist with 
personnel issues.  (JE 6, pp. 187-188) 
Ms. Porter testified claimant mostly had personal issues with R.N. Woolover and 
R.N. Burden.  (JE 6, pp. 190-193)  Ms. Porter testified that the investigation regarding 
claimant was handled the same as the investigation as any other employee at ISP.  (JE 
6, p. 195) 
Abigail Ida-Marie Heins testified that she is an R.N. at ISP.  She testified that 
claimant is her mother.  (JE 6, p. 203, 206)  Ms. Heins testified that Correctional Officer 
Nancy Roth is known for getting other co-workers into trouble and was unprofessional.  
(JE 6, p. 205)  She said she also works with R.N. Woolover and considers Ms. Woolover 
to be very rude.  (JE 6, p. 205) 
Ms. Heins testified that she believed her mother was harassed at work.  She said 
she had to watch her mother’s wellbeing “go down the drain” because ISP did not take 
the harassment seriously.  (JE 6, p. 209) 
Cynthia Ann Felder testified she is an R.N. at ISP.  She said that she worked as 
an R.N. at ISP from 2001 through 2007 and later returned in 2015.  (JE 6, p. 223)  R.N. 
Felder testified she got along very well with claimant.  (JE 6, p. 224)  She testified that 
R.N. Woolover had a “prickly personality.”  (JE 6, p. 224) 
R.N. Felder testified that she believes that she is harassed at her job at ISP as her 
husband is a security director at ISP.  (JE 6, pp. 225-226) 
R.N. Felder testified it is stressful for a nurse to work in a correctional facility.  (JE 
6, p. 228) 
R.N. Felder testified that she began to notice behavior differences in claimant once 
her daughter began to work at ISP.  (JE 6, p. 229) 
R.N. Felder testified it is stressful working as a nurse at ISP.  She testified there 
was nothing about claimant’s job as a nurse at ISP that was more stressful between 
October 2017 through January of 2018.  (JE 6, pp. 230-231) 
Amanda Dodson testified she is an R.N. at ISP.  (JE 6, p. 237)  She testified that 
Correctional Officer Roth was a gruff person.  (JE 6, p. 238) 
She testified that when she and C.O. Roth were watching a camera in 
approximately January 2018, it had nothing to do with claimant.  (JE 6, Tr. pp. 238-239)  
R.N. Dodson testified that DON Whalen and claimant appeared to get along okay.  (JE 6, 
p. 239) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
 
R.N. Dodson testified that R.N. Woolover bullied everyone at work.  She said that 
R.N. Woolover was always trying to correct co-workers.  She said that claimant appeared 
to get very upset with R.N. Woolover.  (JE 6, p. 240)  Ms. Dodson testified that all R.N.s 
deal with the same stress at ISP.  She testified that R.N. Woolover was always difficult to 
work with.  She said that being a nurse at ISP was a stressful environment.  She said that 
claimant appeared to be more upset since her daughter was hired.  (JE 6, pp. 241-242) 
Patti Wachtendorf testified she was the warden at ISP.  (JE 6, p. 249)  She testified 
that the Department of Corrections has used Dr. Ascheman over the years.  She has 
personally used Dr. Asheman on three to four instances.  (JE 6, pp. 256-257) 
Warden Wachtendorf testified she was not aware that Correctional Officer Roth 
singled out claimant.  (JE 6, p. 258) 
Warden Wachtendorf testified claimant’s job duties were the same as any other 
nurse at ISP.  She believed claimant had no unusual work stress beyond the regular 
stresses for nurses at ISP.  (JE 6, p. 259) 
Tasha Whalen testified she is the director of nursing at ISP and has been the DON 
since July of 2015.  (JE 6, p. 268)  She testified that she socializes outside of work with 
R.N. Felder and R.N. Woolover.  (JE 6, p. 269) 
Nurse Whalen testified that claimant brings more problems to her than any other 
staff members.  She said claimant routinely complained of offenders, scheduling and 
other nurses.  (JE 6, p. 269) 
Nurse Whalen testified that she had heard a disagreement between claimant and 
Correctional Officer Roth.  She said that Correctional Officer Roth’s supervisors told C.O. 
Roth to avoid interactions with claimant the remainder of that day.  (JE 6, p. 270) 
Nurse Whalen testified that on January 24, 2018, claimant became upset, tearful 
and verbalized suicidal ideation.  She said that claimant’s daughter assured staff that 
claimant would get follow-up care.  (JE 6, p. 271) 
Nurse Whalen testified that on or about March 21, 2018, claimant complained in 
an accident report regarding stress levels at work.  Nurse Whalen called claimant to do a 
safety check.  She said that when she spoke with claimant on that day, claimant was 
crying and then eventually claimant hung up on her.  (JE 6, p. 273) 
Nurse Whalen testified that being a correctional officer nurse has a higher level of 
stress than being a regular nurse.  (JE 6, p. 274) 
Nurse Whalen said she did not believe claimant was harassed at work.  She said 
she got a number of complaints from claimant regarding scheduling and other complaints 
regarding the way other nurses worked.  (JE 6, p. 275)  Nurse Whalen said that claimant 
told her she was concerned staff was watching her at ISP.  She said claimant also had 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
disagreements with R.N. Woolover as to how flu shots were to be given.  Nurse Whalen 
said that claimant filed a Violence in the Workplace complaint in May of 2018 regarding 
R.N. Woolover and R.N. Burden.  (JE 6, p. 227) 
Nurse Whalen said that claimant had told her of numerous personal issues, 
including her brother’s car accident, her father dying in a car accident, one son being 
stabbed, another son being falsely accused of rape and stress with her daughter working 
at ISP.  She said claimant also had issues with her daughter becoming pregnant by a 
married ISP employee.  (JE 6, p. 278) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is whether the Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation has subject matter jurisdiction to hear this workers’ compensation claim. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
In Delgado-Zuniga v. Dickey & Campbell Law Firm, No. 17-0099, filed 
September 13, 2017 (Iowa Ct. Appeal), unpublished 908 N.W.2d 882 (Table), the Iowa 
Court of Appeals dealt with the issue whether the Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation had subject matter jurisdiction when a civil rights claim was filed.  The 
claimant in Delgado-Zuniga filed both a workers’ compensation claim and a claim under 
the Iowa Civil Rights Act.  Both claims were based on the same alleged acts.  Claimant 
settled his claim with the employer.  The employer and the insurer filed a motion for 
summary judgment against claimant regarding the workers’ compensation claim.  
Claimant’s counsel did not respond to the motion.  Claimant’s motion for summary 
judgment was granted by the agency.  Claimant sued his attorney for legal malpractice 
for failure to respond to the motion for summary judgement.  Claimant’s attorney filed a 
motion for summary judgment alleging the workers’ compensation claim was futile 
because the workers’ compensation claim and the ICRC claim involve the same acts 
and that the Division of Workers’ Compensation lack subject matter jurisdiction.  The 
Court of Appeals agreed and noted: 
Here, Delgado's claims do not merely overlap like two circles in a Venn 
diagram, they are the same—there is only one circle.  Thus, because the 
acts alleged in his workers' compensation claim were the same acts that 
formed the basis for his civil discrimination suit, the agency was without 
subject matter jurisdiction to hear his workers' compensation claim . . . 
Because the agency lacked subject matter jurisdiction to hear Delgado's 
claim, even assuming arguendo that Piper was negligent, Delgado's 
workers' compensation claim would have failed. As a result, Delgado 
sustained no damage by Piper's inaction, and his claim of legal 
malpractice fails as a matter of law. 
Delgado-Zuniga, slip op. at 4 (citations omitted.) 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
 
See Ottumwa Housing Auth. v. State Farm Fire, 495 N.W.2d 723, 729 (Iowa 
1993) (“Therefore the basis for a workers’ compensation claim grounded on the same 
discrimination claims is likewise gone”)  See also, Louvar v. City of Cedar Rapids, File 
No. 5048373 (Arbitration Decision April 9, 2018); McVay v. United Fire & Casualty, File 
No. 5059310 (Ruling May 9, 2019) (granting motion for summary judgment based on 
Delgado-Zuniga). 
As noted in the findings of fact, claimant testified at hearing as follows: 
Q.  You have filed some civil rights complaints; is that accurate? 
A.  Yes, ma’am. 
Q.  You’ve actually filed four of them; is that correct? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  The basis of those civil rights complaints are the same set of facts that 
you’ve testified regarding here today; would you agree with that? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  Those claims are ongoing, are they not? 
A.  No.  Actually, three of them have been denied the appeals, and I’m just 
waiting for a letter of right to sue, and the fourth is ongoing, yes. 
Q.  So you intend to request that right-to-sue letter and pursue those 
claims? 
A.  Yes.  I’ve already hired an attorney. 
(Tr. pp. 73-74) 
The record lacks copies of any of claimant’s ICRC complaints.  There are 
references in various depositions that claimant did file ICRC complaints regarding her 
interactions with co-workers and the response, or lack thereof, from ISP.  The only other 
evidence in the record regarding the duplicity of claimant’s workers’ compensation 
claim, and the ICRC complaints, is in claimant’s testimony, found at pages 73 and 74 of 
the transcript that the basis of the ICRC complaints are the same as the workers’ 
compensation petition. 
Claimant provided no evidence of any kind disputing this testimony.  Claimant 
supplied no evidence that there was any difference between her workers’ compensation 
claim and her ICRC complaints.  The only evidence in the record is that claimant’s 
workers’ compensation claims are the same acts that form the basis of her civil rights 

DAVIS V. IOWA STATE PENITENTIARY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
 
discrimination claims.  Given this record, it is found that the acts alleged in the workers’ 
compensation claim are the same acts that form the basis of claimant’s ICRC complaint. 
Based on this finding, and the law detailed in Delgado-Zuniga, and other cases 
cited above, it is found that the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation lacks subject 
matter jurisdiction to hear the merits of this case. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing. 
Both parties shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this       20th      day of August, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Darwin Bunger (via WCES) 
Tonya A. Oetken (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
