Case Number: 5067306
Case Title:  OXLEY, ANTHONY V. LENNOX MANUFACTURING
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Oxley Anthony-5067306d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ANTHONY OXLEY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5067306 
LENNOX INDUSTRIES, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
           ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY   : 
  Head Note Nos.: 1100, 1801, 1800, 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
1803, 3000, 2700, 2500, 2501 
 
 
  :  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Anthony Oxley, filed a petition on January 24, 2019, seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Lennox Industries, Inc., employer, and Indemnity 
Insurance Co. of America, insurer, both as defendants, for an alleged work injury dated 
October 8, 2018.  
The record consists of claimant’s testimony and joint exhibits (JE) 1-5, claimant’s 
exhibits (CE)1-6, and defendant exhibits (DE) A-F.  
The matter was heard in Des Moines, Iowa, on January 16, 2020 and considered 
fully submitted upon the simultaneous filing of briefs on January 30, 2020. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on October 8, 2018;  
2. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from November 21, 2018 
through January 7, 2019; 
3. Whether claimant has sustained a permanent, disabling loss and if so, the 
extent of said loss; 
4. The appropriate rate; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to repayment of medical expenses in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to future medical care; 
7. Assessment of costs.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Mar-18  14:01:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 2 
 
 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties agree that at all times material hereto, claimant was an employee of 
the defendant employer. During the period of November 21, 2018, through January 7, 
2019, claimant was off work and if it is determined that defendants are liable for the 
alleged injury, claimant is entitled to benefits for this period of time. If there is an award 
of benefits, defendants are entitled to a credit of $2,096.17 for short-term disability 
benefits paid from November 21, 2018, through January 7, 2019. 
While the parties disagree as to the causal connection between the medical bills 
itemized in Exhibit 3, they do agree that the fees or prices charged are fair and 
reasonable, the treatment was reasonable and necessary, that the listed expenses are 
causally connected to the medical condition upon which the claim of injury is based. 
The parties agree claimant’s disputed injury has resulted in a disability that is 
industrial in nature. At all times material hereto, claimant was married and entitled to 
three exemptions.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
At the time of the hearing, claimant was a 60-year-old person. His past 
educational history includes a GED obtained in 1978 and an Associate’s Degree in 
1987. He began working for defendant employer in the early 1990s. At all times material 
hereto, claimant was married with one dependent son.  
Claimant’s past medical history is significant for skull fracture, crush injury to left 
leg, bilateral lateral epicondylitis, bilateral shoulder pain, right knee pain and right third 
ring trigger finger. (DE C:13)  
On or about October 2018, claimant was a Replacement Operator. As a 
Replacement Operator, he would float from station to station and fill in for the operators 
while they were on vacation or out ill. It was not a physically demanding position until a 
tornado caused damage to the plant in July 2018. After a work stoppage, claimant was 
assigned to deliver product to different stations. He was required to push a cart through 
the plant. When empty the cart weighed several hundred pounds and when full, 
exceeded five hundred (500) pounds. The condition of the plant made it difficult to 
maneuver as there were many cables, hoses and other obstacles on the floor. At times, 
he and a co-worker would have to lift the cart over obstacles to navigate the work 
environment. Besides pushing and lifting the cart, he would be required to load and 
unload the product.  
Claimant testified that he was averaging 60-70 hours a week. This is not born out 
by the payment records. In the wage calculation of the claimant, he worked 23.7 hours 
on the low end and 53.5 hours on the high end. (CE 2:2) Most of the weeks were 
between 37 to 42 hours with some outliers. (CE 2:2) To the extent that claimant’s 
testimony differs from his time sheets, the time sheets are relied upon. It is found that 
claimant worked around 40 hours per week in the 13 weeks preceding the work injury 
including the time period after the plant damage in July 2018.  

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 3 
 
 
Claimant was seen for chronic neck pain. (JE 2:4) At that time, he reported a 
fever, muscle aches and joint pain but no abdominal pain. (JE 2:4) He was prescribed 
hydrocodone 10 mg along with acetaminophen. (JE 2:5)  
On or about September 2018, claimant testified he developed a burning 
sensation on the right-side of his abdomen and a bulge. A co-worker suggested that 
claimant may have a hernia. Claimant scheduled an appointment with his primary care 
provider, Steven Scurr, D.O. (JE 2:6)  
Prior to his appointment with Dr. Scurr, claimant saw the plant nurse who 
scheduled him for an appointment at Ankeny Iowa Ortho office. (JE 1:2) There was no 
mention of the groin pain to the company nurse.  
On October 9, 2018, claimant saw Dr. Scurr who diagnosed claimant with an 
inguinal hernia, however, Dr. Scurr was uncertain as to the origin of the hernia. (JE 2:6) 
He wrote,  
He is here today has had some pain in the right groin down in the inguinal 
ligament down into the proximal Estilinguinal ligament on physical exam 
he certainly has a inguinal hernia on this side but I think that has been 
there for a while tenderness is described as some sharp or stabbing 
discomfort in inguinal region worse when he flexes at the hip is been a lot 
more lifting at work. 
(JE 2:6) Dr. Scurr prescribed claimant a trial of meloxicam and instructed claimant to 
practice good lifting techniques and proper back etiquette. (JE 2:7)  
Claimant returned to the company nurse and informed RN Cline of the hernia. 
“He believes that the hernia has been caused by lifting top caps and occurred at the 
same time he injured his knee,” RN Cline documented. (JE 1:2)  Since the orthopaedic 
visit was already scheduled, a request was made that claimant’s hernia condition be 
examined at the same time. Id. 
On October 12, 2018, claimant was seen by KellyJo Balignasay ARNP regarding 
the inguinal hernia. (JE 3:14) She referred him to a general surgeon. (JE 3:14) Nurse 
Practitioner Balignasay felt that the cause of the hernia was most “likely due to a 
combination of muscle wall weakness and increased ultra-abdominal pressure from 
recurrent strenuous events (repetitive heavy lifting).” (JE 3:14) The surgeon, Steven F. 
Van Buren, saw claimant on October 29, 2018. (JE4:18) Dr. Van Buren noted claimant 
had been working hard and that he should undergo surgery to repair the hernia.  
On November 6, 2018, the insurer sought out clarification from Dr. Van Buren to 
determine whether the hernia was work related. (JE 4:22) Dr. Van Buren asked claimant 
to return for an evaluation. In the meantime, claimant sought out care from his personal 
physician due to the delay in the approval and the pain. Dr. Scurr referred claimant to 
John McCune M.D., who performed the repair on November 21, 2018. (JE 5:26, 29) 
During the initial examination, claimant reported that he had been engaged in a lot of 
heavy lifting at work but denied that it was a worker’s compensation matter. (JE 5:26) 

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 4 
 
 
One month following the surgery, claimant returned to Dr. McCune’s office and reported 
normal bowel movements, regular diet and no pain. (JE 5:32)    
In Dr. Van Buren’s medical records, it was noted that claimant was doing well 
after the surgery. (JE 4:24)  
On October 8, 2018, Paul A Conte, M.D., issued an opinion that while claimant 
did have an inguinal hernia when he was evaluated on October 8, 2018, Dr. Conte felt 
that it was a long-standing one. “He had a complete loss of integrity of his inguinal floor 
as well as an indirect hernia. This is not the sort of hernia that occurs through a sudden 
injury, but it is a chronic wear-and-tear type of hernia that is caused by breakdown of 
the normal tissues as well as progressive and prolonged use.” (DE A:4) Dr. Conte felt 
that claimant’s outside activity such as chopping wood for his furnace and his 
longstanding history of smoking which makes one more prone to breakdown of tissue 
were the cause of the hernia rather than claimant’s work. (DE A:4) Claimant maintained 
he stopped smoking in 2011 and that his heaviest daily exertions were performed at 
work.  
Dr. Conte opined that claimant’s results from the surgery were good and that 
claimant did not need any permanent work or activity restrictions. He also assigned no 
permanent impairment. (DE A:5)  
On December 2, 2019, Dr. McCune wrote that it was his medical opinion that 
claimant’s inguinal hernia was a direct result of his heavy lifting. (CE 1:1) “Specifically, it 
occurred during the clean up after the tornado of July 2018. Mr. Oxley was unable to 
obtain timely treatment for his hernia and the resulting significant pain through the 
worker’s compensation system.” (CE 1:1) Dr. McCune also noted that the symptoms 
were relieved by the surgery. (CE 1:1)  
Claimant’s testimony was troubling at times. He exaggerated the number of 
hours he worked prior to the date of the injury. He denied having a wood burning 
furnace in his home but when confronted with his deposition testimony conceded that 
he did have a wood burning fireplace in his garage and shop and chopped wood for 
that. To the extent that there was a discrepancy between the contemporaneous medical 
records and the claimant’s hearing testimony, the medical records and documentation 
created prior were given  more weight.  
Claimant testified at hearing that he has constant pain at the surgical site and a 
palpable bulge. There is no medical evidence to support this as he has not returned for 
care even though he had his hernia treated under his health insurance, but claimant 
testified he would like to return to Dr. McCune. Claimant has the same medical health 
insurance that provided for his previous visits to Dr. McCune but he has not availed 
himself of those benefits.  
Claimant testified that incentive pay is a substantial portion of his earnings and 
therefore should be included in any wage calculation. Based on the union agreement, 
claimant receives a higher wage while on vacation and believes that higher wage is to 

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 5 
 
 
offset the lack of incentive pay. (CE 2:2) Claimant maintains his gross weekly earnings 
were $983.00 per week for a benefit rate of $644.45. Defendants’ wage calculation 
excludes overtime rate and vacation rate for gross weekly wages of $936.40 and a 
weekly benefit rate of $616.86. (DE:17)  
Claimant’s costs include a filing fee, service fee, and the December 2, 2019, 
report of Dr. McCune for a total of $226.80. (CE 6:29)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 6 
 
 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
Claimant maintains that his hernia developed over time as a result of heavy lifting 
following the damage to the plant in July of 2018. In support of his claim, he relies on 
the expert opinion of Dr. McCune who opined that the hernia was the result heavy lifting 
at the worksite following the tornado damage and the lack of timely treatment.  
Defendants argue that Dr. McCune’s opinion must be disregarded because it 
was based on erroneous facts. Claimant testified that he was working 7 days a week 
and 10 hours a day. Per the findings of fact, claimant’s work hours are deemed to be 
around 40 hours per week. While Dr. McCune’s opinion was based in part on the 
claimant’s history, it was also based on Dr. McCune’s experience, the visualization of 
the damage during surgery, as well as claimant’s heavy lifting and extra exertion at work 

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 7 
 
 
which was not disputed. Dr. Conte also acknowledges that heavy lifting activities could 
have contributed to the development of the hernia but identifies claimant’s work at home 
as the primary cause along with the weak tissue resulting claimant’s history of smoking. 
It is not likely that claimant was chopping and hauling wood on a more frequent basis 
than he was lifting heavy objects at his place of work. Nurse Practitioner Balignasay felt 
that the cause of the hernia was most likely due to a combination of muscle wall 
weakness and increased ultra-abdominal pressure from recurrent strenuous events 
consistent with Dr. Conte and Dr. McCune’s opinions.  
Dr. Conte confirms Dr. McCune’s opinion that heavy lifting was likely a 
contributory factor in the development of claimant’s hernia. Taking Dr. Conte’s opinion 
and that of Dr. McCune, it is more likely than not that claimant’s inguinal hernia was 
caused by the work he performed post July 2018.  
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Section 85.33(2). 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor 
an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the 
healing period. 
Based on the foregoing, claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from 
November 21, 2018, through January 7, 2019, when he was off work following his 
hernia surgery. Permanent benefits commence on January 8, 2019, when he returned 
to work.  
Claimant is also entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses and future 
medical care as it is related to his surgery. Claimant specifically requests an order to 
return to Dr. McCune. The Supreme Court has confirmed that when an employer denies 
care, it loses its authorization defense for the care that the employee has requested. 
Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 245 (Iowa 2018) (quoting R.R. Donnelly 

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 8 
 
 
& Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 196–98 (Iowa 2003)). Defendants denied that 
claimant’s hernia was the result of his work and lost their right to direct his case. Thus, 
defendants cannot now object to claimant returning to Dr. McCune for follow up 
treatment for the hernia.  
While claimant maintains he has significant pain following the hernia surgery and 
into the current time period, the medical records are not reflective of this. Dr. McCune 
noted claimant had no problems following surgery. When Dr. Van Buren’s office called 
to schedule an appointment with claimant, claimant relayed that he had already had the 
surgery and was doing well. There is no change in claimant’s work and no 
accommodations. He has no restrictions. There is not sufficient evidence to find a 
permanent and disabling impairment. No award of permanency is given at this time. 
However, given that temporary benefits are owed, the question of rate must be 
answered.  Claimant argues that vacation pay should be factored into his wages while 
defendants argue that it is premium pay that should not be included.  
Iowa Code section 85.36 describes the basis for calculating a disabled 
employee's compensation rate. “The basis of compensation shall be the weekly 
earnings of the injured employee at the time of the injury.” Iowa Code § 85.36. 
In the case of an employee who is paid on a daily or hourly basis, or by 
the output of the employee, the weekly earnings shall be computed by 
dividing by thirteen the earnings, not including overtime or premium pay, 
of the employee earned in the employ of the employer in the last 
completed period of thirteen consecutive calendar weeks immediately 
preceding the injury. If the employee was absent from employment for 
reasons personal to the employee during part of the thirteen calendar 
weeks preceding the injury, the employee's weekly earnings shall be the 
amount the employee would have earned had the employee worked when 
work was available to other employees of the employer in a similar 
occupation. A week which does not fairly reflect the employee's customary 
earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous week with earnings that 
fairly represent the employee's customary earnings. 
Id. § 85.36(6). There is no explicit exclusion of what the defendants call premium pay. 
Instead, the focus is on the claimant’s customary earnings.  
We do not interpret the word “customary” so rigidly as to conclude that 
just because an employee's schedule or output is neither fixed nor 
guaranteed, the employee cannot have “customary” earnings. 
“Customary” means “based on or established by custom”; “commonly 
practiced, used or observed”; or “usual.” Merriam–Webster's Collegiate 
Dictionary 285 (10th ed.2002). We have previously defined “customary” as 
“typical.” Griffin Pipe, 663 N.W.2d at 866. Ascertainment of an employee's 
customary earnings does not turn on a determination of what earnings are 
guaranteed or fixed; rather, it asks simply what earnings are usual or 

OXLEY V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES 
Page 9 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
typical for that employee. As discussed above, an employee need not 
justify the variance with a particular explanation.  
Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 199 (Iowa 2010) In this case, there is 
no showing that vacation pay is not customary for employees of the defendant. It is a 
bargained for benefit that extends to union employees, of which claimant is one. It is 
customary for employees to take vacation days and it is customary for them to be paid 
at a particular rate. It is not a bonus or a shift differential, although it does take into 
account incentive pay that is paid while an individual works. Based on the greater 
weight of the evidence, claimant’s calculation of the benefits is deemed to represent the 
customary wages and therefore claimant’s wage calculation is adopted.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED:  
That defendants are to pay unto claimant temporary disability benefits at the rate 
of six hundred forty-four and 45/100 dollars ($644.45) per week from November 21, 
2018 through January 7, 2019. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical bills in Exhibit 3 and future 
medical for the inguinal hernia.  
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33.  
Signed and filed this __18th __ day of March, 2020. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE 
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
James M. Ballard (via WCES) 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
