Case Number: 24700184.01
Case Title:  SILVERS, DEVIN V. CLOW VALVE CO.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Silvers Devin - 24700184.01d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
DEVIN SILVERS, 
No. 24700184.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
CLOW VALVE CO., 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
Head Note: 1100 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
 
Defendant. 
I. 
STATEMENT OF THE CAS E 
Claimant Devin Silvers seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendant, self-insured employer Clow Valve. The undersigned presided over an 
arbitration hearing on March 26, 2025. Silvers participated personally and through 
attorney Channing L. Dutton. The defendants participated by and through attorney 
Robert C. Gainer. 
II. 
ISSUE 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) Did Silvers sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Clow Valve on August 23, 2023, that has caused the need 
for care under Iowa Code section 85.27? 
2) Is Silvers entitled to reimbursement for the cost of the independent medical 
examination performed by Brian Crites, M.D., under Iowa Code section 
85.39? 
III. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
▪ Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE7; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-06  15:12:26     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 2 
 
▪ Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7;  
▪ Defendants’ Exhibits A through D; and 
▪ Hearing testimony by Silvers.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
Silvers was the only witness to testify in the hearing. His demeanor reflected that 
of someone giving truthful testimony. He directly answered the questions he fielded and 
did not try to evade any of them. Silvers did not attempt to embellish details to his 
perceived benefit. His answers were forthright and straightforward. Silvers was a 
credible witness.  
Silvers is right-hand dominant. (Ex. JE1, p. 1) Silvers was born with glenoid 
dysplasia in his right shoulder. Silvers did not know and had no reason to believe he 
might have glenoid dysplasia in his right shoulder until August 23, 2023. (Testimony) 
Silvers enjoyed playing sports growing up. He played baseball and basketball 
before high school, throwing and shooting with his right upper extremity. He wrestled 
and played football in high school, two of the more physically demanding sports 
sanctioned by the Iowa High School Athletic Association. At no point during his 
participation in sports in his youth did he experience any symptoms in the area of his 
right shoulder, right lower extremity, or neck similar in nature to those he experienced 
after the pop he felt in his shoulder while working at Clow Valve on August 23, 2023. 
(Testimony) 
Silvers graduated from high school and enlisted in the Iowa Army National Guard 
(Guard). He completed a thorough physical before he was accepted into the Guard. 
During his service, he injured his left knee. However, Silvers did not sustain an injury to 
his right shoulder. He served for eight years and during that time did not experience any 
issues with his right shoulder that suggested he had any sort of physical issue. 
(Testimony; Ex. 3, p. 25) 
After the Guard discharged Silvers, he worked in the private sector. Some of his 
jobs were in manufacturing and physically demanding. Silvers did not sustain an injury 
to his right shoulder during his employment with any of these employers. He also did not 
experience any symptoms that suggested he had an underlying physical issue in his 
shoulder. (Testimony; Ex. 3, p. 25) 
Clow Valve hired Silvers in or around May of 2017. Employees for Clow Valve 
perform physically demanding work. At the time Clow Valve hired Silvers, the company 
had instituted a preemployment physical to ensure new hires are physically capable of 
performing the essential functions of the job. Silvers had to go to the physical therapy 
department at Pella Regional Hospital for testing as part of this process before Clow 
Valve finalized his hire. He passed the preemployment physical and Clow Valve hired 
him. (Testimony; Ex. 3, p. 25) 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 3 
 
Silvers first worked for Clow Valve as a utility on the paint line. Then he bid to 
work on just the paint line. Silvers wanted to work on the first shift. A job on first shift 
came open on wet barrel assembly, so he bid into the job. (Testimony) 
The wet barrel assembly group works with different types of fire hydrants. The 
hydrants are heavy. One day, Silvers and his coworkers weighed all the different 
hydrants and the lightest of them weighed 60 pounds. Silvers performed his job duties 
on wet barrel assembly without issue until August 23, 2023. (Testimony; Ex. 3, pp. 25–
26) 
On that date, Silvers and his coworkers were installing plugs on the top of 
hydrants with a large pneumatic impact. An engineer instructed them they should be 
doing so by hand and not with a pneumatic impact. This process required Silvers to use 
a manual wrench that was between three and one-half and four feet long to tighten the 
plug by hand. While doing so, Silvers was standing and wrenching with his hands at 
approximately eye level. (Testimony; Ex. 3, pp. 25–26) 
While wrenching a hydrant plug, Silvers felt a popping sensation in his right 
shoulder followed by the immediate onset of pain. He had never felt such a popping 
sensation before in his right shoulder. As well, Silvers had never experienced pain like 
that which accompanied the popping sensation. (Testimony; Ex. 3, pp. 25–26) 
Silvers’ credible testimony and the documentary evidence in this case establish 
that he did not experience pain in his right shoulder until he was wrenching a plug on a 
hydrant as part of his job duties for Clow Valve on August 23, 2023. Prior to that date, 
no medical professional had diagnosed Silvers with glenoid dysplasia in his right 
shoulder. The weight of the evidence shows it is more likely than not that Silvers had no 
symptoms similar in nature to those after the work incident and required no medical 
care for any injury or condition relating to his right shoulder until after he felt a pop and 
the onset of pain in his shoulder while performing work duties for Clow Valve on August 
23, 2023. 
Because of Silvers’ ongoing right-shoulder pain, Clow Valve arranged care for 
him at the Pella Regional Health Center on October 31, 2023. (Ex. JE1, p. 1) He 
reported during intake that “he was tightening a plug on the top of a hydrant. As he went 
to pull the wrench to continue tightening, he felt a pull and pain in his right shoulder.” 
(Ex. JE1, p. 1)  
Silvers described his right shoulder pain as “minimal with rest” and rated it as 
zero or one out of ten; however, “with activity” his pain increased to a level four or five 
out of ten. (Ex. JE1, p. 1) Silvers shared that he had been able to continue to perform 
his work duties. (Ex. JE1, p. 4) He reported his work restrictions had not helped much 
because he felt the way he lifted objects caused his pain to increase more than the 
amount of weight he lifted. (Ex. JE1, p. 4) Matthew Doty, M.D., examined Silvers and 
ordered magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right shoulder. (Ex. JE1, p. 2)  
At the appointment to review the MRI on November 20, 2023, Silvers reported 
that his shoulder had felt worse over the prior couple weeks with certain movements 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 4 
 
increasing his pain. (Ex. JE1, p. 4) The MRI findings were consistent with a complex 
labral tear, which prompted Dr. Doty to recommend care by an orthopedic surgeon. (Ex. 
JE1, p. 5; Ex. JE6, p. 41) The MRI also showed moderate glenoid dysplasia with 
reduced anteroposterior diameter and posterior glenoid hypoplasia. (Ex. JE1, p. 5)  
In accordance with Dr. Doty’s referral, Clow Valve set up care at Iowa Ortho with 
Steven Aviles, M.D. (Ex. JE2, pp. 7–8) In a letter dated November 27, 2023, to Dr. 
Aviles, a claims specialist with ESIS Central WC Claims named Julie Parkin requests 
his opinion on a series of questions relating to causation. (Ex. JE2, p. 7) In the letter, 
Parkin makes a misrepresentation of material fact regarding Silvers’ symptoms by 
incorrectly asserting he had “been working full duty with no complaints since the date of 
injury.” (Ex. JE2, p. 7) As detailed above, Silvers did in fact have complaints of pain 
while he was working without accommodation between the injury date and his intake at 
Pella Regional Medical Center on October 31, 2023, as well as complaints of worsening 
pain between that appointment and his follow-up appointment on November 20, 2023. 
(Ex. JE1, pp. 2, 4) 
Parkin also omitted relevant information regarding Silvers’ history of right-
shoulder pain. In Parkin’s letter to Dr. Aviles, she does not share with him that Silvers 
was a high school athlete who wrestled and played football and went on to serve in the 
Guard before embarking on a career working in manufacturing with no symptoms in his 
right shoulder. There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude that 
anyone told Dr. Aviles that Silvers’ right shoulder was asymptomatic for his entire life 
until he felt a pop and the onset of pain while performing work duties at Clow Valve on 
August 23, 2023. 
In Parkin’s letter to Dr. Aviles, she misstates the longstanding causation standard 
in Iowa workers’ compensation cases with the framing of “whether the current 
diagnosis, complaints and need for further treatment are causally related to the incident 
on 08/23/23, as a major contributing factor, a preexisting condition aggravated by such, 
or wholly non-related.” (Ex. JE2, p. 7) Under Iowa law, a worker is not entitled to 
workers’ compensation for a pre-existing condition, but the mere existence of that 
condition at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense to liability under the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 
N.W.2d 812, 815 (Iowa 1962). If the work injury aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or 
lighted up a worker’s pre-existing condition, the worker is entitled to recover for the 
resultant disability. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, (Iowa 2000); Rose v. 
John Deere Ottumwa Works, 76 N.W.2d 756, 761 (Iowa 1956); Hanson v. Dickinson, 
176 N.W. 823, 824–25 (Iowa 1920). “For workers' compensation purposes a cause is 
proximate if it is a cause; it need not be the only cause.” Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 
525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  
Thus, Parkin’s letter inaccurately presents the causation question to Dr. Aviles 
under Iowa Supreme Court precedent that dates back over a century. She frames it as 
a question of which of three pigeon holes the work incident fits into:  (1) “a major 
contributing factor”; (2) “a preexisting condition aggravated by such”; or (3) “wholly non-

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 5 
 
related.” (Ex. JE2, p. 7) She then further muddies the waters with the wording of her 
questions. (Ex. JE2, pp. 7–8)  
During intake at Iowa Ortho on November 29, 2023, Silvers rated his right-
shoulder pain as two out of ten at its lowest level and four out of ten at its highest. (Ex. 
JE2, p. 9) The records from the visit state that Silvers denied any previous trauma to his 
right shoulder and experienced an “acute onset” of right-shoulder pain occurred on 
August 23, 2023, when he injured the joint while pulling on a wrench at work. (Ex. JE2, 
p. 11) Dr. Aviles noted that Silvers had been working without restrictions but his right 
shoulder did “hurt quite a bit.” (Ex. 2, p. 10) 
Dr. Aviles reviewed the x-rays and MRI of Silvers’ right shoulder. (Ex. JE2, p. 10) 
He independently interpreted them to show “severe glenoid dysplasia,” a “large labral 
tear posteriorly with possible bony component,” and “[s]uperior labral tear identified with 
cystic changes medial to the superior labrum.” (Ex. JE2, p. 11) Based on this reading, 
Dr. Aviles opined: 
[Silvers] has a difficult problem. He does have a SLAP tear but he also 
has a glenoid hypoplasia and posterior labral tearing. He has posterior 
subluxation of the humeral head. I do worry about this being an issue for 
him and he should benefit from surgical intervention.  
(Ex. JE2, p. 11) Dr. Aviles recommended a computed tomography (CT) scan to rule out 
any bony components associated with the posterior labral tear and issued a patient 
status report with the diagnosis, “SLAP tear, posterior labral tear,” that also released 
Silvers to return to work without restrictions. (Ex. JE2, pp. 11–12)  
After examining Silvers, Dr. Aviles reviewed Parkin’s letter and answered her 
questions in a letter of his own dated November 29, 2023. (Ex. JE2, pp. 13–14) In her 
letter, Parkins asks whether Silvers had “any pre[-]existing conditions or injuries that 
could have affected or led to the need for further treatment,” and in response to which 
Dr. Aviles identifies Silvers’ glenoid hyperplasia as the source of his labral tearing. (Ex. 
JE2, p. 13) Dr. Aviles then went on to answer the next question from Parkin as follows: 
Question #4:  If so, what degree would you attribute this injury is 
affected by the previous injuries/degenerative conditions? Is this a 
temporary exacerbation or permanent aggravation, and has baseline 
been reached? 
Answer:  I do not believe that this injury is causing his problems. I think 
that it is more incidental that it occurred at work. It was eventually going to 
tear given the severity of his glenoid hypoplasia. Once again, given the 
severity of his glenoid hyperplasia, this was only a matter of time, and I 
believe that it was only an incidental finding that the pain began at work. I 
would not call it either a temporary or permanent aggravation. 
(Ex. JE2, p. 13)  

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Aviles makes no mention in his letter when opining on causation or the fact 
that Silvers was asymptomatic in his right shoulder and received no medical care for 
any symptoms in it from birth until torqueing the wrench while working for Clow Valve on 
August 23, 2023. (Ex. JE2, pp. 13–14) Dr. Aviles expressly recognizes the injury that 
necessitated care “happened at work” but does not limit his opinion to whether the 
incident at work was a cause in the aggravation, acceleration, worsening, or lighting up 
of Silvers’ pre-existing condition. (Ex. JE2, p. 13–14) Instead, he accepts Parkin’s 
incorrect framing of the causation standard as focused on only aggravation when 
opining, “I would not call it either a temporary or permanent aggravation.” (Ex. JE2, p. 
13) Dr. Aviles did not address whether the performance of work duties that caused 
Silvers to experience a popping sensation followed by the onset of pain accelerated, 
worsened, or lit up his congenital condition. (Ex. JE2, pp. 13–14)  
Dr. Aviles also opines that he felt the fact that Silvers sustained the injury 
necessitating care while working was “incidental” because “the severity of his glenoid 
hyperplasia” meant it “was only a matter of time” before he sustained a shoulder injury. 
But the question in a workers’ compensation case is not whether the claimant may have 
eventually sustained a similar injury at some point in the future when not working. The 
question is whether the injury in question arose out of and in the course of the 
claimant’s employment. Therefore, the counterfactual relied upon by Dr. Aviles is given 
no weight. 
There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Dr. Aviles 
considered the fact that Silvers experienced no symptoms and received no medical care 
relating to his right shoulder before he felt a pop in it that was followed by the onset of 
pain while working for Clow Valve on August 23, 2023. Consequently, the evidence 
establishes Dr. Aviles failed to give adequate consideration to relevant information 
regarding the history of Silvers’ symptoms or lack thereof. Also detrimental to Dr. 
Aviles’s credibility on the causation question is the fact that he accepted Parkin’s 
inaccurate framing of the causation standard under Iowa workers’ compensation law. 
The persuasiveness of Dr. Aviles’s causation opinion further suffers because it relies on 
a counterfactual instead of what actually happened. For the above reasons, Dr. Aviles’s 
causation opinion is unpersuasive and therefore rejected. 
On December 12, 2023, Dr. Aviles saw Silvers for a follow-up appointment. (Ex. 
JE2, pp. 15–16) Silvers reported his right-shoulder pain was constant, aching, and 
sharp, at a level two out of ten. (Ex. JE2, p. 15) Dr. Aviles noted his injury occurred at 
work and his pain was aggravated by movement and relieved by rest. (Ex. JE2, p. 15) 
The CT scan of Silvers’ right shoulder showed posterior labral tear, small cortical defect 
consistent with old periosteal avulsion injury, and severe glenoid hypoplasia. (Ex. JE2, 
p. 16; Ex. JE4, p. 42) Dr. Aviles recommended a referral to the University of Iowa 
Hospitals & Clinics (UIHC) to determine if Silvers needed a bony reconstruction of the 
glenoid in addition to labral repair surgery. (Ex. JE2, p. 16) 
In a letter to Silvers dated December 19, 2023, Parkin informs him that Dr. Aviles 
opined that neither his medical presentation nor his need for further treatment was 
related to any workplace incident at Clow Valve. (Ex. B, p. 2) Parkin enclosed the 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 7 
 
medical opinion from Dr. Aviles. (Ex. B, p. 2) She further states that Clow Valve was 
denying that his injury arose out of and in the course of his employment based on the 
opinion “in addition [to] and including the information our investigation into this matter 
returned.” (Ex. B, p. 2) There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to 
conclude Clow Valve conducted an investigation that turned up any information on the 
question of causation other than Dr. Aviles’ opinion prior to Parkin sending the letter. 
In the letter, Parkin also notifies Silvers that Clow Valve would not volunteer 
payment of workers’ compensation and that “any medical expenses incurred should be 
submitted to your personal health care provider.” (Ex. B, p. 2) It is unclear based on the 
record why Parkin told Silvers to submit medical expenses to his personal health care 
provider since that is the entity that would be billing him for care not paying for it. 
Regardless, Clow Valve’s denial of liability based on the assertion that Silvers’ August 
23, 2023 injury did not cause his need for treatment meant Silvers was responsible for 
arranging and paying for all care relating to the injury. (Testimony) 
On January 11, 2024, Silvers went to his Mahaska Health family practice clinic to 
see Eric Miller, D.O., for a second opinion or referral on his right shoulder. (Ex. JE3, p. 
25) Dr. Miller noted, “On August 23 he was at work torqueing a wrench to close a fire 
hydrant when he developed acute onset of pain in his shoulder” and “has had significant 
pain since then.” (Ex. JE3, p. 25) At the time of Dr. Miller’s examination, Silvers rated 
his pain at two out of ten because he was not working. (Ex. JE3, p. 25) Silvers shared 
that he had weakness in his right upper extremity such that his eight-year-old daughter 
could overpower him and that he experienced popping in his injured shoulder. (Ex. JE3, 
p. 25) Dr. Miller noted that Dr. Aviles had recommended a referral to UIHC and that he 
would make the referral. (Ex. JE3, p. 26)  
Silvers saw Lori Vitko, N.P., at the Des Moines Division of the U.S. Department 
of Veteran Affairs (VA) Central Iowa Health Care System (CIHS) on April 4, 2024, 
because of persistent pain that began when he was “pulling on a pipe wrench and felt a 
sharp pain in his right shoulder.” (Ex. JE4, p. 29) Silvers requested a referral to VA Des 
Moines orthopedics. (Ex. JE4, pp. 28, 33) Vitko initiated the consultation with 
orthopedics. (Ex. JE4, p. 33) 
On May 31, 2024, Silvers had an intake appointment at UIHC orthopedics with 
Brendan Patterson, M.D. (Ex. JE5, p. 35) Dr. Patterson noted that Silvers had 
“experienced an injury at work … when he was pulling on a heavy wrench.” (Ex. JE5, p. 
35) Dr. Patterson reviewed Silvers’ x-rays, MRI, and CT scan and concluded that 
“glenoid augmentation operation would likely not provide him with any type of relief.” 
(Ex. JE5, p. 36) He advised conservative care in the form of physical therapy (PT) and 
corticosteroid injections. (Ex. JE5, p. 36) 
Silvers returned to UIHC orthopedics for a right glenohumeral joint corticosteroid 
injection. (Ex. JE5, p. 38) On October 9, 2024, Silvers telephoned the VA because he 
was experiencing worsening pain and achiness after the injection. (Ex. JE4, pp. 34, 39) 
The VA notified UIHC of the call and Jami Woods, R.N., telephoned Silvers the next day 
to set up new x-rays and a return visit. (Ex. JE5, p. 39) 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 8 
 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Silvers to undergo an IME with Brian Crites, 
M.D., on January 9, 2025. (Ex. 1, p. 1) The IME consisted of a review of records relating 
to care before the date of the IME and in-person examination that included a history. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 1–5) Silvers described his symptoms at the time of the examination to 
include constant pain that was achy but sharp with certain movements (such as lifting 
his arm straight up forward or overhead) or activities (such as lifting greater than five 
pounds). (Ex. 1, p. 4) He rated his pain level as three or four out of ten. (Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Silvers also reported occasional popping in his right shoulder and weakness in it. (Ex. 1, 
p. 4) 
In the IME report, Dr. Crites diagnoses Silvers with a SLAP tear in his right 
shoulder, posterior labral tear in his right shoulder, and glenohumeral instability in his 
right shoulder. (Ex. 1, p. 6) He categorizes Silvers’ prognosis as “fair” but states he 
would “continue to be symptomatic with painful range of motion activities until he has 
surgical treatment.” (Ex. 1, p. 6)  
On causation, Dr. Crites writes: 
It is my opinion as a board-certified orthopedic surgeon and sports 
medicine specialist whose practice consisted of 50% shoulder cases, that 
the work injury on 8/23/23 caused a permanent material aggravation to 
Devin’s right shoulder. Glenoid hypoplasia is a congenital condition which 
does predispose to glenohumeral instability. Chronic glenohumeral 
instability can lead to chronic labral tearing. His radiologic studies confirm 
the chronic nature of some of the posterior labral tearing. So his 
underlying anatomy is definitely a risk factor for developing a labral tear 
but it is not the only risk factor. The injury/trauma that occurred on 8/23/23 
is also a significant contributing factor in his shoulder condition. He most 
likely had some pre-existing posterior labral tearing. His mechanism of 
injury is also very consistent with causing an acute SLAP tear. He 
heard/felt a pop at the time of injury. This is consistent with an acute labral 
tear. It is my opinion that it is most likely that the injury caused an acute 
SLAP tear on top of a pre-existing posterior labral tear which was 
completely asymptomatic. This represents a material aggravation to his 
pre-existing right shoulder condition as an acute-on-chronic type of injury. 
Even Dr. Aviles states that his tear occurred at the time of injury when he 
stated, “His labrum was going to tear at some point. I think it is more 
incidental that it occurred at work than anything else.” This acute on 
chronic scenario matches his clinical course/history/symptoms. The 
alternative clinical scenario is that all of his pathology shown on the 
MRI/CT scan was pre-existing. If all of the labral tearing (posterior and 
SLAP) was pre-existing he was still completely asymptomatic prior to his 
injury at work. The medical records dating back to 1997 do not show any 
previous shoulder complaints or issues. So ultimately, when the labrum 
was torn is irrelevant for causation in this case because no matter what 
the age of any portion of the labral tearing, he went from an asymptomatic 
state to a symptomatic state due to the injury on 8/23/23. The injury 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 9 
 
pushed his shoulder over the edge and it became symptomatic and 
continues to be symptomatic. Thus, he had a permanent material 
aggravation to his right shoulder condition. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 6–7) 
Dr. Crites opines Silvers had not reached maximum medical improvement (MMI). 
(Ex. 1, p. 6) Dr. Crites agrees with the recommendation of Dr. Aviles that Silvers 
undergo surgery to repair his labral tear and bony glenoid reconstruction. (Ex. 1, p. 7) 
He feels the procedures were necessary for Silvers to reach MMI for the injury. (Ex. 1, 
p. 7)  
On January 17, 2025, Silvers followed up with Dr. Patterson with complaints of 
continuing anterior shoulder pain that was worse when he slept on it or performed 
activities above shoulder level. (Ex. D, p. 43) Dr. Patterson opined that Silvers’ pain 
“was likely due to his glenoid dysplasia.” (Ex. D, p. 43) Silvers reported that the injection 
he received on September 9, 2024, only provided him with about two days of pain relief. 
(Ex. D, p. 43) Dr. Patterson advised Silvers that a posterior labral repair or bone 
augmentation procedure would likely provide little pain relief and he would likely require 
a right shoulder replacement in the future. (Ex. D, p. 49) Instead, Dr. Patterson 
recommended an ultrasound guided biceps tendon injection for his anterior pain. (Ex. D, 
p. 49) 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to find that Dr. Patterson 
had knowledge of the fact that Silvers was asymptomatic until torqueing the wrench at 
work on August 23, 2023. Further, there is no indication in the record that Dr. Patterson 
knew of or considered the causation standard applicable in Iowa workers’ compensation 
cases when opining on the cause of Silvers’ pain. For these reasons, his opinion on 
causation is of little probative value. 
Defense counsel arranged for Silvers to undergo a defense medical examination 
(DME) with Robert Broghammer, M.D. (Ex. JE7) The DME included a medical records 
review and in-person examination on February 3, 2025. (Ex. JE7, pp. 44–52) Dr. 
Broghammer then issued a DME report dated February 8, 2025, summarizing the 
records he reviewed, noting his observations on examination, detailing the history 
Silvers provided him, and answering questions from defense counsel. (Ex. JE7) 
Dr. Broghammer’s DME report does not contain any discussion of what, if any, 
right-shoulder symptoms Silvers experienced before torquing a wrench to tighten a plug 
on a fire hydrant as part of his job duties at Clow Valve on August 23, 2023. (Ex. JE7, 
pp. 44–55) Based on the contents of Dr. Broghammer’s DME report, his consideration 
of Silvers’ medical history began with right hand x-rays on March 2, 2012. (Ex. JE7, pp. 
45, 51–52)  
Under the heading “Current Complaints,” Dr. Broghammer writes, “Mr. Silvers 
currently complains of aching all day long that he rates as 3 to 4 on a zero to 10 scale. 
He states that quick movements and lifting heavier items increases the sharp pain that 
lasts for a few seconds to a minute or two.” (Ex. JE7, p. 51) 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 10 
 
Under the heading “Injury and Fracture History” Dr. Broghammer’s DME report 
states, “Notable for a left knee injury with quadriceps injury when he jumped into a 
foxhole during basic training and struck his knee on a rock.” (Ex. JE7, p. 51–52) Under 
the heading “Worker History,” Dr. Broghammer describes Silvers as “a decent 
historian.” (Ex. JE7, p. 50) The DME report summarizes Silvers’ recount of the events 
on August 23, 2023, leading to the onset of his symptoms. (Ex. JE7, p. 50). Dr. 
Broghammer notes, “Silvers states that he was using a large pipe wrench, 
approximately three and a half feet long and was pulling forcefully on the plug to tighten 
it at about chest level when he experienced a sudden sharp pain in the right shoulder.” 
(Ex. JE7, p. 50) The “Worker History” section details the events of August 23, 2023 
moving forward. (Ex. JE7, pp. 50–51) There is no mention of Silvers’ life experience 
leading up to him feeling a pop in his right shoulder accompanied by the onset of pain 
when torqueing a wrench while working for Clow Valve. (Ex. JE7, 50–51)  
Defense counsel asked Dr. Broghammer to identify “the mechanism of injury 
claimant reported that he believes caused his current problems.” (Ex. JE7, p. 53) Dr. 
Broghammer answers in the report, “Silvers believes that the act of pulling on a wrench 
when working on a fire hydrant has caused the current problems in his shoulder.” (Ex. 
JE7, p. 53) Defense counsel did not ask and Dr. Broghammer does not address why 
Silvers believes the pop he felt in his right shoulder followed by the onset of 
unprecedented pain in the joint while torqueing a pipe wrench at work caused the 
problems in his shoulder. (Ex. JE7, p. 53)  
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Dr. 
Broghammer inquired about any right-shoulder symptoms Silvers may have 
experienced before August 23, 2023. (Ex. JE7, pp. 44–55) The evidence shows Dr. 
Broghammer did not consider the fact that Silvers did not experience symptoms similar 
in nature to those he felt after the work incident while playing sports as a youth, 
participating in wrestling and football in high school, passing the physical to enlist in the 
Guard, serving as a member of the Guard, working as a manual laborer after his 
discharge from military service, or working for Clow Valve between his date of hire and 
August 23, 2023. (Ex. JE7, pp. 44–55) The weight of the evidence establishes it is more 
likely than not Dr. Broghammer’s opinions are based on an incomplete understanding of 
Silvers’ medical history with respect to symptomology in his right shoulder. This fact 
significantly undermines his credibility as an expert witness in this case. 
On the issue of causation, defense counsel asked, “Do you believe claimant’s 
work activities at Clow Valve on August 23, 2023 caused or substantially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened, or “lit up” claimant’s right shoulder condition? Please state the 
basis for your opinion.” (Ex. JE7, p. 53) Unlike Parkin in her letter to Dr. Aviles, defense 
counsel accurately recites the causation standard that has governed in Iowa workers’ 
compensation cases for over a century. However, there is no indication that Dr. 
Broghammer knew that a pre-existing condition is not a defense in workers’ 
compensation or that the work activity need only be a cause and not the lone cause of 
the injury. (Ex. JE7, p. 53) Thus, it appears more likely than not Dr. Broghammer had an 
incomplete understanding of the causation standard in Iowa workers’ compensation 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 11 
 
cases when he opined on causation. This undermines the persuasiveness of his 
opinion. 
In response to defense counsel’s question on causation, Dr. Broghammer opines 
(sic): 
In my medical opinion, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, Mr. 
Silvers’ work activities at Clow Valve on August 23, 2023 did not cause or 
substantially aggravate, accelerate, worsen, or “light up” Mr. Silvers’ right 
shoulder condition. There are several reasons for stating so. First and 
foremost, Mr. Silvers has glenoid dysplasia noted on x-rays, CT scan, and 
MRI. Dr. Aviles, on physical examination of Mr. Silvers, also noted that the 
workers’ shoulder tended to sublux posteriorly consistent with glenoid 
dysplasia. It is highly likely that Mr. Silvers’ right shoulder has been 
subluxing over many years, which on a more likely than not basis, caused 
the SLAP tear in his shoulder, which was temporarily exacerbated by the 
described mechanism of injury occurring on August 23, 2023 when he 
pulled on a wrench working on a fire hydrant. 
It should be noted that Mr. Silvers’ right shoulder MRI demonstrated what 
the radiologist termed a “Chronically fractured periostem”. This would 
indicated that his periosteum fracture occurred sometime in the distant 
past. It should also be noted that Mr. Silvers’ MRI demonstrated 
“Prominent associated paralabral cystic change”. As you are likely aware, 
cystic change seen on MRI is again typically associated with chronic and 
degenerative-type findings. This supports my opinion to a reasonable 
degree of medical certainty that Mr. Silvers’ SLAP tear was due to his 
glenoid dysplasia and was more likely than not chronic in nature and 
significantly predated his alleged right shoulder injury on August 23, 2023. 
Just because he developed symptoms after the incident does not mean 
there is a cause and effect relationship between the findings on MRI and 
his ongoing right shoulder pain. In my medical opinion, to a reasonable 
degree of medical certainty, Mr. Silvers’ injury did not substantially 
contribute to, accelerate beyond normal progression, or “light up” the pre-
existing condition. I would again submit condition was temporarily 
exacerbated by the described mechanism of injury. I would also submit 
that labral tears do not occur from pulling activities as described by Mr. 
Silvers. They are often caused by shoulder dislocations or, in a rare case 
such as Mr. Silvers, by glenoid dysplasia. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 53) 
 
Claimant’s counsel provided Dr. Crites with Dr. Broghammer’s DME report and 
requested he respond to the opinions expressed in it. (Ex. 1, p. 9) Dr. Crites did so. (Ex. 
1, pp. 9–10) With respect to whether Silvers torqueing the wrench could have been the 
mechanism injury, Dr. Crites opines: 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 12 
 
I respectfully disagree with his opinion set forth in answer to question 4 on 
page 10 of his report. He states, “I would submit that labral tears do not 
occur from pulling activities as described by Mr. Silvers. They are often 
caused by shoulder dislocations or, in a rare case such as Mr. Silvers, by 
glenoid dysplasia.” As a board-certified orthopedic surgeon and sports 
medicine specialist where 50% of my cases were shoulders it is accepted 
orthopedic knowledge and my experience clinically that pulling activities 
can in fact cause SLAP labral tears. This is due [to] the biceps muscle 
being a major component or structure to the arm. The long head of the 
biceps muscle attaches to the superior labrum and traction or pulling 
injuries can pull this attachment off the superior labrum resulting in a 
SLAP tear. Dr. Broghammer is correct that dislocations and shoulder 
instability can lead to labral tears. However, this is not the only way in 
which a labrum can be torn. Both can be and are true. I do not dispute the 
fact that Mr. Silvers has glenoid dysplasia and I have addressed its 
contribution to his shoulder condition in my IME report. 
(Ex. 1, p. 9) 
 
Dr. Crites further states: 
A temporary exacerbation results in a worsening of a pre-existing 
condition due to an injury or event but the condition then returns to the 
pre-injury baseline. Thus, it is temporary. Mr. Silvers has not returned to 
his pre-injury baseline of being asymptomatic. Dr. Broghammer offers no 
evidence to show that Mr. Silvers is asymptomatic. In fact, the Current 
Complaints section of Dr. Broghammer’s report proves the exact opposite. 
His opinions seem contradictory to the facts of the case.  
(Ex. 1, p. 9) 
 
As found above, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to 
conclude Silvers experienced any right shoulder symptoms before he felt a pop while 
torqueing a wrench at work on August 23, 2023. In Dr. Broghammer’s report, he does 
not recognize the lack of symptoms in Silvers’ right shoulder before this work incident. 
The closest Dr. Broghammer gets to recognizing this fact is his assertion, “Just because 
he developed symptoms after the incident does not mean there is a cause and effect 
relationship between the findings on MRI and his ongoing right shoulder pain.” But Dr. 
Broghammer’s statement that Silvers “developed symptoms after the incident” is 
insufficient to show he knew of this fact or considered it when rendering his opinion on 
causation. 
 
Dr. Broghammer categorizes Silvers’ injury as a temporary exacerbation. As Dr. 
Crites compellingly asserts, a temporary condition requires a return to baseline. Given 
the fact that Dr. Broghammer documents Silvers’ ongoing complaints of constant pain 
worsened by certain motions and activities as well as weakness in the “Current 
Complaints” section of his DME report, it is more likely than not that he was operating 
under the inaccurate understanding that the symptoms Silvers shared with him during 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 13 
 
his DME were the same that he was living with before August 23, 2023. There is no 
indication in the evidence that this is true and Dr. Broghammer points to no information 
in his DME report that would support such a finding. 
For Silvers, the right-shoulder symptoms that followed the pop in his right 
shoulder while using the wrench at work were unprecedented and significant enough for 
him to report the injury to Clow Valve and seek care. Since the August 23, 2023 injury, 
Silvers has also had lost function and weakness in the right upper extremity that he had 
never experienced prior to using the wrench at work on August 23, 2023. It is absurd to 
posit that the event that triggered the symptoms necessitating medical care did not 
cause, aggravate, accelerate, worsen, or light up the condition in Silver’s right shoulder 
that caused him to seek care.  
Dr. Crites demonstrates in his IME report and supplemental report an accurate 
understanding of when Silvers first experienced a pop in his right shoulder immediately 
followed by the onset of pain that continued through the date of hearing as well as 
weakness and lost function. He expressly recognizes that Silvers was asymptomatic 
before he felt the pop in his shoulder that was accompanied by the onset of pain. Dr. 
Crites further opines in convincing fashion that a pop such as the one Silvers 
experienced while torqueing the wrench at work on August 23, 2023, is “consistent with 
an acute labral tear. It is my opinion that it is most likely that the injury caused an acute 
SLAP tear on top of a pre-existing posterior labral tear which was completely 
asymptomatic. This represents a material aggravation to his pre-existing right shoulder 
condition as an acute-on-chronic type of injury.” (Ex. 1, p. 6)  
Dr. Crites preemptively addresses Dr. Broghammer’s pre-existing SLAP tear 
theory against the backdrop of Silvers being asymptomatic until he torqued the wrench 
while working for Clow Valve. Dr. Crites persuasively opines, “So ultimately, when the 
labrum was torn is irrelevant for causation in this case because no matter what the age 
of any portion of the labral tearing, he went from an asymptomatic state to a 
symptomatic state due to the injury on 8/23/23. The injury pushed his shoulder over the 
edge and it became symptomatic and continues to be symptomatic. Thus, he had a 
permanent material aggravation to his right shoulder condition.” (Ex. 1, pp. 6–7) 
Dr. Crites’ causation opinion is most credible. His IME report expressly 
demonstrates an accurate understanding of the fact that Silvers was asymptomatic 
before he torqued the wrench at work on August 23, 2023. He explains how Silvers 
experiencing no symptoms until the pop in his right shoulder at work—which was likely 
reflective of the SLAP tear occurring—rendered the question of when part or all of the 
tear happened irrelevant for causation purposes because his symptoms were caused by 
the work activity, which represents either the outright cause of the injury or a material 
aggravation of a pre-existing condition as an acute-on-chronic type of injury. This 
reflects an accurate understanding of the causation standard under Iowa workers’ 
compensation law. For these reasons, Dr. Crites’ opinion on causation is persuasive 
and adopted. 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 14 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The edition of the Iowa Code in effect on the injury date governs in workers’ 
compensation cases. See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r 
No. 5064673, 2020 WL 6037539 *2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). The injury at issue in this case 
occurred on August 23, 2023. Therefore, the 2023 edition of the Iowa Code governs in 
this case. 
A.  
C a u s a t i o n  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act “covers any and all personal injuries” 
relating to an employee’s work. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823, 824 
(1920). Under section 85.3(1), an employer covered by the Act must “provide, secure, 
and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment.” The legislature has codified a partial definition of “personal injury” in 
section 85.61(4) that is not applicable in the current case. Rather, the expanded 
definition of “personal injury” as articulated by the Iowa Supreme Court in its seminal 
Almquist v. Shenandoah Nurseries, Inc. governs: 
“an injury to the body, the impairment of health, or a disease, not excluded 
by the act, which comes about, not through the natural building up and 
tearing down of the human body, but because of a traumatic or other hurt 
or damage to the health or body of an employee.... The injury to the 
human body here contemplated must be something, whether an accident 
or not, that acts extraneously to the natural processes of nature, and 
thereby impairs the health, overcomes, injures, interrupts, or destroys 
some function of the body, or otherwise damages or injures a part or all of 
the body.”  
Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 850–51 (Iowa 1995) (quoting 
Almquist, 218 Iowa 724, 732, 254 N.W. 35, 39 (1934)) (citations omitted in Dunlavey). 
“In order for an injury to be compensable in Iowa, there must be ‘a connection 
between the injury and the work.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 
2007) (quoting Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 221 (Iowa 2006)). To recover, a 
claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury for which the 
claimant is seeking workers’ compensation arose: 
1) Out of the claimant’s employment; and 
 
2) In the course of the claimant’s employment. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 
143, 150 (Iowa 1996)); see also Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 
(Iowa 1996).  

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 15 
 
“‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an 
injury to be deemed compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this 
case, the parties dispute only whether the injury arose out of employment. 
“An injury ‘arises out of’ employment if there is a causal connection between the 
employment and the injury.” Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 652 (citing Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 
N.W.2d 334, 338 (Iowa 1998)). “‘In other words, the injury must not have coincidentally 
occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to the working 
environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174. (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311).  
Taking the words themselves, one is first struck by the fact that in the 
“arising” phrase the function of the employment is passive while in the 
“caused by” phrase it is active. When one speaks of an event “arising out 
of employment,” the initiative, the moving force, is something other than 
the employment; the employment is thought of more as a condition out of 
which the event arises than as the force producing the event in affirmative 
fashion. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. 
Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law (2005) § 3.06, at 3-7 to 3-8 (emphasis in 
original)). 
“[S]ubject to ‘limited exceptions,’” the Iowa Supreme Court has “‘abandoned’ or 
‘discarded’ the increased-risk test in favor of the actual-risk test” when determining 
whether an employee’s injury arises out of employment under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 85–86 (Iowa 2018) (quoting 
Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 177, n.7). The actual risk rule holds: 
If the nature of the employment exposes the employee to the risk of such 
an injury, the employee suffers an accidental injury arising out of and 
during the course of the employment. And it makes no difference that the 
risk was common to the general public on the day of injury. 
Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting Hanson v. Reichelt, 452 N.W.2d 164, 168 (Iowa 
1990)).  
An expert opinion on causation may not be considered in isolation; rather, it must 
be considered along with all other evidence bearing upon the causal connection 
between the injury and the disability. See Schujter v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 
N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010); see also Nellis v. Quealy, 237 Iowa 507, 512, 21 N.W. 
584, 586 (Iowa 1946). Moreover, the Iowa Supreme Court has long held that an injured 
worker’s credible testimony regarding the onset of symptoms “must be given 
considerable weight on the issue of causal connection.” Hinrichs v. Davenport 
Locomotive Works, 203 Iowa 1395, 214 N.W. 585, 586 (Iowa 1927).  

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 16 
 
Under Iowa law, a worker is not entitled to workers’ compensation for a pre-
existing condition, but the mere existence of that condition at the time of a subsequent 
injury is not a defense to liability under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Nicks v. 
Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 812, 815 (Iowa 1962). If the 
work injury aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or lighted up a worker’s pre-existing 
condition, the worker is entitled to recover for the resultant disability. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, (Iowa 2000); Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 76 N.W.2d 
756, 761 (Iowa 1956); Hanson v. Dickinson, 176 N.W. 823, 824–25 (Iowa 1920)). “If the 
employment of claimant resulted in a personal injury aggravating her already impaired 
physical condition, she is entitled to compensation to the extent of that injury.” Nicks, 
254 Iowa at 135,115 N.W.2d at 815. “For workers' compensation purposes a cause is 
proximate if it is a cause; it need not be the only cause.” Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 
525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  
As found above, Dr. Crites’ causation opinion is the most credible in this case 
because he articulates an accurate understanding of the fact that Silvers was 
asymptomatic in his right shoulder before feeling a pop in it while torqueing a wrench at 
work on August 23, 2023, that was followed by the onset of pain as well as lost function 
and weakness, symptoms that continued through the hearing date. Dr. Crites also 
demonstrates an accurate understanding of the causation standard in workers’ 
compensation cases under Iowa law. Further, his reasoning was thorough and 
persuasive. Therefore, the undersigned adopts Dr. Crites’ causation opinion in this 
decision. 
Silvers has met his burden of proof on causation. The evidence establishes it is 
more likely than not he sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Clow Valve on August 23, 2023, that caused the need for medical 
care. Under Iowa Code section 85.27, Clow Valve shall furnish reasonable care for the 
injury. 
B .  
C o s t s  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting City of Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 
660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are 
strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Because Silvers prevailed on the disputed issue of causation, the following costs 
are taxed against the defendants under Iowa Code section 86.40 and Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—4.33: 
▪ $8.89 for the cost of service of the original notice and petition; 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 17 
 
▪ $500.00 for the reasonable costs of obtaining Dr. Crites’ rebuttal report to Dr. 
Broghammer’s IME report; and 
▪ $128.00 for the cost of the filing fee, including convenience fee incurred by 
using the payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System 
(WCES). 
C .  
I M E  
The parties identified IME reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39 as in 
dispute on the hearing report. Neither party’s brief addressed the issue. Therefore, the 
decision does not address it. If either party wishes the issue addressed, the party may 
apply for rehearing under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.24. 
V. 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall furnish reasonable care for the work injury. 
2) The defendants shall pay to Silvers the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a) One hundred twenty-eight dollars and 00/100 ($128.00) for the filing 
and WCES convenience fees; 
b) Eight dollars and 28/100 ($8.28) for service of the original notice and 
petition; and 
c) Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the cost of Dr. Crites’ report in 
rebuttal to Dr. Broghammer’s IME report. 
Signed and filed this 6th day of May, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Channing L. Dutton, Attorney for Claimant 
Robert C. Gainer, Attorney for Defendants 
 

SILVERS V. CLOW VALVE 
Page 18 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
