Case Number: 20700561.02
Case Title:  DOWNING, SHELLEY V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Downing Shelley-20700561.02m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
SHELLEY DOWNING, 
No. 20700561.02 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES, 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ARCH INSURANCE CO., 
Headnote:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C ASE  
On June 18, 2020, claimant Shelley Downing filed a petition in arbitration seeking 
workers’ compensation benefits from the defendants, employer Gallagher Bassett 
Services and insurance carrier Arch Insurance Company, for work injuries she 
sustained on April 25, 2018. The agency assigned the case No. 20700561.01. The 
parties ultimately entered into a compromise settlement under Iowa Code section 85.35 
(3) and (6). The undersigned hereby takes administrative notice of the parties’ filings in 
that contested case proceeding. 
The Commissioner issued an order approving the settlement on June 22, 2021. 
The parties’ settlement contains the agreement that the “[d]efendants will continue to 
pay for causally related medical care under Iowa Code [section] 85.27, pursuant to Iowa 
Code [s]ection 85.36(6)” until the defendants fund a Medicare Set Aside and the parties 
reach an agreement on any non-Medicare covered medical expenses. The dispute in 
the current case stems from the defendants’ rescission of previously authorized care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27. 
On May 17, 2024, Downing filed a petition concerning application for alternate 
care under Iowa Code section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48. The 
defendants answered on May 30, 2024, accepting liability for the work injuries 
necessitating the care at issue. They also filed a pre-hearing brief in accordance with 
rule 876—4.48(11).  
The undersigned presided over an alternate care hearing that was held by 
telephone and recorded on May 31, 2024. That audio recording constitutes the official 
record of the proceeding under rule 876—4.48(12). Downing participated personally and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-31  16:19:00     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 2 
 
through attorney James M. Ballard. The defendants participated through attorney 
Garrett A. Lutovsky. The record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 2; and 
 Hearing testimony by Downing that the undersigned finds credible. 
II.  
ISSU E  
The issue under consideration is whether Downing is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of services provided by her husband that include: 
1) Transportation to and from medical appointments and the workout facility 
where she performs water therapy; and 
2) Assistance reasonably necessary to allow Downing to access the point of 
care for medical appointments and the workout facility where she performs 
water therapy. 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
On April 25, 2018, Downing sustained injuries to her back, neck, and head 
arising out of and in the course of her employment with Gallagher Bassett. Her head 
injury was a traumatic brain injury that caused significant disability. Because of the 
injury, Downing has problems with her gait, balance, vision, depth and perception, as 
well as mental health issues including anxiety and depression. She is unable to walk 
long distances, on uneven ground, or up and down steps. Downing’s blurry vision 
prevents her from being able to read the buttons on elevators. Her mental health issues 
make change much more difficult for her than before the injury. Downing’s depth 
perception and blurry vision also make walking difficult. Indeed, since the work injury, 
she has sustained multiple falls that have caused her further injury. (Testimony) 
The parties settled Downing’s underlying workers’ compensation case and left 
medical benefits open. Under the terms of the parties’ agreement, which was approved 
by the Commissioner, the defendants are responsible for care under Iowa Code section 
85.27 until the defendants fund a Medicare Set Aside and the parties reach an 
agreement on any non-Medicare covered medical expenses. No Medicare Set Aside 
had been funded as of the date of hearing, so the defendants were responsible for care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 at all times material to this case. (Settlement 
Agreement; Testimony) 
The defendants continued to authorize care with Downing’s treating physicians. 
At the time of hearing, this included counseling two times per month, seeing a 
psychologist once per month, and an appointment with her treating psychologist, Heike 
Schmolck, M.D., once every six months. Dr. Schmolck prescribed Downing water 
therapy, a form of physical rehabilitation that is performed in a swimming pool. The 
defendants authorized the care. (Testimony)  

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 3 
 
At first, Downing participated in formal water therapy with a physical therapist 
present. Ultimately, she progressed to the point where her care providers concluded 
she no longer needed formal water therapy and could perform informal water therapy, 
which is the same regimen but without a physical therapist present, on her own. 
Gallagher Bassett agreed to pay for Downing’s membership at Lifetime Fitness, a 
workout facility with a pool, so she could continue the care of daily informal water 
therapy. Downing testified that water therapy has been beneficial to her. It helps her 
endurance, stability, and strength. (Testimony) 
Dr. Schmolck has given Downing activity restrictions that include no driving and 
no working. The defendants initially attempted to provide her with transportation to care 
using a third-party service. The first time they sent a driver, he did not know who he was 
picking up or where he was going. The vehicle was full of trash, smelled of cigarette 
smoke, the ashtray was full of cigarette butts, and there was still smoke in the air from 
his most recent cigarette when Downing got in the vehicle. This was an issue because 
Downing is allergic to cigarette smoke. Nonetheless, she rode in the vehicle to her 
appointment, but when they arrived, the driver refused to assist her in getting out of the 
vehicle and to the point of care within the building where the provider was located. 
(Testimony) 
The transportation issues did not end there. On at least six different occasions, 
nobody showed up at her home to transport Downing to scheduled medical 
appointments with authorized care providers. The failure to provide transportation 
effectively denied Downing care on each of the six occasions nobody showed up to 
transport her to the appointment. (Testimony) 
It is more likely than not that Gallagher Bassett recognized this was untenable. 
An assistant branch manager telephoned Downing and proposed a solution:  The 
defendants would pay her husband $100.00 per appointment to transport her to and 
from the facility and assist her with getting to and from the point of care at the facility so 
long as her husband guaranteed to get her to every appointment on time. The 
agreement would apply to appointments with authorized care providers and informal 
water therapy sessions. (Testimony) 
Downing and her husband agreed to the proposed arrangement and he dutifully 
assisted her with getting to and from care. There is no evidence in the record anybody 
took issue with any aspect of how he performed his end of the bargain. In fact, the 
weight of the evidence shows Downing’s husband assisted her with getting to and from 
care far better than Gallagher Bassett did before the arrangement. There is no 
indication she missed an appointment after her husband took over this aspect of her 
care. Gallagher Bassett paid him $100.00 per appointment and water therapy session 
for approximately two years. (Testimony) 
When assisting Downing with getting to the point of care, her husband drives her 
to the building where the provider is located, helps her in and out of the car, provides 
physical support with his arms when she is walking so she does not fall or pushes a 
wheelchair, and pushes elevator buttons because she is unable to read them. For water 

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 4 
 
therapy, he drives her to Lifetime Fitness, helps her in and out of the car, provides 
physical support with his arms when she is walking so she does not fall or pushes a 
wheelchair, helps her change into and out of her swimsuit in the changing room, and 
helps her in and out of the pool. (Testimony) 
Downing’s husband is employed full time. He was able to get off work for the day 
at 3:00 p.m. on many days and provide the assistance under the agreement so 
Downing can physically access the point of care for water therapy. When Downing had 
an appointment during her husband’s workday, he would take paid time-off (PTO) to 
assist her with getting to the point of care in appropriate attire. He does not have 
unlimited time-off, so this was a financial burden to them. (Testimony) 
On February 2, 2024, Gallagher Bassett telephoned Downing and rescinded the 
agreement that the defendants would pay her husband $100.00 per appointment and 
water therapy session for assisting her in accessing the point of care. The person with 
whom Downing spoke did not state why it was terminating the arrangement. Nor did this 
individual propose an alternative arrangement. (Testimony) 
At one point, an individual with Gallagher Bassett stated they would pay her 
mileage, but nobody ever proposed an alternative arrangement that would physically 
enable Downing to get from the vehicle to the point of care within the building where the 
provider was located. Nor did they offer to provide services that would assist her so that 
she would be physically able to perform her prescribed water therapy. (Testimony) 
Downing cannot drive, per doctor-prescribed restrictions. She is physically 
incapable of getting from the parking lot outside the building containing the point of care 
to the point of care without assistance. The evidence shows that by terminating 
Downing’s husband as the provider of assistance with getting her to and from the point 
of care, they effectively denied her care. (Testimony) 
At some point in time after Gallagher Bassett informed Downing that it would no 
longer be honoring its agreement with Downing and her husband, an individual with the 
company informed her that if her treating physician would order the assistance services 
by her husband, they would authorize it. So, Downing asked Dr. Schmolck, who 
authored a letter to Gallagher Bassett dated February 13, 2024, “Re: Shelley Downing,” 
stating: 
The above patient follows in our clinic for a neurological condition. Shelley 
continues to do pool rehabilitation daily. She needs care giver [sic] 
services provided by her husband as he has done the last 2 years. Shelley 
needs assistance with getting out of the car[], in and out of the pool, 
removing wet swimsuit, up and down steps and help with pushing a 
wheelchair. His assistance is needed up to 2 hours daily. 
(Ex. 1, p. 2) Despite Dr. Schmolck’s letter regarding the medical necessity of the 
assistance by her husband, the defendants did not change their position. (Testimony) 

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 5 
 
Downing was unable to get to scheduled medical appointments between 
February 2, 2024, and the date of hearing because of the defendants’ rescission of her 
husband as an authorized provider to assist her in getting to the point of care. Because 
the defendants did not offer alternatives, Downing looked into them herself. Downing 
contacted two transportation services in her local area to inquire about the cost of their 
services and whether they would include someone physically assisting her in getting to 
and from the point of care in appropriate attire. Both were more expensive than her 
husband and did not include hands-on services like those she requires. (Testimony) 
Downing’s condition deteriorated after the defendants denied her care in the form 
of her husband assisting her with getting to and from the point of care in appropriate 
attire. She was unable to attend counseling, which has caused her mental health 
conditions to worsen. On one occasion, her husband used PTO from work to take her to 
counseling because she had suicidal ideation. Downing has been unable to see her 
authorized treating psychiatrist because she cannot access the point of care without 
assistance. She has not been able to perform water therapy because she cannot 
access the point of care without assistance. (Testimony) 
The defendants have stated they would pay for mileage relating to the 
transportation Downing must have to access care. But she cannot drive and they 
rescinded payment to her husband to be her driver without offering an alternative. Since 
the defendants’ first choice was an alternative that failed to show up on multiple 
occasions, the weight of the evidence in this case shows that the defendants have 
acted unreasonably by rescinding their authorization for her husband to be her driver to 
and from appointments and water therapy sessions because he got her to and from her 
appointments on time, which their service could not do. 
The weight of the evidence establishes that Downing is physically incapable of 
getting to the point of care from the vehicle that transports her to the building or facility 
of an authorized provider because of the significant functional limitations caused by her 
work injury. Dr. Schmolck’s letter combined with Downing’s credible hearing testimony 
establishes that the assistance provided by her husband is inextricably intertwined with 
medical care in the form of counseling, psychiatrist appointments, neurology 
appointments, and water therapy. The evidence conclusively establishes that the 
assistance services performed by Downing’s husband are medically necessary and 
reasonably calculated to treat her work injuries without undue inconvenience to her. 
Consequently, Downing has met her burden of proof and established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the defendants’ decision to rescind their two-year 
agreement with Downing’s husband to pay him to provide her with assistance services 
so she can get to and from the point of care despite the functional limitations caused by 
her work injury is unreasonable. 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
Iowa Code section 85.27 governs care for a work injury. Under section 
85.27(1)(a),  

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 6 
 
The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter or chapter 
85A, shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies therefor and shall allow reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for such services. The 
employer shall also furnish reasonable and necessary crutches, artificial 
members, and appliances. 
Section 85.27(4) further provides: 
[T]he employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to 
treat an injured employee, and has the right to choose the care. If the 
employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee 
harmless for the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that 
the employer is no longer authorizing all or any part of the care and the 
reason for the change in authorization. . . . The treatment must be offered 
promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue 
inconvenience to the employee. 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). “Reduced to its essentials, section 85.27 requires an insurer to 
furnish reasonable medical services and supplies and reasonable and necessary 
appliances to treat an injured employee.” Castle, 657 N.W.2d at 490. 
“In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), our legislature 
sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the competing interests of 
their employers.” Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 770–71. An injured employee 
dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack thereof) may share the employee’s 
discontent with the employer and if the parties can’t reach an agreement on alternate 
care, “the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity 
therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. “Determining what care is reasonable under the 
statute is a question of fact.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 
1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the 
party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the employee bears the burden of 
proving that the authorized care is unreasonable. Id. at 123. Because “the employer’s 
obligation under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not 
desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, 
standing alone, is not enough to find such care unreasonable. Id. 

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 7 
 
In the current case, the defendants agree that Downing is entitled to water 
therapy under section 85.27 and have authorized the care, even paying for her 
membership to Lifetime Fitness so she can perform informal water therapy on her own, 
without the oversight of a therapist. The defendants also agree that under the statute, 
Downing is entitled to transportation to the building where an authorized provider is 
located. However, the defendants argue that is the extent of their duty under the statute. 
They contend they have no responsibility to assist Downing in getting from the vehicle 
to the point of care in appropriate attire and vice versa, even though she is physically 
incapable of doing so on her own. The defendants believe this is Downing’s 
responsibility, not theirs, even though the physical limitations necessitating that she 
have assistance were caused by the work injury. 
In support of their position, the defendants rely on the Iowa Supreme Court’s 
interpretation of the statutory term “nursing services” in Henry v. Iowa-Illinois Gas & 
Elec. Co., 522 N.W.2d 301 (Iowa 1994) and its progeny. In Henry, the claimant sought 
care in the form of home services his family performed for him, such as clearing snow 
from his driveway, helping him get dressed, and cooking him meals. 522 N.W.2d at 302. 
The claimant in Henry did not seek care in the form of assistance getting to and from 
the point of care safely and in appropriate attire. See id. at 301–02. In fact, there is no 
indication in the Henry opinion that the claimant sought any services directly related to 
the provision of care authorized by the defendants. See id. Consequently, Henry and its 
progeny are inapposite here because it focuses on caregiver services in the home, not 
assistance with accessing the point of care authorized in accordance with section 85.27. 
Despite the defendants’ framing, this is not a case about nursing services. The 
evidence in this case shows that the assistance services at issue are necessary to allow 
Downing to access the point of care authorized by the defendants under section 85.27. 
Without the assistance services at issue, Downing cannot access the care. This dispute 
in this case centers on the defendants’ rescission of the two-year agreement regarding 
these services and how it has prevented Downing from being able to access care 
authorized by the defendants under section 85.27. 
Downing did not pray for nursing services in her petition or request them at 
hearing. While it is true Dr. Schmolck used the term “care giver services provided by her 
husband” in the letter regarding the medical necessity of the assistance services by 
Downing’s husband, that is not enough to place the assistance services in question 
outside the care described in section 85.27. As found above, the weight of the evidence 
establishes that due to the unique facts in this case regarding Downing’s physical 
limitations, the assistance services performed by her husband are medically necessary 
because, without them, she is incapable of reaching the point of care within the 
buildings where her providers and the pool necessary for informal water therapy are 
located. Thus, refusing to authorize the services performed by Downing’s husband 
constitutes a denial of care in the form of medical services and physical rehabilitation. 
And that denial is unreasonable because the record establishes such care has been 
prescribed by authorized care providers and has been beneficial. 

DOWNING V. GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES 
Page 8 
 
Further, the failure of the defendants’ transportation service provider(s) earlier in 
Downing’s care establish the provider(s) as an unreasonable alternative to her husband 
as a transportation provider. The record showed he dutifully performed this service 
without issue at a lesser cost to the defendants than the incompetent provider(s) they 
attempted to use. The parties’ two-year arrangement struck a balance of interests that 
met the defendants’ responsibility under section 85.27 to hold Downing harmless with 
respect to transportation expenses since she is physically incapable of driving during 
the workday and her husband has a full-time job with limited PTO while also being cost 
effective for the defendants. 
V. 
OR D ER  
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Downing’s application for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) The defendants shall authorize Downing’s husband to provide the following 
medical assistance services: 
 
a) Transportation to and from medical appointments and the workout 
facility where she performs water therapy; and 
 
b) With respect to medical appointments and water therapy, assistance 
reasonably necessary to allow Downing to access the point of care. 
The Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order delegating 
authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the undersigned, to 
issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. Consequently, there is 
no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial review in a district court 
under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 31st day of May, 2024. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
James M. Ballard, Attorney for Claimant 
Garrett A. Lutovsky, Attorney for Defendants 
 
