Case Number: 22012559.02
Case Title:  THOMPSON, LINDA V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Thompson Linda-22012559.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LINDA THOMPSON,   
  : 
 
 
  : 
          File No. 22012559.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a,   
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AMERICAN ZURICH INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes: 1108.50, 1402.30, 1402.40  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
                1701, 1803, 2501, 2502, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Linda Thompson filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Fortune Brands Home & Security d/b/a Masterbrand 
Cabinets, LLC, the employer, and American Zurich Insurance Company, the insurance 
carrier, for an alleged work injury date of August 16, 2022. The case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on June 25, 2025. The case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via Zoom, with all participants appearing remotely. The hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 10, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through D.  
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on June 25, 2025. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on July 24, 2025, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Nov-05  07:18:59     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 2 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment on August 16, 2022; 
2. 
If so, whether the injury is a cause of temporary disability; 
3. 
Whether and to what extent the alleged injury is a cause of permanent 
disability; 
4. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
5. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; 
6. 
Whether defendants are entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 
85.38(2); and 
7. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 63-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
15) Claimant has alleged a cumulative injury to her right shoulder as a result of her work 
duties, with August 16, 2022 as the date of injury. (Tr., p. 16) There is a factual dispute 
as to what specific job duties claimant was performing on the alleged date of injury. 
 
Claimant has been employed at Masterbrand/Omega Cabinets for almost 30 
years. Over the course of her employment, she had worked in several different 
positions. She testified that she has worked in sanding, expediting, as a molding 
inspector/molding packaging operator, and as a quality tech. (Tr., pp 15-16)1 She 
testified that on the alleged date of injury she was performing the job of molding 
inspector. (Tr., p. 16) At the time of hearing, claimant was working in the quality 
technician position, which does not require her to lift the rolls of cardboard. (Tr., pp. 18-
19) 
 
Claimant testified that the job duties of a molding inspector included pushing 
large carts of molding, lifting rolls of cardboard off of a pallet and rolling them to 
machines, where they would then lift the rolls of cardboard to place them into the 
machine, as well as lifting molding overhead. (Tr., pp. 16-17) She said the rolls of 
cardboard weigh 25 to 50 pounds. (Tr., p. 17) She further testified that in order to 
inspect molding, she was required to lift the molding overhead in order to fully inspect it. 
                                                 
1 Claimant testified that “molding inspector” and “molding packaging operator” are the same job. (Tr., p. 
16) As such, the terms may be used interchangeably in this decision. 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 3 
She said she had to do the overhead lifting “quite often;” 50 times or more per shift. (Tr., 
p. 23) 
 
In her answers to defendants’ interrogatories, which were served on October 10, 
2024, claimant described her job on the date of injury as “working in the moulding 
department which required pushing large racks and lifting large cardboard rolls off of a 
pallet and then rolling them to where they would have to be lifted onto the boxing 
machine. I was also required to lift moulding overhead in order to inspect the pieces 
during production.” (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 18) She also stated that the weights varied, 
but could range from 30 to 50 pounds, depending on the box being lifted. 
 
At the top of the formal job description for a molding packaging operator, it states 
“Dept: 560 Custom Accessory.” (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 24) It also states that employees had a 
small lift they could use when changing the cardboard rolls. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 27) However, 
claimant testified that that lift was not always available for use in her position, and only 
became available for use after the date of her alleged injury. (Tr., pp. 17-18) The job 
description also describes the job duties as an employee scanning a label and then 
placing the molding on the machine conveyor to be packaged. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 24) With 
respect to use of the shoulders, the job description indicates that forward and sideways 
motion of the shoulders is constant (greater than 66 percent of the time), but says “no” 
for shoulder elevation. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 27) Finally, the job description indicates claimant 
would occasionally have to lift items weighing from 3 to 35 pounds, and rarely lift up to 
55 pounds.  
 
On cross-examination, claimant was asked about her job duties as an expediter. 
(Tr., p. 24) She testified that there was lifting involved in that position as well, but could 
not remember how often she had to lift things. She agreed that it was less than she was 
required to do as a molding inspector. She also stated that she only had to deal with the 
large rolls of cardboard in molding. Claimant agreed that whenever there was a transfer 
at Masterbrand from one department to another, a “personnel status change form” was 
generated, and kept in the employee’s personnel file. (Tr., p. 28) There is a personnel 
status change form in claimant’s personnel file, dated April 7, 2019, that indicates she 
was changed from department 560 (“custom accessory” department, which includes the 
molding packaging operator position) to department 110. (Defendants’ Exhibit D, p. 12) 
Under the reason, it states “New dept. created – restructure.” In the space on the form 
for “Authorized By,” the form is initialed by “DT.” There is no date next to the 
authorization, and the space for “Approved By” is blank.  
 
When asked about department 110, claimant agreed that department includes 
the quality technician position she had at the time of hearing. (Tr., p. 29) She further 
agreed that after starting at Masterbrand, she worked in the sanding position for about 
ten years. She then moved to the molding inspector position. However, when asked if 
she moved to a new position from the molding inspector position in April of 2019, she 
said “I signed a paper. I did not go there right away.” (Tr., pp. 29-30) She said she did 
not remember when she went to the new position, and did not remember if it was before 
November of 2022. (Tr., p. 30) She testified that she worked as an expediter shortly 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 4 
after the sanding position. (Tr., p. 31) As far as she remembers, she went to the molding 
inspector position after expediting. She testified that when there is a personnel change, 
the transfer does not happen right away, as there is a 30-day period before the 
employee goes to the new position. She stated that did not happen. She stated that 
employees have to wait for the next person to take over the job, and then train that 
person. (Tr., pp. 31-32) However, she agreed that after that training took place, she 
switched out of department 560 “around 2019.” (Tr., p. 32)  
 
There is a “job acceptance form” in evidence from the employer indicating that 
claimant accepted an offer of the position of quality technician in department 110 on 
November 15, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 22) The form was signed by claimant’s supervisor 
and the HR representative on November 16, 2022. 
 
Turning to the medical records, there is a record from AtlasWork, which is 
identified as the on-site wellness provider. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) The record has a 
“request date” of August 23, 2022, and a “contact log date” of September 6, 2022. The 
record lists claimant’s position as material handler, in department 120 – “Dynasty 
Plywood.” The injury mechanism is listed as repetitive motion, and injury type says 
sprain, strain, or tear to shoulders. Claimant was instructed to take non-prescription 
medication, and use ice, heat, and stretching. She was to follow up with onsite early 
intervention on September 8, 2022. The record also states “protective duty,” and 
recommends claimant work with her supervisor and EHS staff on alternatives.  
 
The next record from AtlasWork is dated September 8, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) The 
employee instructions were essentially the same, with the addition of “body 
mechanics/recommendations,” and “Massage/Atlas STM.” She returned approximately 
twice per week after that, until her last visit on October 24, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 3-12) 
The employee instructions were essentially the same at each visit. 
 
Claimant saw Erin Kennedy, M.D., at UnityPoint – Allen Occupational Health on 
November 8, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 13) There is an email in Dr. Kennedy’s file from Jeff 
Orr, EHS Manager at Masterbrand, dated October 31, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 20) The email 
is Mr. Orr’s request for claimant to be scheduled with Dr. Kennedy. Mr. Orr stated in the 
email that claimant works in the Quality department, and had been seeing onsite 
wellness for months. He explained that claimant had been having right shoulder pain 
when she tried to elevate above shoulder height. There was no specific mechanism of 
injury, and Mr. Orr stated that her job did not require any above-shoulder work. He 
stated that she “uses a scanner to check molding parts into her department and places 
them on a packing machine that is waist high.” He also stated that claimant expressed 
that her pain might be from arthritis as she has it in “most of her joints,” but she wanted 
to be seen by occupational health to determine if it was something more than arthritis. 
Finally, Mr. Orr stated that claimant was in a dart league that plays “multiple times per 
week” and requires over the shoulder movement, so the claim had already been 
submitted as “questionable.” He noted that other supervisors are in the same dart 
league and had seen claimant attend and participate since her pain started in August.  
 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 5 
Dr. Kennedy’s November 8, 2022 record lists claimant as a molding inspector. 
Dr. Kennedy recorded claimant’s description of the accident as repetitive picking up 
moldings and lifting cardboard, long in length, off the pallet, and turning a wheel with 
resistance. At that time claimant rated her pain at a level 6 out of 10, and said it was not 
constant, but came and went. She reported pain increased with lifting, and interrupted 
her sleep. Claimant reported she had been seeing therapy at work, and was given 
stretches and they were trying to help her use her other arm. She reported other people 
were lifting, pushing and pulling her cart.  
 
Dr. Kennedy’s record states that claimant presented for initial evaluation of right 
shoulder pain that she believed was related to her work. She reported pain started 
gradually in the preceding weeks with no specific incident. She said her pain was 
previously constant and escalating, but the onsite trainer had recommended shoulder 
exercises and evaluation of her job, making recommendations to keep her elbows 
down, share activities between the two sides, eliminate over chest-level activity, and lift 
with her palms to reduce the height at which her arms were used. She also reported 
using ibuprofen, Tylenol, ice, and icy hot. She said they all helped but did not resolve 
her symptoms. She reported that she continued to do her exercises to stretch, and 
modified her activity to keep her arms at chest level whenever possible, bringing objects 
to her rather than reaching where possible.  
 
Dr. Kennedy stated that claimant reported working as an inspector for the past 12 
years. She said claimant described handling large cardboard pieces and cabinet 
molding from ground level to waist height typically. She said the molding can be stored 
above head level on carts, requiring her to lift it down up to three times per shift. She 
described her body mechanics throughout her shift as highly variable, moving 
frequently, operating a machine, but arms primarily at chest level. She said that 
previously she sanded for several years. Claimant testified that she performed work 
above shoulder level quite often, as she would have to lift molding down from overhead 
to inspect it. (Tr., p. 23) When asked if Dr. Kennedy’s record indicating she would do 
that three time per shift was accurate, she could not recall the discussion. (Tr., p. 24) 
 
With respect to personal activities, claimant told Dr. Kennedy she threw darts 1 
day per week for about 2 hours with her right arm. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 13) She estimated 
throwing about 50 darts per evening over the course of the 2 hours. She had not had 
pain with throwing darts until August, and recently had someone filling in for her 
because of the pain. Her pain had not decreased since avoiding darts. She reporting 
playing darts once a week for many years without difficulty. 
 
Regarding prior medical issues, claimant reported a history of arthritis in her feet, 
and left shoulder pain six years prior, which was resolved with an injection.  
 
An X-ray of the right shoulder showed mild degenerative changes, but no acute 
abnormality. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 17) Dr. Kennedy performed a physical examination, after 
which she stated there was insufficient evidence to opine claimant’s right shoulder pain 
was work-related within a reasonable degree of medical certainty. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) She 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 6 
noted that claimant had performed the same job for 12 years with no pain, and the job 
did not change in the period leading up to the onset of symptoms. She opined that the 
job was considered low risk for shoulder injury because the shoulder was used in the 
neutral position with insignificant exposure to over-shoulder tasks. Claimant was unable 
to indicate that any particular job tasks made the symptoms worse, although she said 
that deliberately using the shoulder in the “safe-zone” improved symptoms. Dr. Kennedy 
noted evidence on examination of chronic poor body mechanics of the shoulder, with 
down-sloping that could be contributing. She also noted that natural aging was a 
significant factor. She did not believe throwing darts was a contributing factor. 
 
Dr. Kennedy recommended claimant follow up under her personal health 
insurance as it was not considered a work-related injury. She noted she would be happy 
to revisit causation if there were more factors to consider or additional information 
became available. In  the meantime, she recommended claimant continue with her 
stretches and over the counter medications. She released claimant to return to full duty 
work.  
 
A claims examiner from Sedgwick, the third party administrator for the employer, 
wrote to claimant on November 10, 2022, indicating that after “careful consideration of 
all available information,” her claim for workers’ compensation benefits was not 
compensable. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) Claimant testified that after her claim was denied, she 
sought treatment for her shoulder on her own. (Tr., p. 19) 
 
Claimant first saw her primary care provider, Katie Bries, ARNP, at Cedar Valley 
Family Medicine. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) She reported right shoulder pain on January 6, 2023, 
noting that she had been seen by occupational health. She said her job involved a lot of 
lifting, pulling, tugging, and repetitive motion, but she was told her condition was not 
work related. After physical examination, ARNP Bries’ assessment was right shoulder 
pain, and subacromial bursitis of the right shoulder joint. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 22) She 
recommended physical therapy, prescription NSAID medication, and a cortisone 
injection, which was provided that day. She was told to follow up if her symptoms did 
not improve. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23) 
 
Claimant returned to ARNP Bries on March 29, 2023, and reported her right 
shoulder pain had flared up, and was constant and worse with movements. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
24) She reported she had not yet done physical therapy as recommended. After 
physical examination, ARNP Bries recommended an MRI. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25) 
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right shoulder on April 21, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 34) The 
MRI revealed diffuse tendinosis of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus, with high-grade 
undersurface tear of the conjoined insertion and mild muscle belly atrophy; SLAP tear 
extending along the anterior labrum; and moderate degenerative spurring, AC joint, with 
subacromial bursitis and mild subacromial impingement.  
 
On August 31, 2023, claimant saw Robert Bartelt, M.D., at Cedar Valley 
Orthopedics. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 35) Claimant reported right shoulder pain, increasing over the 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 7 
past year. She reported working in cabinet manufacturing, and stated she had done 
heavy work over many years, and was currently working as an inspector. She had no 
specific injury. Dr. Bartelt reviewed the MRI and performed a physical examination. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 36) His assessment was nontraumatic incomplete tear of right rotator cuff, and 
superior labrum anterior to posterior (SLAP) tear of the right shoulder. He 
recommended surgery, and provided claimant with a sling in the meantime. 
 
Claimant had right shoulder arthroscopic surgery and open rotator cuff repair on 
September 27, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 38) At her first post-operative visit with Dr. Bartelt’s 
ARNP on October 12, 2023, she reported improved pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 39) She was 
concerned about returning to work, and had not yet done therapy. Over all she was 
doing well. She was given an order to start physical therapy, and told to continue off 
work for a few months. At her next visit on November 9, 2023, she was still having some 
biceps pain, and having trouble sleeping. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) She reported feeling sore, 
and again mentioned concerns about work. She was to continue physical therapy, and 
improvement was anticipated.  
 
At claimant’s next visit on December 21, 2023, she reported ongoing pain with 
abduction. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 43) She was still in physical therapy, and still restricted with 
motion. Despite this, there were no obvious concerns, and she was to continue with 
physical therapy and strengthening. She was released to return to work with restrictions. 
At her next follow up on February 1, 2024, she was continuing with slow improvement. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 45) She still had soreness, most noticeable after a hard day at therapy. 
She was still progressing, but was advised to continue physical therapy and stay off 
work for another month.  
 
At her next follow-up appointment on March 5, 2024, she reported some ongoing 
pain in the biceps area, but some improvement. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 47) She was still limited 
with motion, and did not think her pain was activity related. She was to continue with 
more therapy and strengthening. She was released to work with a 5 pound lifting 
restriction at the waist.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Bartelt on April 4, 2024, and reported minor improvement with 
pain, but ongoing limitations with range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 49) She was progressing 
slowly with physical therapy and working with restrictions. Dr. Bartelt recommended an 
MRI to ensure the rotator cuff repair was intact, and evaluate for frozen shoulder. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 50)  
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right shoulder on April 18, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 33) 
She returned to Dr. Bartelt on April 25, 2024, who noted the MRI showed thickening of 
the capsule, but no evidence of recurrent tearing of the rotator cuff. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 52) He 
diagnosed adhesive capsulitis, and recommended manipulation under anesthesia with 
injection.  
 
Claimant underwent manipulation under anesthesia with injection on May 8, 
2024. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 53) The operative report states that when claimant’s arm was first 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 8 
taken through full range of motion, they felt release of adhesions. They were able to 
obtain full motion. Claimant was to continue with physical therapy. She returned to see 
Dr. Bartelt’s ARNP on May 23, 2024, at which time she reported doing very well, and 
she had her full range of motion back. (Jt. Ex. 5, p.54) She also felt her strength was 
good, and wanted to return to work with no restrictions. She was encouraged to 
continue her physical therapy exercises at home, and was released to return to work.  
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation on March 7, 2025, with Farid 
Manshadi, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Manshadi’s report is dated April 29, 2025. Dr. 
Manshadi reviewed the relevant medical records, and interviewed claimant. She 
explained that she has had several different job positions over the nearly 30 years of 
working for Masterbrand/Omega Cabinets. She reported that at the time of the alleged 
injury, she was working in the molding department in a position that required her to 
inspect and box cabinet molding pieces. She was regularly required to lift items, 
including molding, boxes, and large cardboard rolls with weights varying from 
approximately 10 to 40 pounds. She also said her job required quite a bit of reaching 
and lifting, as well as pushing carts containing the moldings. She reported performing 
that job for about 10 years, when she gradually started to notice right shoulder pain in 
August of 2022. 
 
Dr. Manshadi reviewed the medical treatment claimant received for her right 
shoulder, including Dr. Kennedy’s opinion that there was insufficient evidence to opine 
the condition was work-related. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) He also noted her prior left shoulder 
condition in 2017, which was cumulative in nature, and for which she received injections 
and physical therapy. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 2-3) She was able to return to work with no left 
shoulder restrictions. 
 
Claimant reported that her current job involved less reaching and lifting, and she 
was tolerating it okay, but she primarily used her left arm. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) She also 
reported doing her activities of daily living primarily with her left arm. She reported 
difficulty lying on her right side due to pain. 
 
Dr. Manshadi used a goniometer to measure claimant’s range of motion after a 
warm up period. He tested claimant’s sensation and reflexes, as well as manual muscle 
testing. He noted tenderness to palpation along the right shoulder anteriorly and 
laterally. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
 
After reviewing the medical records, and evaluation and examination of claimant, 
Dr. Manshadi opined that she suffered a right shoulder injury as a result of her work 
activities at Masterbrand/Omega. He opined that it is probable that the rotator cuff tear 
and SLAP tear were a result of her work activities, and the injury was cumulative in 
nature. He also opined that claimant had reached maximum medical improvement 
(MMI), and used the date of his evaluation, March 7, 2025, as the date of MMI.  
 
Dr. Manshadi opined that claimant had sustained permanent impairment as a 
result of the shoulder injury. Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 9 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, he assigned 19 percent permanent impairment of the right 
upper extremity related to the shoulder. With respect to permanent restrictions, he 
recommended she try to avoid activities that required shoulder height or overhead 
motions.  She was to avoid lifting more than 10 pounds with her right arm, and avoid 
lifting more than 10 pounds from waist to overhead, and 20 pounds from ground to waist 
level. It was also recommended she avoid ladders and crawling. Regarding future 
medical treatment, Dr. Manshadi stated that claimant may need additional physical 
therapy, injections, and possibly additional right shoulder surgery. 
 
On June 12, 2025, claimant’s attorney wrote to Dr. Manshadi and provided a 
copy of claimant’s job description for the molding package operator job. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 
57)  After review of the job description, Dr. Manshadi signed the letter, indicating he 
stood by the opinions in his April 29, 2025 report. He further agreed that he believed 
claimant’s job duties as described therein were a substantial factor in causing her right 
shoulder condition. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 58) 
 
In reviewing the evidence as a whole, I find it is more likely than not that claimant 
was working in the role of a molding inspector/molding packaging operator at the time of 
the alleged injury. Claimant was a credible witness, and testified that she was 
performing those job duties in August of 2022 when her shoulder began to bother her. 
Dr. Kennedy’s medical record lists her job as “molding inspector.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p., 13) She 
also told Dr. Kennedy she had been in the same position for the past 12 years, and 
described handling large cardboard pieces and cabinet molding. She told ARNP Bries 
that she does a lot of lifting, pulling, tugging, and repetitive work at her job. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
21) Dr. Bartelt’s records also note she had done heavy work for many years. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 35) She told Dr. Manshadi that she was working in the molding department at the 
time of the injury, in a position that required her to inspect and box cabinet molding 
pieces. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) She described lifting molding, boxes, and large cardboard rolls, 
as well as repetitive lifting, reaching, and pushing carts with the moldings.  
 
Claimant testified that only employees in the molding department had to handle 
the large rolls of cardboard, which is something she mentioned as part of her job duties 
to more than one medical provider. (Tr., p. 24) Additionally, when she described her job 
to medical providers, she noted repetitive motion, lifting, pulling, and tugging, which is 
consistent with her work in the molding department. She testified that in her current 
position as a quality technician, she does not have to lift the heavy cardboard rolls. (Tr., 
pp. 18-19) She further testified that her position as a quality technician is a light-duty 
position. (Tr., p. 29) The weight of evidence supports the claimant’s position that she 
was working in the molding department in August of 2022 when she began to notice her 
right shoulder problems. 
 
Defendants argue the “personnel status change” form from April 19, 2019, 
proves that claimant was not working in the molding department (department 560) on 
the date of injury, but had already been in the lighter quality technician position 
(department 110) for over 3 years. (See Def. Ex. D, p. 12) However, the change form 
does not indicate it was ever approved, and claimant testified that the change never 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 10 
happened. (Tr., p. 31) 2 When she answered “yes” to the question about working in 
department 110 in 2019, I do not believe she understood the question. (Tr., p. 32) She 
did eventually move from department 560, but it was not until November of 2022, which 
is evidenced by the job acceptance form she signed on November 15, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 5, 
p. 22) The job acceptance form is also the only form she signed, and she testified that 
she “signed a paper” but did not get transferred right away. (Tr., p. 30) It is unlikely that 
claimant would move to department 110 in 2019, and then accept another job transfer 
to the same job in November 2022. No employer representative testified to provide any 
clarification regarding the various departments or job titles. The weight of the evidence, 
when viewed as a whole, supports claimant’s position that she was working as a 
molding packaging operator in August of 2022, and moved to the quality technician 
position sometime after November 15, 2022.  
 
Having found that claimant was working in the molding inspector position at the 
time of the injury, I find Dr. Manshadi’s opinion with respect to causation to be the most 
reliable. Dr. Manshadi is the only physician who reviewed claimant’s actual job 
description. The job description did not change his opinion that claimant’s job was a 
substantial factor in causing the right shoulder injury. Dr. Kennedy did not review the job 
description, and opined that claimant’s job was low-risk for shoulder injury because the 
shoulder was used in a neutral position with insignificant exposure to over-shoulder 
tasks. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) She seems to disregard the repetitive lifting, pushing, pulling, 
and reaching that her job required. She also provided her causation opinion before 
claimant’s shoulder condition was fully diagnosed through an MRI, and suggested poor 
body mechanics and aging as possible causes for her symptoms. However, the MRI 
showed a nontraumatic rotator cuff tear and a SLAP tear, neither of which were 
attributed to body mechanics or age. (See Jt. Ex. 5, p. 36) Dr. Kennedy noted she was 
happy to revisit causation if additional information became available, but there is no 
evidence she was asked whether the MRI findings or Dr. Manshadi’s opinions changed 
her opinion. As such, I do not find her initial causation assessment to be the most 
reliable.  
 
Having found Dr. Manshadi’s opinion to be the most reliable, I find that claimant 
sustained a cumulative injury to her right shoulder, arising out of and in the course of 
her employment, on August 16, 2022. Because claimant’s injury arose out of and in the 
course of her employment, she is entitled to temporary disability benefits. The parties 
stipulated that if the defendants were found liable for the injury, claimant is entitled to 
temporary total disability/healing period benefits from September 27, 2023 to May 24, 
2024, subject to a disputed credit for short-term disability benefits, which is discussed 
further below. 
 
Claimant testified she continues to have some symptoms and complaints related 
to her right shoulder. (Tr., p. 20) She has difficulty sleeping, doing daily chores, lifting, 
                                                 
2 It is also noted that the on-site physical therapy records list claimant’s department as “120 Dynasty 
Plywood,” which is not a position/department claimant mentioned at hearing or in any medical records. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1-12) The inconsistencies in the employer’s records make them unreliable when compared 
to claimant’s testimony and the remainder of the evidence. 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 11 
reaching, vacuuming, brushing her hair or putting it in a ponytail, and mopping. She still 
has some reduced range of motion in her right shoulder, and believes she can only 
carry one to five pounds with her right arm. (Tr., pp. 20-21) She is right-hand dominant, 
and testified there are a lot of chores and daily activities she can no longer do. (Tr., p. 
21) Dr. Manshadi provided an unrebutted opinion that claimant has sustained 19 
percent impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of the work injury. As such, I 
find claimant has proven the injury caused permanent partial disability to the right 
shoulder. Claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits for 19 percent of 
the shoulder, which is equal to 76 weeks. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first issue to determine is whether the claimant has met her burden to prove 
that she sustained an injury to her right shoulder arising out of and in the course of her 
employment. The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily 
has the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. 
P. 6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). A 
possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. Blue Bird 
Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce Motor 
Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 12 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
In this case, defendants rely on Dr. Kennedy’s opinion to deny the shoulder injury 
was work-related. Defendants also argue that claimant was not a credible historian, and 
that she had not been working in the heavy-duty molding department since 2019. This 
argument is based on the “personnel status change” form dated April 7, 2019, as well 
as Dr. Kennedy’s opinions that claimant’s job was considered “low-risk” for shoulder 
injury. As noted above, I did not find the 2019 personnel status change form to be a 
reliable indication of claimant’s actual job duties in August of 2022. When looking at all 
of the evidence in the record, including the signed job acceptance form in November 
2022, and claimant’s testimony regarding her job duties and the medical records, I 
found that claimant was more likely than not working in the molding department in 
August of 2022.  
Having made that determination, I found Dr. Manshadi’s opinion regarding 
causation to be more convincing than Dr. Kennedy’s opinion. Dr. Kennedy disregarded 
the repetitive nature of claimant’s job duties, and focused entirely on the limited 
overhead work. She also reached her conclusion prior to claimant receiving a formal 
diagnosis for her shoulder condition. She was not asked to review any updated 
information or revisit her opinion after the shoulder MRI or surgery, nor was she asked 
to comment on Dr. Manshadi’s opinions. Dr. Manshadi had the benefit of reviewing the 
medical records including the MRI and operative reports, and later reviewed the job 
description, which did not change his opinions. Dr. Manshadi had more information at 
his disposal in reaching his conclusions, and I found his opinion to be the most reliable. 
As such, I found that claimant has met her burden to prove she sustained an injury to 
her right shoulder arising out of and in the course of her employment on August 16, 
2022. 
The parties stipulated that claimant was off work related to the injury from 
September 27, 2023 through May 24, 2024, and entitled to benefits for that period of 
time if defendants are liable for the injury. (See Hearing Report, p. 1) The next issue to 
determine is whether defendants are entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 
85.38(2) for short-term disability benefits claimant received while recovering from her 
surgery. Defendants argue they are entitled to credit for $10,857.14, for short-term 
disability benefits claimant received from October 4, 2023, to March 11, 2024. (Def. Ex. 
C, p. 11)  
Iowa Code section 85.38(2) provides: 
   

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 13 
2.  Benefits paid under group plans.  
a.  In the event the employee with a disability shall receive any 
benefits, including medical, surgical, or hospital benefits, under any group 
plan covering nonoccupational disabilities contributed to wholly or partially 
by the employer, which benefits should not have been paid or payable if 
any rights of recovery existed under this chapter, chapter 85A, or chapter 
85B, then the amounts so paid to the employee from the group plan shall 
be credited to or against any compensation payments, including medical, 
surgical, or hospital, made or to be made under this chapter, chapter 85A, 
or chapter 85B.  The amounts so credited shall be deducted from the 
payments made under these chapters.  Any nonoccupational plan shall be 
reimbursed in the amount deducted.  This section shall not apply to 
payments made under any group plan which would have been payable 
even though there was an injury under this chapter or an occupational 
disease under chapter 85A or an occupational hearing loss under chapter 
85B.   
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that the purpose of Iowa Code section 
85.38(2) is to preclude an employee with a disability from receiving a double recovery of 
workers’ compensation benefits and group disability plan benefits provided by the 
employer. State v. Erbe, 519 N.W.2d 812, 815 (Iowa 1994).  
  
An employer seeking the credit bears the burden of proving entitlement to the 
credit. Miller v. Maintainer Corp. of Iowa, Inc., File No. 5020192 (App. Dec. 2, 2009). To 
meet this burden, defendants must prove:  (1) the benefits were received under a group 
plan; (2) contribution to the plan was made by the employer; (3) the benefits should not 
have been paid if workers’ compensation benefits were received; and (4) the amount to 
be credited or deducted from payments made or owed under Iowa Code chapter 85. Id.  
Claimant testified that she received short-term disability benefits through her 
employer while she was off work recovering from her shoulder surgery. (Tr., p. 34) She 
further testified that the short-term disability policy was not a policy she had purchased, 
but was entirely through her employer. (Tr., p. 35) Defendants produced an email from 
the benefits client manager at Unum, indicating claimant was paid a total of $10,857.14 
in short-term disability related to the shoulder injury, from October 4, 2023 through 
March 11, 2024. (Def. Ex. C, p. 11)  
Defendants also produced Masterbrand’s corporate leave of absence policy, 
which was approved August 11, 2023, and would have been in effect when claimant 
received short-term disability benefits. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 2-10) The policy indicates that 
when an associate is approved for extended leave due to his or her own serious health 
condition, the associate “may be eligible to receive pay replacement in the form of short-
term disability or workers’ compensation benefits (‘Disability Benefits’) while on leave.” 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 4) 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 14 
The corporate leave of absence policy does not specify whether short-term 
disability benefits would be payable even if workers’ compensation benefits were owed. 
The policy later discusses that during FMLA, associates are eligible for “all benefits for 
which the associate elected coverage,” indicating there was more than one type of 
benefit coverage available to Masterbrand employees. (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) Defendants did 
not introduce a copy of the specific short-term disability plan under which claimant was 
paid, nor a summary of its terms, and there was no testimony or other evidence as to 
whether the short-term disability benefits were payable in addition to any workers’ 
compensation benefits payable to claimant.  
Pursuant to the plain language of Iowa Code section 85.38(2), a credit is only 
available against worker’s compensation benefits if the short-term disability benefits 
were not payable in addition to or regardless of whether workers’ compensation benefits 
were payable. In other words, if the short-term disability benefits were payable even if 
workers’ compensation benefits are owed, then defendants are not entitled to a credit.  
As the party that possesses this information in the form of plan documents, and 
that presumably has the contractual arrangements with administrators of the short-term 
disability plan, defendants had access to establish this essential term of Iowa Code 
section 85.38(2). (See Sheila Ryan v. Zoetis, Inc., File No. 23700224.01 (Arb. Oct. 23, 
2024; Aff’d App., April 18, 2024; see also Hines v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 
20700462.01 (Arb. Jan. 18, 2022; Aff’d App., May 13, 2022) Defendants’ failure to 
produce any evidence to establish that the short-term disability benefits were not 
payable if workers’ compensation benefits were payable results in a failure to establish 
entitlement to a credit pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.38(2). I conclude that 
defendants failed to prove entitlement to a credit pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.38(2). 
The next issue is whether claimant’s right shoulder injury resulted in permanent 
disability. As stated above, I found that the injury resulted in permanent disability based 
on claimant’s testimony, and the expert opinion of Dr. Manshadi. The parties stipulated 
that if the injury was found to be the cause of permanent disability, the disability is a 
scheduled member disability to the shoulder, and the commencement date for 
permanent partial disability benefits is March 7, 2025. (Hearing Report, p. 2) 
The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is 
entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is "limited to 
the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf 
Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 320 
(Iowa 1998).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 15 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities. See 876 IAC 
2.4. Dr. Manshadi is the only expert who has offered an impairment rating using the 
AMA Guides. He opined that claimant’s right shoulder injury resulted in 19 percent 
permanent impairment. A shoulder is compensated on the basis of 400 weeks, pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). As such, claimant is entitled to 76 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits. 
The next issue to determine involves claimant’s claim for reimbursement and 
payment of medical expenses. Because I found the right shoulder injury to be 
compensable, claimant is entitled to medical benefits related to the injury, pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.27. Defendants did not present any argument in post-hearing 
briefing regarding medical expenses. Under Iowa Code section 85.27, the employer is 
responsible for reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies related 
to a compensable injury. As such, defendants are responsible for claimant’s medical 
expenses related to the right shoulder injury. 
Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for medical bills unless claimant shows 
that they were paid from her own funds. See Caylor v. Employers Mutual Casualty Co., 
337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). Otherwise, claimant is entitled only to an order 
directing the responsible defendant to make such payments directly to the provider. See 
Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). Claimant has alleged a total of $365.54 in 
out-of-pocket expenses related to co-payments. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 33; Cl. Ex. 9) I find 
defendants are responsible for reimbursement of claimant’s out-of-pocket medical 
expenses in the amount of $365.54. Claimant also submitted records of an outstanding 
balance related to her medical treatment with Cedar Valley Medical Specialists, in the 
total amount of $2,301.53. (Cl. Ex. 8, Cl. Ex. 9) Defendants are responsible for payment 
of that outstanding balance directly to the provider. 
The next issue to determine is reimbursement of claimant’s IME with Dr. 
Manshadi. Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 16 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen 
physician’s opinion that there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the 
cost of an examination conducted pursuant to section 85.39 if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable. Iowa Code § 85.39(2) 
In this case, the employer retained Dr. Kennedy, who opined on November 8, 
2022, that claimant’s injury was not work related. Her opinion is tantamount to a zero 
percent impairment rating. I found claimant’s injury to be compensable. As such, 
claimant is entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Manshadi’s IME in the amount of $3,000.00 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 29) 
The final issue for consideration is costs. Under Iowa Administrative Rule 876-
4.33, costs are taxed at the discretion of the commissioner. Claimant has submitted as 
costs the filing fee in the amount of $125.00, and the charge for Dr. Manshadi’s 
supplemental report, in the amount of $250.00. (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 28, 30) Both items are 
allowable costs under Rule 876-4.33. As claimant was successful in her claim, I use my 
discretion to award costs. Defendants shall reimburse claimant $375.00 in costs. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
All benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of six hundred thirty-one and 
79/100 dollars ($631.79). 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits from September 27, 2023 
through May 24, 2024. 
 

THOMPSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS d/b/a MASTERBRAND CABINETS, LLC 
Page 17 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant seventy-six (76) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing March 7, 2025. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for her out-of-pocket medical expenses in 
the amount of three hundred sixty-five and 54/100 dollars ($365.54). 
 
 
Defendants are responsible for payment of any outstanding causally related 
medical expenses, as outlined in the decision above. 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Manshadi’s IME in the amount of 
three thousand and 00/100 dollars ($3,000.00), pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of three hundred 
seventy-five and 00/100 dollars ($375.00). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___5TH ___ day of November, 2025. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Dillon Carpenter  
(via WCES) 
 
Bryan Brooks  
(via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
