Case Number: 22700950.01
Case Title:  HILL, DENNIS V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hill Dennis-22700950.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DENNIS HILL, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File Nos. 22700950.01 
 
 
  : 
 
 
     22700951.01 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION, 
  : 
          ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
     Head Notes:  1402.40, 1803, 2907 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Dennis Hill, claimant, filed petitions for arbitration against Whirlpool Corporation.  
These cases came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on September 27, 
2023, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 12, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through F.  All exhibits were received without 
objection. 
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  Joan Schlenk also testified on claimant’s 
behalf.  The evidentiary record was held open to allow defendant the opportunity to 
depose Douglas Hornick, M.D.  On November 2, 2023, the parties notified the 
undersigned of their agreement to replace Joint Exhibit 3, pages 51 through 53a, and to 
cancel the deposition of Dr. Hornick.  As such, the evidentiary record was closed on 
November 2, 2023.  All parties served their post-hearing briefs on December 12, 2023, 
at which time this case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery; 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-03  14:21:00     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 2 
 
3. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any; 
4. Medical expenses; and  
 
5. Costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The instant case stems from a stipulated inhalation injury occurring on October 2, 
2020, and October 6, 2020.  The claimant at the center of this case is Dennis Hill.  At 
the time of the evidentiary hearing that brought forth this claim, Hill was 64 years old. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 16)  Hill graduated from high school in 1977 and 
subsequently obtained a Bachelor’s Degree in Business Administration from the 
University of Iowa. (Defendant’s Exhibit C, p. 49)  He later obtained a Master of 
Business Administration degree from Southern Illinois University. (Id.)  The majority of 
his employment history has involved working for his father at Hawkeye Auto Glass.  Hill 
installed glass for his father’s company from 1997 to 2018. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 23)  
Hill also worked nights at the Cedar Rapids Gazette from 2000 to 2005, and at Walmart 
from 2012 to 2015. (Ex. 2, p. 22) 
 
Hill began working as an Assembler for Whirlpool Corporation (“Whirlpool”) in 
June  2015. (Ex. 2, p. 23)  According to Hill, a bleach mixing station was added 
approximately 10 feet from his workstation in April 2020 to assist with disinfecting the 
plant during the coronavirus pandemic. (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  The cleaning solution consisted 
of a bleach and water mixture consisting of 1-2/3 cups of bleach to 5 gallons of water in 
accordance with CDC recommendations. (Exhibit B, p. 43)  According to Hill, Whirlpool 
and his local union agreed to the use of the solution. (See Ex. B, p. 27) Defendant 
asserts the bleach container was stored in an open and well-ventilated area.  The 
defendant further asserts the disinfectant was used in the “work cells” and break areas 
to disinfect between employee usages. (Ex. B, p. 31)   
Hill did not experience any reactions to the bleach station between April 2020 
and October 2020.  On October 2, 2020, Hill was working his normal job on Assembly 
Line 3.  After approximately 90 minutes of work, Hill began coughing.  At some point, 
Hill asserts that he coughed up blood into a Kleenex.  Hill reported the incident to his 
supervisor, who instructed him to visit the onsite health center. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  Hill 
presented to the health center and reported that he was feeling “OK” aside from his 
cough. (Joint Exhibit 12, p. 155) 
After leaving work, Hill presented to Jeffrey Jones, M.D. at UnityPoint Westside 
Urgent Care Clinic.  He reported coughing and possibly going into atrial fibrillation after 
working near a bleach and water mixture for 90 minutes. (JE1, p. 1)  At the time of the 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 3 
 
evaluation, Hill was reporting less coughing and resolution of the atrial fibrillation, but he 
was still experiencing burning in his eyes. (Id.)  X-rays of Hill’s chest returned negative 
and his lungs were “expanded and clear.” (JE1, p. 2)  Dr. Jones removed Hill from work 
for a day and recommended he avoid working near the bleach solution. (JE1, p. 3) 
Hill attempted to return to work on October 6, 2020; however, he was sent home 
after he experienced another coughing fit. (Hr. Tr., pp. 24, 26; see JE4, p. 61; JE12, p. 
155)   
Notably, this is not the first instance in which Hill has dealt with fatigue, shortness 
of breath, or memory issues.  On March 15, 2015, claimant presented to the St. Luke’s 
Hospital emergency department reporting chest congestion and cough. (JE2, p. 5). 
Claimant underwent a chest x-ray that indicated left lower lobe airspace disease 
concerning for pneumonia. (JE2, p. 9)  On examination, Hill exhibited rales in the left 
middle field and left lower field of his chest. (JE2, p. 6)  It was recommended that Hill 
present for an evaluation with Internal Medicine. (JE2, p. 10)   
A little over two years later, Hill presented to the emergency room for chest 
discomfort and was admitted for overnight monitoring by Ojas Bansal, M.D. (See JE6, p. 
80)  Due to Hill’s risk factors of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, and 
history of hyperlipidemia, Dr. Bansal elected to run a stress test. (See JE6, p. 80)  While 
participating in the stress test, Hill developed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. (See JE6, p. 
80)  Although Hill’s condition improved, Dr. Bansal noted that he was still experiencing 
intermittent episodes of atypical chest discomfort and shortness of breath at his one-
month follow-up appointment. (JE6, pp. 80, 84)  The medical records also note that 
Hill’s type-2 diabetes was uncontrolled. (JE6, p. 84) 
In November 2019, Hill called into St. Luke’s Cardiology Clinic and reported 
prolonged episodes of palpitations with associated weakness and fatigue. (See JE6, p. 
97)  He was placed on a 30-day event monitor and subsequently referred to 
Electrophysiology for further atrial arrhythmia management. (See JE6, p. 97) 
Hill presented to Urgent Care on December 24, 2019, and December 29, 2019, 
to address an illness. (See JE3, p. 56)  He was diagnosed with mycoplasma pneumonia 
and prescribed azithromycin. (See JE3, p. 57)  On January 3, 2020, Hill presented to 
Disa Awah, D.O., of Hiawatha Internal Medicine for further evaluation of his persistent 
cough and shortness of breath with exertion. (JE3, p. 56)  On examination, Dr. Awah 
discovered decreased breath sounds in the left lower lung and overall decreased 
airflow. (JE4, p. 57) 
On January 27, 2020, Hill presented to Weiwei Li, M.D., on referral from Dr. 
Bansal for atrial fibrillation. (JE6, p. 85)  The 30-day event monitor showed one episode 
of atrial fibrillation as well as frequent premature atrial contractions (PACs) and short 
atrial runs. (Id.)  Hill reported that he was experiencing palpitations every three days, 
which would cause him to slow down his activity. (Id.) 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 4 
 
On April 1, 2020, Hill presented to James Justice, M.D., to be evaluated for sleep 
apnea. (JE4, p. 58)  According to the medical record, Hill snored “extremely loud,” 
stopped breathing at night, was “dead tired” when he woke up in the mornings, and he 
was falling asleep during the day. (Id.)  The medical notes provide, “He drives down to 
the [Amana] factory and he says is only 20-minute drive but there have been more than 
1 time where he is [sic] pulled off on the side of the road during the 20-minute drive 
because he is afraid he is going to fall asleep.” (Id.)  Hill underwent a formal sleep study 
in May 2020 and was diagnosed with mild sleep apnea.  A CPAP machine was 
recommended; however, Hill declined the same.  
Hill returned to Dr. Bansal for his one-year follow-up appointment on August 27, 
2020, and reported less frequent arrhythmia and palpitations. (JE6, p. 89)  By this time, 
Hill and his physicians had discussed the possibility of an ablation for his atrial 
fibrillation; however, Hill relayed that he wanted to use a CPAP machine before 
proceeding with the ablation procedure. (See id.)  It is noted that Hill’s type-2 diabetes 
“has been poorly controlled.” (JE6, p. 94) 
The pre-existing medical records demonstrate a pattern of respiratory and 
cardiovascular issues that spans several years.  The stipulated inhalation injury adds a 
new layer of complexity to Hill’s medical history. 
Hill asserts he did not immediately connect his coughing up blood to his 
workplace exposure to bleach; however, he eventually made the connection when his 
cough started to taste like bleach. (Hr. Tr., pp. 24-25)  I have a difficult time accepting 
Hill’s testimony in this regard.  On the initial date of injury, Hill specifically told Dr. Jones 
that he was working near a large amount of bleach when he started coughing and 
having right-sided chest pains. (JE1, p. 2)  Additionally, on October 9, 2020, Hill 
reported to the on-site health center that, “it occurred to him that just before the 
coughing fit that he noticed a strong odor of Bleach near him” and that he believed his 
exposure to bleach caused his coughing fit. (JE12, p. 155) 
 
Hill returned to Dr.  Awah on October 13, 2020. (JE4, p. 60)  Due to the 
persistence of Hill’s cough and right-sided discomfort, Dr. Awah recommended a 
consultation with a pulmonologist and ordered pre and post-bronchodilator pulmonary 
function tests (PFT). (JE4, p. 62)   
 
Three days later, Hill was evaluated by pulmonologist Hafiz Hashmi, M.D. (JE8, 
p. 135)  During the evaluation, Hill described an intermittent dry cough and right-sided 
atypical chest discomfort. (Id.)  Dr. Hashmi commented that Hill had previously 
complained of right-sided chest discomfort in 2017. (Id.)  Based on his reported history 
and symptoms, Dr. Hashmi assessed Hill with reactive airway dysfunction syndrome; 
however, he noted that Hill’s PFTs and x-rays were unremarkable. (JE8, p. 137)  Dr. 
Hashmi opined that Hill should wear appropriate protective equipment at work, but he 
did not require restrictions from a pulmonary standpoint. (Id.) 
 
Hill returned to Dr. Hashmi on October 26, 2020, reporting that he had not 
returned to work because Whirlpool refused to discontinue its use of bleach in its 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 5 
 
COVID-19 mitigation strategy. (JE8, p. 138)  Hill reported no chest pain or shortness of 
breath at rest. (Id.)  Dr. Hashmi reviewed all relevant lab results and diagnosed Hill with 
a cough, environmental allergies, and vocal cord dysfunction. (Id.)  He reassured Hill 
that he did not have an obstructive airway disease; instead, he believed that Hill had 
restrictive lung physiology likely secondary to body habitus. (Id.)  Dr. Hashmi also 
“extensively discussed” with Hill that his RAST test was positive for multiple 
environmental allergies, “including cat which [he] has at home[.]” (JE8, p. 139)  Dr. 
Hashmi did not believe there was a need for any additional pulmonary follow-up; 
however, he referred Hill to an allergist and speech pathologist. (Id.) 
 
Hill began speech therapy on November 6, 2020. (JE9, p. 140)  He reported 
throat tightness, difficulty breathing, stuttering and memory difficulties, all of which he 
attributed to bleach exposure. (JE9, p. 141)  Hill reported 50 to 60 percent improvement 
in throat tightness. (Id.)  Vocal quality and intensity were within normal limits on 
examination. (JE9, p. 142)  Renee Perlwitz, SLP, noted, “patient is reporting symptoms 
of stuttering which were minimal to nonexistent based on therapist observation of 
patient speaking at a rapid rate.” (JE9, p. 143) 
 
On November 9, 2020, Holly Conway Brown, M.D. of Allergy Partners of Cedar 
Rapids, examined Hill and found no significant allergic etiology for his symptoms. (JE10, 
p. 147) 
 
Kevin Carpenter, M.D., an otolaryngologist, evaluated Hill on November 12, 
2020. (JE11, p. 149)  Hill reported difficulty talking and swallowing following an 
exposure and inhalation of bleach. (Id.)  Dr. Carpenter performed a laryngoscopy during 
the evaluation.  Dr. Carpenter did not observe any growths, tumors, signs of burns, 
reflux, or infection in Hill’s throat. (JE11, p. 150)  He noted that Hill’s vocal cords 
appeared and moved normally; however, he nevertheless recommended Hill complete a 
FEES to further evaluate his swallowing capabilities and to visualize his vocal cords 
better. (Id.)    
 
The FEES demonstrated normal swallowing mechanisms. (See JE11, pp. 152-
153)  The examination also documented normal vocal quality.  The record provides,  
Medial edge of the right vocal fold was smooth. Medial edge of the left vocal 
fold was smooth. Mucosal wave of the right and left vocal folds was normal. 
Amplitude of the right and left vocal folds was normal. No adynamic 
vibratory behaviors were noted on the right or left vocal folds. Arytenoid 
movement was normal and symmetrical. There was closure of the vocal 
folds. There was consistent supraglottal compression.  
(See JE11, pp. 152-153; Ex. A, p. 4)  Dr. Carpenter reviewed the FEES results and 
noted no abnormalities. (JE11, p. 154)  
On or about November 19, 2020, Hill filed a complaint against Whirlpool with the 
National Labor Relations Board. (Ex. B, p. 27)  According to the complaint, Whirlpool 
and his local union had agreed on a practice that was “extremely dangerous to both the 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 6 
 
short and long term health” of approximately 3,200 employees. (Ex. B, p. 27)  The 
complaint argued the use of bleach or bleach solutions against Covid-19 “screams” of 
an unfair labor practice. (Ex. B, p. 28) 
Hill returned to Dr. Awah for his annual physical and management of chronic 
conditions on December 23, 2020. (JE4, p. 65)  Hill asked Dr. Awah to complete FMLA 
paperwork for him. (JE4, p. 66)  He reported that he could perform all of his job duties, 
but was concerned about exposing himself to the bleach used to clean his work area. 
(Id.)  Dr. Awah assessed Hill with non-compliance with medication regimen, acquired 
hypothyroidism, uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic polyneuropathy, 
cough, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and environmental allergies. (JE4, p. 70) 
 
After presenting to Dr. Hashmi, Ms. Perlwitz, Dr. Conway Brown, and Dr. 
Carpenter, Hill attempted to return to work in January 2021.  Unfortunately, he was only 
able to work one hour before returning home. (JE12, p. 155)  According to Hill, he could 
smell the bleach in the air and began to realize that he was not “firing” correctly from a 
cognitive standpoint.  He also reported that he did not have dexterity in his hands and 
“felt like his A-fib kicked in.”  He also reported that he helped his brother move furniture 
into a large, 17 to 20-foot truck “in the bitter cold” and had no issues with his heart. (See 
id.) 
On January 28, 2021, Hill presented to Heather Mactaggart, ARNP of St. Luke’s 
Cardiology Department for an evaluation of his paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, essential 
hypertension, mixed hyperlipidemia, and obstructive sleep apnea. (JE6, p. 95)  He 
reported a prolonged episode of atrial fibrillation in November 2019 and denied current 
chest pain or shortness of breath. (JE6, p. 97)  He further reported a recent incident at 
work “in which he inhaled bleach” and he felt that his atrial fibrillation had increased 
“slightly,” but it was beginning to “settle down.” (Id.)   
Ms. Mactaggart provided a thorough summary of Hill’s medical treatment as it 
relates to his atrial fibrillation and sleep apnea. (See JE6, p. 97)  Due to Hill frequently 
missing his second dose of atrial fibrillation medication, Ms. Mactaggart increased the 
dosage of his first dose and eliminated the need for a second dose. (JE6, p. 99)  The 
two discussed the risks of persistent and recurring atrial fibrillation in the setting of 
untreated sleep apnea. (JE6, p. 100)  Ms. Mactaggart recommended Hill use a CPAP 
mask prior to considering an atrial fibrillation ablation procedure. (JE6, pp. 99-100) 
There is a significant gap in Hill’s treatment following the January 28, 2021, 
appointment.   
Hill presented to Benjamin Daniels, M.D. to establish care on December 27, 
2021. (JE5, p. 71)  Dr. Daniels documented Hill’s health conditions and noted Hill had 
decided to discontinue all of his medications in May 2021. (Id.)  Hill then reported he 
sustained a bleach inhalation injury at work in October 2020 and it dramatically altered 
his health.  He reported experiencing a chronic sore throat, hoarse voice, chest pain, 
memory issues, and trouble swallowing since the inhalation. (Id.)  Hill further reported 
that he used to have chest pain and shortness of breath; however, those symptoms had 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 7 
 
resolved. (Id.)  Indeed, Hill denied chest pain and shortness of breath when presenting 
to Ms. Mactaggart in January 2021. (JE6, p. 97)  
On March 7, 2022, claimant underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy at 
UnityPoint Health Endoscopy. (JE2, p. 20). The procedure revealed mild esophagitis, 
mild esophageal stricture in the distal esophagus, gastric polyps, and an otherwise 
normal EGD. (JE2, p. 22). 
Hill presented to the St. Luke’s Hospital emergency department on March 26, 
2022, reporting he was having difficulty swallowing food. (JE2, p. 24)  He felt like the 
food was stuck mid chest. (Id.). He received medication and fluids. (JE2, p. 30) 
On April 26, 2022, Hill underwent an esophageal manometry with Douglas Purdy, 
M.D. at St. Luke’s Hospital. (JE2, p. 31)  The results returned normal. (JE2, pp. 31-32)  
He recommended Hill cut his food into small pieces and chew thoroughly before 
swallowing. (JE2, p. 32) 
Hill presented to Dr. Daniels on May 17, 2022, and requested a referral to 
pulmonology for chronic shortness of breath. (JE5, p. 73)  Hill reported that the 
shortness of breath had been present since his exposure to bleach in October 2020. 
(See id.)  Dr. Daniels documented that Hill’s lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally 
and his respiratory effort appeared normal. (Id.)  Following the examination, Dr. Daniels 
assessed chronic shortness of breath and agreed to refer Hill back to pulmonology. 
(JE5, p. 74)  Hill’s reporting of his shortness of breath is inconsistent with his reporting 
to Dr. Daniels five months earlier that his chest pain and shortness of breath had 
resolved.  (See JE5, p. 71)  Indeed, Hill did not describe shortness of breath or difficulty 
breathing between December 2020 and May 2022.  The last time Hill reported 
shortness of breath prior to the May 17, 2022, appointment, was November 6, 2020. 
(JE9, pp. 141-142) 
Hill underwent bronchodilator spirometry testing at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics on July 5, 2022. (JE3, p. 43)  The medical record provides that Hill 
was not consistent in his efforts and the results could be sub-optimal due to difficulty 
performing the test. (Id.)  The results suggested a restrictive ventilatory defect; lung 
volumes revealed a reduced TLC.  (Id.) 
On July 8, 2022, Hill presented to Dr. Hornick at the University of Iowa Hospitals 
and Clinics reporting chronic shortness of breath. (JE3, p. 47). Dr. Hornick opined that 
the PFTs showed restrictive lung pathology and the CT showed minimal left basilar 
scarring. (Id.)  Dr. Hornick reviewed the outside chest CT images from October 26, 
2021, and noted no significant parenchymal lung abnormality other than atelectasis in 
the left lower lobe with an associated thickened pleura. (JE3, p. 50)  Dr. Hornick noted 
similar findings were described in a chest x-ray from 2015 when claimant went to urgent 
care for left lower lobe pneumonia associated with acute hypothyroidism. (Id.)  Dr. 
Hornick noted it was possible that the findings on the current chest CT were residual 
from the episode of left lower lobe pneumonia. (Id.)  The record provides,  

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 8 
 
Reactive airway disease syndrome (RADS) as a result of chlorine exposure 
seems plausible. However his PFTs predominately demonstrate restrictive 
physiology. In that regard however we found no evidence for diffuse lung 
parenchymal changes (noted residual changes LLL presumably from 
pneumonia 2015), diaphragm weakness, nor thoracic deformity.  
(JE3, p. 50)  Dr. Hornick recommended Hill increase his physical activity to 3 hours of 
moderate aerobic exercise per week and to follow up in 10 months to reassess his 
PFTs. (Id.) 
 
On July 29, 2022, Hill presented to Dr. Daniels and reported difficulty with his 
memory over the prior 12-18 months. (JE5, p. 75)  Dr. Daniels noted that Hill had been 
reporting issues with his memory for over two years. (JE5, pp. 75-76)  Dr. Daniels 
ordered neuropsychiatric testing. (JE5, p. 76)  
 
Hill presented to Dr. Ojas Bansal on January 19, 2023, reporting ongoing 
breathlessness and sometimes atypical chest discomfort on the right and left side of the 
chest. (JE6, p. 117).  Dr. Bansal opined the etiology of Hill’s dyspnea on exertion was 
not clear. (JE6, p. 121) 
Hill presented to Megan Adams Rieck, Ph.D., at St. Luke’s Neuropsychology 
Clinic on March 15, 2023, for a neuropsychological evaluation. (JE2, p. 33)  He reported 
memory, concentration, and word finding difficulties. (Id.)  Claimant stated he was 
independent with daily living. (Id.)  Dr. Rieck concluded Hill had an abnormal 
neuropsychological profile. (JE2, p. 34).  Due to the number and significance of 
challenges with testing, Dr. Rieck believed claimant warranted a diagnosis of mild 
neurocognitive disorder. (Id.)  However, Dr. Rieck did not believe the past chlorine 
exposure was the basis for his symptoms as they were more commonly associated with 
untreated sleep apnea, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension. (Id.) 
On April 2, 2023, Hill presented to the St. Luke’s Hospital emergency department 
for shortness of breath. (JE2, p. 38). According to Hill, he was leaving Carlos O’Kelly’s 
the night before and the workers were using a cleaning solution on the tables. (Id.). He 
smelled bleach and immediately developed a sore throat and became short of breath; 
he later developed left-sided chest pain. (Id.)  Hill’s chest x-ray revealed bilateral low 
lung volumes and left lower lobe airspace disease which could reflect atelectasis or 
pneumonia. (JE2, p. 42) 
On May 11, 2023, Hill returned to Dr. Hornick with complaints of ongoing 
dyspnea. (JE3, p. 51)  Dr. Hornick noted that Hill’s complaints were similar to what he 
described at his last appointment in July 2022. (Id.)  Dr. Hornick provided, “I continue to 
presume the persistent restrictive physiology on pulmonary function testing is related to 
the chlorine inhalation injury in 2020. (Id.) 
As mentioned, Hill last worked for Whirlpool on January 4, 2021. (See JE12, p. 
155)  He briefly worked for Domino’s Pizza as a delivery driver in the summer of 2021; 
however, he ultimately quit this position after a few weeks because he was having 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 9 
 
difficulty focusing and staying awake. (Ex. 2, p. 23)  Although he grew up in the Cedar 
Rapids area, Hill asserts he would consistently get lost while making deliveries.  He 
further asserts that it was difficult for him to walk from the pizza store to his car. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 29)  Hill has not applied to work for any other employers since leaving Domino’s 
Pizza. (Hr. Tr., pp. 50-51)   
Hill asserts he continues to have difficulties with shortness of breath, coughing, 
and stamina.  Hill admits he can handle physical labor; however, he can only work for 
approximately two hours before he needs to rest. (Hr. Tr., p. 33)  Hill testified that he 
cannot perform any additional work after he rests. (Hr. Tr., p. 34)  He does not feel as 
though he is capable of working a full-time job at this time. (Id.)  At his deposition, Hill 
testified that “being exposed like I was to that bleach was devastating” and “It’s probably 
one of the worst things you can do.” (Ex. E, Depo. p. 32)  He continued, “The guys at 
World War I that was exposed to it, terrible time afterwards.  I could relate to that.” (Ex. 
E, Depo. pp. 32-33)   
It is worth noting that the distinctive smell associated with Clorox bleach is not 
chlorine gas.  In fact, liquid bleach and chlorine gas are distinct chemical substances 
with different properties and uses. (See Ex. A, pp. 12-13)  The chlorine gas that was 
utilized as a chemical weapon was concentrated, highly toxic, and dangerous.  The 
liquid bleach solution – containing five gallons of water and 1-2/3 cup of liquid bleach – 
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was weak and 
generally safe for household use.  As noted in the Safety Data Sheet, liquid bleach can 
produce hazardous irritating gases, such as chlorine and other chlorinated compounds, 
when combined with other household cleaning agents (Ex. B, p. 34); however, there is 
no evidence the liquid bleach was combined with anything other than water in this case. 
 
Joan Schlenk was called to testify at the evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 54)  Ms. 
Schlenk is a retired nurse practitioner and Hill’s significant other. (Hr. Tr., pp. 55, 57) 
Ms. Schlenk presented as a credible witness.  She appeared to answer all questions to 
the best of her ability, even when her answers were damaging to Hill’s case.  While Ms. 
Schlenk was not called to be an expert witness in this case, she did offer some insight 
into Hill’s pre-existing conditions and some of their common symptoms.  For example, 
she testified that individuals with atrial fibrillation may have shortness of breath and/or 
experience fatigue. (Hr. Tr., p. 61) 
Ms. Schlenk provided testimony that suggests Hill is physically capable of more 
than he lets on.  Ms. Schlenk testified that Hill helped her move a long, “quite heavy” 
mirror and cabinet in the days leading up to the evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 62)  
There was also testimony to suggest Hill is able to handle more than just two hours of 
physical activity each day.  For instance, Ms. Schlenk testified that Hill has two 
properties that flooded in 2008 that keep him busy. (Hr. Tr., pp. 62-63)  She testified, 
“He may drive over there, like he painted one of them, and he was doing some updates 
to his home on A Avenue as well, and usually by about maybe the first, approximately, 
4:00 or 5:00 he’s back at my home.” (Hr. Tr., p. 63)  In addition to painting, Ms. Schlenk 
also mentioned that Hill has taken the siding off one of his properties. (Hr. Tr., p. 73)  

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 10 
 
Ms. Schlenk testified that Hill “is definitely not” in bed or a recliner all day, and that he 
will sleep once a day for “at the most” one hour. (Hr. Tr., p.63) 
Ms. Schlenk confirmed that Hill struggled with his speech and cognitive abilities 
at one point in time; however, she implied that Hill’s issues with stuttering and brain fog 
have since resolved. (Hr. Tr., pp. 67-68)  With respect to Hill’s alleged stuttering, Ms. 
Schlenk testified, “I believe he used that word (stuttering), but he was just slower to get 
some words and thoughts out.  But that is not – that part of his speech is not as 
significant that I see now as it was back then.” (Hr. Tr., p. 67)   
Lastly, Ms. Schlenk attributed some of Hill’s balance and gait issues to his 
diabetes and the fact he had his great and second toes removed over the last two 
years. (Hr. Tr., p. 69) 
In support of his claims, Hill sought an independent medical examination with 
Sunil Bansal, M.D.  The physical examination occurred on December 16, 2022. (Ex. 1, 
p. 5)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed Hill with acute bleach inhalation injury with resultant reactive 
airway disease, voice hoarseness, and altered mental status. (Ex. 1, p. 15)  He opined 
that the acute inhalation was immediately consistent with mucosal membrane irritation 
followed by lung injury, leading to voice/speech impairment from laryngeal irritation. (Id.)  
Dr. Bansal placed Hill at maximum medical improvement as of December 16, 2022, and 
assessed permanent impairment. (Ex. 1, p. 16)  Based on Table 5-12 of the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal noted an FVC of 66 percent and assigned 15 percent 
whole person impairment. (Id.)  He then utilized Tables 11-8 and 11-9 to assign 5 
percent whole person impairment because of the inhalation’s effect on Hill’s voice. (Id.) 
With respect to permanent restrictions, Dr. Bansal recommended that Hill avoid 
multiple stairs or inclines, no walking greater than 30 minutes at a time, and no carrying 
greater than 20 pounds for over 10 feet. (Ex. 1, p. 17)  He also recommended Hill avoid 
jobs that require frequent talking, as well as work in high particulate or dust 
environments. (Id.) 
In response, defendant scheduled Hill for an independent medical examination 
with Jonathon Fields, M.D.  Dr. Fields conducted the physical examination and collected 
a detailed history from Hill on August 2, 2023. (Ex. A, p. 1)  In describing the work injury, 
Hill relayed his belief that the ceiling fans in the large, open facility forced air up into his 
face shield and “supercharged” the diluted bleach solution.  Hill conceded that the fans 
had been running for the prior two months and there was nothing different about his 
work environment on or about October 2, 2020. (Ex. A, p. 2)  Hill reported that he had 
not coughed up any blood since October 6, 2020. (Ex. A, p. 7)  A Mini Mental Status 
Exam was performed as part of Dr. Fields’ examination. Mr. Hill scored 27 out of 30, 
indicating no cognitive impairment. (Ex. A, p. 10)  The results of Dr. Fields’ Mini Mental 
Status Exam are similar to the Mini Mental Status Exam administered by Dr. Daniels on 
July 29, 2022. (JE5, p. 76)  
Dr. Fields addressed each of Hill’s complaints individually.  Dr. Fields opined that 
Hill experienced an acute respiratory irritation as a result of his proximity to the diluted 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 11 
 
bleach mixture on October 2, 2020, and October 6, 2020.  Dr. Fields, like the Safety 
Data Sheet, noted that inhalation exposure to vapor mist might irritate the respiratory 
tract and cause coughing.  He explained that the reactive airway disease, coughing, and 
sloughing of the mucosa could have persisted for a few days, but would have resolved 
by October 26, 2020, when the CT scan of Hill’s lungs revealed no acute injury. (Ex. A, 
p. 10) 
Dr. Fields further opined that any vocal cord dysfunction would be unrelated to 
the alleged work injuries, as Hill’s ENT examination and FEES results from November 
25, 2020, indicated no abnormality of the vocal cords and no swallowing dysfunction. 
(Ex. A, p. 11)  Dr. Fields added that Hill talked for approximately 90 minutes during his 
physical examination without any issues or hoarseness in his voice. (Id.) 
With respect to the left lower lobe basilar scarring present on the October 26, 
2021, CT scan, Dr. Fields believed this finding was a chronic condition present since at 
least 2015. (Id.)  This opinion is consistent with the opinions of Dr. Hornick’s July 8, 
2022, medical record. (See JE3, p. 50) 
Dr. Fields provided that there is some evidence of a neurologic condition, 
including micrographia, instability when walking, hunched over gait, swallowing 
difficulties, speech difficulties and tremor, but the neurologic condition is personal and 
unrelated to any alleged exposure to diluted bleach in October 2020. (Ex. A, p. 11)  Dr. 
Fields cites to a January 10, 2020, medical record from Hiawatha Internal Medicine and 
Dr. Rieck’s March 15, 2023, neuropsych evaluation for support. (Id.) 
Lastly, Dr. Fields opined that Hill’s ongoing fatigue, depression, and difficulties 
concentrating are likely a result of his personal medical conditions, including his 
untreated sleep apnea. (Ex. A, p. 12)  Again, Dr. Fields points to a pre-existing medical 
report from April 1, 2020.  The report provides,  
61-year-old male who thinks he might have sleep apnea. His wife reports 
he has extremely loud snoring. He stops breathing at night. He is dead tired 
when he wakes up in the morning. He falls asleep during the day. He drives 
down to the main factory and he says his only 20-minute drive but there 
have been more than 1 time where he is pulled off on the side of the road 
during the 20-minute drive because he is afraid he is going to fall asleep. 
(Id.; See JE4, p. 58 (errors in original))  
Defendant requested that Dr. Fields respond to Dr. Bansal’s December 16, 2022, 
IME report.  Dr. Fields took issue with Dr. Bansal’s claim that “exposure to chlorine can 
lead to reactive airway dysfunction syndrome (RADS), a chemical irritant-induced type 
of asthma.”  Dr. Fields opined that there is no medical evidence of occupational asthma 
or RADS in this case.  Instead, he noted that the medical evidence has repeatedly 
demonstrated a restrictive lung disease and not an obstructive lung disease, like 
asthma. (Ex. A, p. 12)  Dr. Fields also took issue with Dr. Bansal’s discussion of chlorine 
gas inhalation.  Dr. Fields opined, 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 12 
 
There is no evidence that Mr. Hill was exposed to chlorine gas. Chlorine 
gas may be released if common household bleach is mixed with other 
cleaning chemicals such as ammonia. However, there is no evidence that 
this occurred at Whirlpool on October 2, 2020 or October 6, 2020. Common 
household bleach is surprisingly nontoxic to humans and the majority of 
people exposed to bleach recover without any sequela. Inhalation injuries 
tend to be relatively minor with common household bleach. Reactive airway 
disease, coughing and mucosal sloughing typically resolve within a few 
days. Notably when Mr. Hill was seen at Urgent Care on October 2, 2020 
he was already noting resolution of his cough. 
(Id.) 
Dr. Fields placed Hill at maximum medical improvement as of October 26, 2020. 
(Ex. A, p. 13)  He opined there is no basis for an impairment rating per the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition, as Hill’s injury was merely a temporary exacerbation. (Id.)  He further 
opined there is no basis for any permanent restrictions as a result of the alleged injuries. 
(Id.) 
Dr. Fields’ opinions on causation are consistent with the medical records in 
evidence.  Following the workplace exposure on October 2, 2020, Hill underwent a 
chest x-ray, the results of which came back negative.  Shortly thereafter, Hill was 
evaluated by Dr. Hashmi at the pulmonology clinic.  His pulmonary function tests 
returned unremarkable.  On October 26, 2020, Hill underwent a chest CT scan that 
indicated no acute cardiopulmonary process and minimal left basilar scarring and/or 
atelectasis.  Dr. Hashmi told Hill on October 26, 2020 that he did not have obstructive 
airway disease.  Dr. Hashmi stated Hill had restrictive lung physiology likely secondary 
to body habitus.  As mentioned, Hill did not report difficulty breathing or shortness of 
breath between December 2020 and May 2022. 
Sixteen months later, Dr. Hornick conducted additional pulmonary function tests 
on Hill, which revealed restrictive lung pathology.  Dr. Hornick reviewed the CT imaging 
from October 26, 2020, and noted no significant parenchymal lung abnormality other 
than atelectasis in the left lower lobe with an associated thickened pleura.  He noted 
similar findings were described in a chest x-ray from 2015 when claimant went to urgent 
care for left lower lobe pneumonia associated with acute hypothyroidism.  Dr. Hornick 
agreed with Dr. Hashmi that Hill’s lung function was most likely due to body habitus. 
(JE3, p. 50)  Additionally, Dr. Bansal, Hill’s cardiologist, opined that the etiology of Hill’s 
dyspnea on exertion was not clear. (JE6, p. 121) 
I do not afford significant weight to Dr. Hornick’s statement that he continues to 
presume Hill’s restrictive physiology is related to the chlorine inhalation injury in 2020.  
Dr. Hornick’s use of the word “presume” is concerning as it suggests that his opinion is, 
to some extent, based on an assumption rather than definitive evidence.  At the very 
least, his use of the word “presume” introduces ambiguity into his opinion, which affects 
its persuasiveness.  Lastly, his opinion is not followed by any analysis, and he provides 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 13 
 
no assurance that his opinion was made with a reasonable degree of medical certainty.  
For these reasons, I do not find Dr. Hornick’s opinion to be convincing.   
Dr. Fields opined claimant sustained an acute respiratory irritation due to his 
proximity to a diluted bleach solution at work, which resolved by October 26, 2020.  Dr. 
Fields’ medical opinion is the most credible and consistent with the medical records in 
evidence.  I find Hill failed to produce sufficient evidence to prove his current shortness 
of breath is causally related to the bleach exposures in October 2020.  
It is similarly difficult to attribute Hill’s fatigue to the workplace exposures.  
Several months prior to the October 2, 2020, exposure, Hill presented to his primary 
care physician to discuss a possible diagnosis of sleep apnea.  According to the 
medical record, Hill stopped breathing at night, was “dead tired” when he woke up in the 
morning, and he fell asleep during the day. (JE4, p. 58)  It is further noted that, “He 
drives down to the [Amana] factory and he says is only 20-minute drive but there have 
been more than 1 time where he is pulled off on the side of the road during the 20-
minute drive because he is afraid he is going to fall asleep.” (Id.)  Hill was diagnosed 
with mild sleep apnea.  A CPAP machine was recommended; however, Hill declined to 
use the same.  He continues to decline the use of a CPAP machine despite being 
alerted to the risks associated with persistent and recurring atrial fibrillation in the setting 
of untreated sleep apnea. (JE6, p. 100)   
Dr. Fields opined Hill’s ongoing fatigue and difficulties concentrating are due to 
his untreated sleep apnea.  The medical records demonstrate that claimant was having 
issues with fatigue prior to the alleged work injury.  I find Dr. Fields’ opinion convincing.  
I further find Hill failed to produce sufficient evidence to prove his alleged ongoing 
fatigue and difficulties concentrating are causally related to the bleach exposures in 
October 2020. 
There is little evidence to support a finding that Hill’s difficulties with swallowing 
and the change in his voice are causally related to the October 2020 work exposures.  
Dr. Carpenter performed a laryngoscopy of Hill’s throat on November 12, 2020, and did 
not observe any abnormalities.  Hill subsequently underwent a FEES and exhibited 
normal swallowing mechanisms.  One year later, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
revealed mild esophagitis, mild esophageal stricture in the distal esophagus, gastric 
polyps, and an otherwise normal EGD. (JE2, p. 22)  Hill then underwent an esophageal 
manometry, which returned normal. (JE2, pp. 31-32)  The medical records support Dr. 
Fields’ conclusion that Hill’s vocal cord dysfunction and swallowing issues are not 
causally related to the bleach exposure. (Ex. A, p. 11) 
With respect to the alleged cognitive injuries, Dr. Rieck did not believe the bleach 
exposure was the basis for Hill’s symptoms as they were more commonly associated 
with untreated sleep apnea, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension.  Dr. Fields’ 
opinion is consistent with Dr. Rieck’s conclusion and the remainder of the medical 
records.  I find the opinions of Dr. Rieck and Dr. Fields most convincing on this issue. 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 14 
 
Based on these opinions, I find there is insufficient evidence to causally relate 
Hill’s ongoing complaints and need for medical treatment to the October 2, 2020, and 
October 6, 2020, work exposures.  I further find claimant has not proven that the alleged 
pulmonary and cognitive conditions, the treatment he obtained after October 26, 2020, 
and any resulting disability are causally related to, arose out of, or were materially 
aggravated or accelerated by the October 2020 exposures.  Having rendered this 
factual finding, all other disputed issues are rendered moot.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issue is whether the stipulated workplace exposures to 
bleach on October 2, 2020, and October 6, 2020, resulted in temporary and/or 
permanent disability. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v, Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (lowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc, v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods. Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling. Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (lowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961).     
In this case, I found the medical opinions of Dr. Fields to be more persuasive and 
credible than the opinions offered by Dr. Sunil Bansal.  Having rejected the opinions of 
Dr. Bansal, I ultimately found that Hill failed to prove he sustained permanent injuries as 

HILL V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION 
Page 15 
 
a result of his workplace exposures to liquid bleach on October 2, 2020, and October 6, 
2020.  I conclude that the claimant’s claim for workers’ compensation benefits against 
Whirlpool for the October 2, 2020, and October 6, 2020, injury dates must fail.  Claimant 
is not entitled to an award of temporary or permanent disability benefits.   
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 10A.328 and rule 876 IAC 4.33. Iowa Code section 10A.328. Costs are to 
be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers' compensation 
commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. Because claimant was not successful in 
his claim, I decline to tax any costs to defendant. 
All other disputed issues are rendered moot by the above findings of fact and 
conclusions of law. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Signed and filed this ___3rd _ day of July, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Thomas Wertz (via WCES) 
Kent Smith (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The ap peal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
