Case Number: 23005158.01
Case Title:  CABALLERO, JOAQUIN V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Caballero Joaquin-23005158.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOAQUIN CABALLERO, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 23005158.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
    Head Notes: 1108.50, 1402.20,  
 
 
 
  : 
    
 
   1402.30, 2907 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Joaquin Caballero, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., self-insured employer as 
defendant.  Hearing was held via Zoom videoconference on January 9, 2025.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Joaquin Caballero was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record also includes joint exhibits 1-7, claimant’s exhibits 1, 4-14, and defendant’s 
exhibits A-G.  Claimant did not offer claimant’s exhibits 2 and 3. All exhibits were 
received without objection. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on March 3, 2025, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on November 29, 2022. 
2. Whether claimant sustained any permanent partial disability as the result of 
the work injury.  If so, the nature and extent of permanency he sustained.   
3. The appropriate commencement date for any permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-16  10:12:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary total disability and/or healing period 
benefits from November 29, 2022 through February 10, 2023 and August 11, 
2023 through November 1, 2023. 
5. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses. 
6. Whether defendants should reimburse claimant for the independent medical 
examination. 
7. Whether penalty benefits are appropriate. 
8. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 Claimant, Joaquin Caballero, alleges injury to his neck, bilateral shoulders, and 
bilateral hands/wrists and ulnar nerve.  Defendant, Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc. (“Tyson”) 
denied that Joaquin sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of his 
employment on November 29, 2022.  (Hearing Report) 
 
Joaquin was hired by IBP as a laborer in 1990.  (Tr. p. 14) He eventually moved 
to a position on the cutting floor.  (Tr. p. 15) In that position he used a knife with his right 
hand for eight hours a day, five days a week.  (Tr. pp. 15-16) He performed this job for 
approximately 10 years.  (Tr. p. 16) From 1990 to 2003 he was always on the cut line or 
on the floor working.  (Tr. p. 16)  
From 2003 until late 2017 Joaquin was in prison. (Tr. pp. 16-17) During this time 
he worked in the dining hall on the food line and cleaning tables.  (Tr. p. 17-18) 
In December 2017 Joaquin obtained full-time employment at Tyson and 
remained employed there until he was terminated in September 2024.  (Tr. p. 18) As 
part of his employment he underwent a post-offer health assessment.  (CE7, pp. 12-13) 
The results of the assessment and tests were all within acceptable limits.  (CE7, pp. 12-
13) In 2017 he worked as a laborer using a Whizard knife.  (Tr. p. 19) He held the knife 
in his right hand and the meat with his left.  (Tr. p. 20) He did this for 8 to 10 hours per 
day.  (Tr. p. 20) He typically worked sixty hours per week, six days per week.  (Tr. pp. 
18-19) He did this for three to four years until he became a trainer.  (Tr. p. 20) He 
worked as a trainer for one year and then was promoted to supervisor.  (Tr. pp. 20-21) 
As a supervisor his job was to manage.  (Tr. p. 21) If a line was short of workers he 
would have to fill in and perform the work. (Tr. p. 21) This included filling in briefly for 
workers to go on break and similar things.  (Tr. p. 34) He estimated he filled in for a 
worker 3 days a week. (Tr. p. 21)  
In March 2018 Joaquin sought treatment for pain shooting down his right leg from 
his hip which began on March 2, 2018.  He also reported other symptoms including 
numbness and tingling in his right foot when he had this pain.  (JE3, pp. 21-25) He was 
bench pressing 150 pounds approximately 1-2 months ago when he heard a crack in 
his back.  The assessment included radicular pain.  Joaquin was interested in physical 
therapy.  (JE3, pp. 21-25) 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
On April 24, 2018, Joaquin went to Peoples Community Health Clinic (PCHC) to 
establish care.  (JE3, pp. 27-31) He reported he had been working at Tyson for 4 
months and for the past 2 months he had been having right leg radicular pain.  Two 
months ago he was doing push-ups and heard a snap in his back and had pain for 
days.  The assessment included radicular pain.  He was referred to physical therapy. 
(JE3, p. 28-31)  
On May 19, 2022, Joaquin went to PCHC with complaints of swollen legs that 
began with cramping and his left leg was swollen.  (JE3, pp. 32-35) The assessment 
included back pain, lumbar with radiculopathy.  Conservative treatment was 
recommended.  (JE3, pp. 32-35) 
At hearing Joaquin testified that he began having pain and problems with his 
neck and shoulders in 2022.  (Tr. p. 22) He went to the nurse at Tyson who sent him to 
see a doctor.  The doctor recommended physical therapy and injections which helped 
with his pain. (Tr. p. 22) He testified that he began having problems with his wrists and 
hands in October and November 2022.  (Tr. p. 22) He went to the nurse at Tyson and 
was referred to a doctor.  (Tr. pp. 22-23)   
 
 On October 14, 2022, Joaquin went to PCHC for right arm numbness and 
neck/shoulder pain that began 3 days ago. (JE3, p. 39) He also reported numbness 
mostly on the right thumb and second finger and pain that begins near neck and travels 
down near the elbow.  His pain was worse when reaching behind back.  He denied 
weakness of his arms or hands.  Joaquin reported that “he works as supervisor at 
Tyson and says ‘I don’t do anything hard - I just walk and push pencils.’” (JE3, p. 39) 
The pain in his neck and shoulder throbs. (JE3, p. 39) Cervical spine x-rays revealed 
degenerative changes affecting C5-C6 and C6-C7.  (JE3, p. 36) The impression from 
right shoulder x-rays was limited degenerative changes.  (JE3, p. 37) The assessment 
included: neck pathology likely cause of symptoms given his history and physical, 
concerning for radiculopathy from his neck; pain in the right shoulder; radicular pain.  
(JE3, p. 41) Conservative treatment was recommended.  (JE3, pp. 41-43)  
 
Joaquin returned to PCHC on October 21, 2022 to follow up on right arm pain. 
(JE3, pp. 44-48) He reported he was not feeling better, he was feeling worse.  The 
numbness was in his 4th and 5th finger now.  He purchased an arm sling which he stated 
helped.  (JE3, p. 45) The assessment was radicular pain and right shoulder pain.  An 
EMG and MRI cervical spine was recommended.  (JE3, pp. 46-48)  
On November 21, 2022 Joaquin was seen for follow-up of neck and right 
shoulder pain. (JE3, pp. 49-54) Since October 21, 2022 he has had left shoulder pain 
and no right shoulder pain.  (JE3, p. 50) He reported having money concerns and 
wanted to return to work.  Joaquin felt because he was in a management position he 
could perform his job without difficulty.  (JE3, p. 50) The November 19, 2022 MRI 
showed C6-7 degenerative changes with moderate to severe foraminal narrowing and 
spurring at C6-7 and C7-T1.  (JE3, p. 50; JE4, pp. 64-65) He was given a note to return 
to work on Wednesday November 23, 2022.  (JE3, p. 52) The assessment was neck 
pain, pain in right shoulder, and radicular pain.  (JE3, p. 52) He was to return in 6 to 8 
weeks.  (JE3, pp. 49-54) 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Joaquin saw Brian E. O’Shaughnessy, M.D. for electrodiagnostic studies of his 
right upper extremity on November 29, 2022.  (JE4, p. 63) He had chronic neck pain 
that went into the scapular region on the right, into the triceps and forearm.  He also has 
pain, numbness, and tingling especially in the first 2 digits of the right hand and his arm 
feels fatigued.  (JE4, p. 63) Dr. O’Shaughnessy noted an abnormal electrodiagnostic 
study of the right upper extremity.  The findings were compatible with moderate 
dysfunction of the median nerve motor and sensory fibers in the carpal tunnel.  There 
was no evidence for cervical radiculopathy.  (JE4, p. 63)  
On December 5, 2022, Joaquin saw Ashar Afzal, M.D. at the WLA Pain clinic. 
(JE5, pp. 91-92) He was seen for an initial consultation for dorsal neck pain that was 
initially radiating to the right side, but now also radiated towards the left upper extremity 
which was quite severe and sharp discomfort.  (JE5, p. 91) This all began four weeks 
ago; he denied any acute on setting event.  He works at Tyson as a supervisor but has 
worked physical labor in the past.  (JE5, p. 91) Dr. Afzal noted that the MRI of the 
cervical spine was pertinent for bulging disc at C7, bilateral neuroforaminal stenosis C6-
7, moderate neuroforaminal stenosis bilaterally C7-T1, straightening of cervical lordosis 
with minimal reversal at C5-6.  Dr. Afzal’s impression was cervical degenerative disc 
disease, cervical radiculopathy. Physical therapy was recommended for at least 2 
weeks.  He also prescribed gabapentin.  Joaquin was to follow-up in 2 weeks.  (JE5, p. 
92) 
 
On January 6, 2023 Joaquin returned to the WLA Pain Clinic.  (JE5, pp. 93-100) 
He presented with bilateral shoulder pain.  He had been to physical therapy and still had 
1 more week of therapy.  (JE5, p. 99) He reported that his symptoms were getting 
better.  He was making improvement and his range of motion was improving.  He 
continued to experience discomfort, burning sensation like fibers that shoot from the 
neck all the way down into his fingers on the left.  His symptoms were present 
throughout the day.  Dr. Afzal’s impression was cervical radiculopathy and left shoulder 
pain.  (JE5, p. 100) He strongly suggested that Joaquin finish all his treatments.  Dr. 
Afzal recommended a cervical epidural steroid injection (ESI) for the burning sensation 
in his left upper extremity.  (JE5, p. 100) Joaquin requested work related restrictions.  
Dr. Afzal noted his work status would remain the same as currently defined by the 
primary care provider.  (JE5, p. 100)  
Joaquin returned to Brent Buhr, M.D. at PCHC on January 6, 2023.  (JE3, pp. 55-
58) Dr. Buhr noted that Dr. Afzal, pain specialist called him today to report patient was 
improving with physical therapy and had not requested any time off.  (JE3, p. 56) 
Joaquin was to return to work on December 24, 2022 per last FMLA.  Dr. Buhr noted 
that in November he was a “manager and I don’t do nothing” in regards to strenuous 
activities.  (JE3, p. 56) At the January 6, 2023 visit Joaquin reported that his symptoms 
were worse and he reported worse pain almost everywhere.  He had not been back to 
work and wanted further work restrictions and time off. When Dr. Buhr mentioned the 
note from Dr. Afzal, Joaquin contradicted that history but continued to try to insist he is 
doing worse.  Dr. Buhr stated that Joaquin was to complete physical therapy and get 
injection with Dr. Afzal for continued management.  (JE3, p. 56) Dr. Buhr noted that 
Joaquin had been sitting comfortably until he came into the room then Joaquin guarded 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
and slouched saying he hurt.  Dr. Buhr noted this changed when he discussed his notes 
from Dr. Afzal.  (JE3, p. 57) Dr. Buhr stated that Joaquin was “clearly malingering for 
more time off.  I made it clear to him I will NOT write any further time off or work 
restrictions…” (JE3, p. 57) Dr. Buhr strongly urged Dr. Afzal to not write further time off 
or restrictions unless there was objective evidence of worsening. (JE3, pp. 55-59)   
 
On January 10, 2023 Joaquin saw Pratibha Dua, M.D. at UnityPoint Clinic.  (JE1, 
pp. 1-3) Joaquin reported that he had been having issues with his hand going to sleep. 
He had been having issues with his shoulder as well.  The assessment was left 
shoulder pain, unspecified chronicity, cervical radiculopathy.  (JE1, pp. 1-2)   
 
On January 20, 2023, Joaquin underwent a cervical epidural steroid injection 
(ESI) left C6/7.  (JE5, p. 101)  
 
Joaquin returned to UnityPoint on February 10, 2023. (JE1, pp. 5-7) He had a 
tooth pulled out today and wanted paperwork to be off work; Dr. Dua advised that she 
could not recommend that. (JE1, p. 5) He had been evaluated by pain management and 
had an injection.  Joaquin reported he was not back to 100% normal.  He requested 
paperwork to state that his carpal tunnel and cervical problem was caused by Tyson;  
Dr. Dua denied Joaquin’s request.  Joaquin did not want a referral to neurosurgery for 
cervical disc degeneration.  (JE1, p. 5) Dr. Dua’s diagnosis included cervical 
radiculopathy and carpal tunnel syndrome of the right wrist.  (JE1, p. 6)  
 
Joaquin returned to WLA Pain Clinic on February 17, 2023 for follow-up after his 
cervical ESI.  (JE5, p. 102) He reported the injection was ineffective for management of 
his pain.  He continued to experience significant discomfort in the dorsal lateral aspect 
of the neck with radiation of the pain, numbness, and tingling into the dorsal aspect of 
hand and wrist.  (JE5, p. 102) The MRI was reviewed again.  He had advanced 
multilevel degenerative disc disease, degenerative spondylosis with severe 
neuroforaminal stenosis C6-7 on the left side more than likely the causation of his 
symptoms.  The impression was cervical radiculopathy C7 left-sided.  (JE6, p. 102) The 
doctor noted that unfortunately the patient did not respond to conservative modalities 
including neuro modulating medication, physical therapy, and a cervical ESI.  
Neurosurgical evaluation was offered and could be arranged through his PCP.  (JE5, p. 
102) 
Joaquin went to UnityPoint Clinic Neurosurgery on May 31, 2023 (JE4, pp. 87-
90) He had pain and numbness in the left arm which began in November without fall or 
injury in the right arm with numbness.  His symptoms improved on the right side and 
now symptoms were all in the left arm.  His symptoms included numbness and tingling 
down the front of the left arm into the thumb and next 2 fingers.  He felt as if his entire 
left hand goes numb.  The pain is sharp, shooting sensation that radiated from the 
shoulder down the front of the left arm to his fingers. The diagnoses were degeneration 
of intervertebral disc at C6-C7 level, cervicalgia, cervical spondylosis, degeneration of 
C5-C6 intervertebral disc, degeneration of cervicothoracic intervertebral disc, right 
carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE4, pp. 89-90) Joaquin was referred for EMG of the left 
upper extremity.  (JE4, p. 90)  

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On April 26, 2023, Joaquin returned to see Dr. Dua for follow-up of chronic 
medical conditions.  (JE1, pp. 8-10) The clinical notes state had cervical radiculopathy 
and wanted a referral to neurosurgery. (JE1, p. 8) Dr. Dua provided the referral.  (JE1, 
p. 9) 
 
At the request of the defendant, Robert Gordon, M.D. examined Joaquin 
Caballero on April 18, 2023.  (Def. Ex. C) Joaquin reported that his right shoulder 
region/right upper extremity were doing well. He reported no symptoms of his right 
shoulder region/right upper extremity even though his symptom diagram indicated this 
region was symptomatic.  Joaquin told Dr. Gordon that he was no longer symptomatic in 
right shoulder/upper extremity region.   
Joaquin reported symptoms from his left cervical region down the entirety of his 
left upper extremity into his left hand as well as numbness and tingling throughout his 
left upper extremity but most notably the left thumb and left long digit.  No reported 
weakness of the left upper extremity.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 36) Joaquin could not recall 
anything specific that brought his symptoms on so acutely.  He slept awkwardly and 
thinks that is what caused his symptoms initially of his right upper extremity but then his 
symptoms shifted to the other extremity. (Def. Ex. C, p. 36) Joaquin reported to Dr. 
Gordon that in his job as a supervisor he does paperwork and does not perform 
anything strenuous.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 36) In the past he did work as a production worker 
on the line but never had any issues of neck or upper extremity problems.  Joaquin 
stated that his current issues began acutely after wakening from sleep in October 2022.  
(Def. Ex. C, p. 36) Dr. Gordon felt that Joaquin’s symptomatology was consistent with a 
left cervical radiculopathy.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 38) He stated that his condition was not a 
work-related matter. Dr. Gordon did not place any restrictions on his activities with 
regard to a work-related condition. (Def. Ex. C, p. 38)     
 
Dr. Gordon addressed Joaquin’s carpal tunnel syndrome.  He felt Joaquin did not 
have any examination features, nor did he have any symptomatology consistent with 
carpal tunnel syndrome either on the left or right side.  He noted that Joaquin did not 
have any permanent impairment or restrictions.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 38)     
On May 8, 2023, Tyson authored a missive to Joaquin advising him that they 
were denying his claim for workers’ compensation.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 39) Their decision 
was based on the opinions of Dr. Gordon that there was no mechanism to contribute his 
bilateral upper extremities condition to the work activities at Tyson.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 39) 
 
Joaquin went to UnityPoint Clinic Neurosurgery on July 26, 2023 for follow-up on 
the EMG.  (JE4, pp. 81-83; JE4, pp. 85-86) Dr. Buchanan recommended surgical 
treatment.  (JE4, p. 83)  
On August 11, 2023, Joaquin underwent a left carpal tunnel release.  (JE6, p. 
103) On August 14, 2023, he was restricted from work until September 1, 2023.  (JE4, 
p. 80) He underwent surgery on the right wrist in September 2023.  (JE6, p. 104) On 
September 1, 2023 Russell Buchanan, M.D. stated that Joaquin should remain out of 
work until his September 21, 2023 appointment.  (JE4, p. 79)  

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
On September 21, 2023, Joaquin returned to UnityPoint Clinic Neurosurgery.  
(JE4, pp. 73-78) He was 3 weeks post-op right carpal tunnel release, 6 weeks post-op 
left carpal tunnel release.  (JE4, p. 75) His pain was 0/10 on the left hand, 5/10 on right 
hand.  (JE4, p. 75) Grip weakness on the left improved, but not on the right.  He is not 
interested in occupational therapy at this time due to cost.  He was released to return to 
work on Wednesday, October 4, 2023.  (JE4, pp. 76-78) 
On October 9, 2023 Lynn Galloway, PA-C at UnityPoint Health stated that 
Joaquin should remain out of work until he was seen in the office on October 18, 2023.  
(JE4, p. 72)  
Joaquin went to UnityPoint Clinic Neurosurgery on October 18, 2023. (JE4, pp. 
66-71) He reported his pain had improved since surgery but he continued to have some 
tenderness in his right palm to his wrist.  His numbness was improving but continued to 
have tingling in the tips of his right thumb and index finger. (JE4, pp. 68-69) He had 
diminished grip strength and drops items.  He would like to try occupational therapy and 
return to work on November 1, full duty.  (JE4, p. 71) He is planning on retiring on 
December 31, 2023.  (JE4, p. 69) Joaquin was released to return to work on November 
1, 2023.  (JE4, p. 70) He was restricted from driving if he was sleepy or drowsy or while 
on pain medications.  No sport for 12 weeks.  (JE4, p. 70) He was referred to 
occupational therapy and was to return as needed.  (JE4, p. 70)  
On November 6, 2023 Joaquin went to the emergency department at Allen 
Memorial Hospital.  (JE2, pp. 15-19) He reported he was at work at Tyson’s when he 
missed the last step and fell onto his left shoulder.  He reported left shoulder pain and 
lower back pain.  (JE2, p. 15) He denied any head or neck pain.  The diagnosis was fall, 
initial encounter. (JE2, p. 19)    
Joaquin returned to UnityPoint on November 13, 2023 for left shoulder pain.  
(JE2, p. 12) He reported he was looking into getting retirement and want to look into 
disability.  He was having issues with shoulder pain.  He had surgery, physical therapy, 
and injection.  Joaquin was advised that he would need an evaluation by occupational 
health.  The diagnoses were left shoulder pain, unspecified chronicity and primary 
hypertension.  (JE2, p. 12) 
Joaquin underwent a cervical MRI on November 19, 2023.  (JE2, pp. 13-14) The 
impression was lower cervical multifactorial degenerative change, most severe at C6-
C7.  (JE2, pp. 13-14)  
After his carpal tunnel releases Joaquin returned to work full-time at Tyson.  (Tr. 
p. 24) He remained there until September 27, 2024 when Tyson terminated Joaquin for 
failure to follow Tyson Foods policies and procedures.  (Def. Ex. G, p. 50) 
At hearing Joaquin testified that he still has problems with his right and left wrists. 
(Tr. pp. 24-25) His hand locks up and he has a lot of pain at night.  (Tr. pp. 24-25) He 
takes ibuprofen for his pain.  (Tr. pp. 24-25) Vibration bothers his hands.  He feels he 
does not have good pressure in his hands to grab things such as a pool cue.  (Tr. pp. 
25-26) Joaquin testified that once in awhile he has pain with his shoulders.  (Tr. p. 26)  
He takes ibuprofen for his pain.  (Tr. p. 27) He has pain when he lifts something heavy.  

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
(Tr. p. 27) Joaquin was asked if he had any ongoing problems with his neck.  (Tr. p. 26) 
He responded, “My neck is okay. It’s perfect.” (Tr. p. 26) 
Joaquin points out that there is a Tyson document that acknowledges there are 
health risks for production workers.  (CE6, p. 11) Some of the risks include cumulative 
trauma disorder and lower back strains.  (CE6, p. 11) 
The central issue in this case is whether Joaquin sustained injuries that were 
connected to his work at Tyson.  There are several experts who have rendered their 
opinions in this case.  Joaquin relies on the opinion of his IME doctor, Farid Manshadi, 
M.D. while Tyson relies primarily on the opinions of their IME doctors, Robert Gordon, 
M.D. and Charles Mooney, M.D. These physicians examined Joaquin and reviewed 
records provide to them.  Their opinions will be discussed below.   
At the request of his attorney Joaquin saw Dr. Manshadi for an IME.  (Cl. Ex. 1) 
On June 7, 2024 Dr. Manshadi issued his report. (Cl. Ex. 1) Joaquin reported constant 
needles and pins sensation in his left thumb and index finger and in his right wrist.  (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 4) He felt that his grip was significantly reduced in both hands.  He reported 
frequently dropped objects with both hands.  Joaquin was unable to push a mower and 
now used a riding mower. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) He also reported bilateral shoulder pain, right 
greater than left.  Dr. Manshadi noted reduced active range of motion in the shoulders.  
Joaquin reported the shoulder pain began several years ago but has gotten worse 
during the past 3 years.  Joaquin also reported intermittent neck pain which interferes 
with his ability to sleep.  (CE1, p. 4)  
In his report Dr. Manshadi stated that Joaquin “sustained multiple injuries as a 
result of his work activities while working for Tyson Foods, Inc.”  (CE1, p. 5) He noted 
Joaquin was post bilateral carpal tunnel release with ongoing symptomatology in both 
hands.  (CE1, p. 5)  
Dr. Manshadi noted that Joaquin had “evidence of bilateral shoulder pain with 
reduced active range of motion probably secondary to impingement syndrome.”  (CE1, 
p. 5) Dr. Manshadi did not state whether he felt the bilateral shoulder pain was related 
to his activities at Tyson.  
Dr. Manshadi stated that Joaquin “has evidence of active neck pain with reduced 
active range of motion with MRI findings for significant degenerative changes also in the 
lower cervical spine involving C5-C6 and C6-C7.”  Dr. Manshadi opined, “that his work 
activities at Tyson have caused significant aggravation of his neck condition.”  (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 5)  
At the request of the defendant, Charles D. Mooney, M.D. performed an IME.  Dr. 
Mooney issued his IME report on July 11, 2024.  In addition to examining Joaquin, Dr. 
Mooney also reviewed the medical records provided to him.  (Def. Ex. B) At the time of 
the examination by Dr. Mooney, Joaquin reported ongoing neck pain which he rated at 
3 at rest and up to 5 with attempts at overhead motion and lifting arms above his head.  
(Def. Ex. B, p. 25) He also reported pain in his right shoulder which was worse with 
lifting and he could not lie on his right shoulder for any length of time due to pain.  (Def. 
Ex. B, p. 25) He denied any specific activity which caused his issue.  He worked for the 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
last 3 years at Tyson’s as a supervisor.  This “did not require any significant overhead 
lifting or motion.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) He rated his pain in the right shoulder at 3 or 4 with 
lifting.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) Joaquin also reported similar symptoms in his left shoulder.  
He denied any specific injury occurring to the right or left shoulder.  He was very 
demonstrative regarding difficulty with painful motion and demonstrated smooth 
elevation and abduction of both shoulders.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) Additionally, Joaquin 
reported complaints of right hand and left hand pain.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) He has 
intermittent pain at the base of his right thumb and feels that his thumb actually locks up 
with full adduction.  He reported pain at the base of his thumb.  He has sensation of pins 
and needles mostly noted in the small finger and the thumb.  Gripping is difficult and he 
demonstrated very poor ability to make a composite fist.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) He feels his 
grip is weaker and has similar complaints of pain in the left hand although noting that it 
goes to sleep more and has more pain at night.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) 
Dr. Mooney’s assessments were: medical record evidence of degenerative 
cervical disc disease most pronounced at C5-6 and C6-7 with some evidence for 
radicular pain but no evidence on EMG testing of radiculopathy; complaints of bilateral 
shoulder pain without evidence of specific shoulder injury with range of motion 
measures inconsistent between measured and observed; complaints of bilateral hand 
and arm pain with numbness and tingling now status post carpal tunnel release with 
invalid measures in both strength and sensory testing; and complaints of thoracolumbar 
back pain with degenerative findings of scoliosis, degenerative spondylosis, with some 
limited loss of disc height involving primarily L4-5 and L5-S1 and sclerosis of the lower 
facet joints.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 29-30)   
Dr. Mooney opined that there was no evidence of any injury as it relates to 
Joaquin’s findings of degenerative cervical disc disease or thoraco-lumbar scoliosis, 
spondylosis or facet arthropathy.  He also felt that his claims of ‘cumulative trauma’ 
would not be consistent with the findings or related to his employment at Tyson’s.  (Def. 
Ex. B, p. 30) In support of his opinion he cited to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Disease and Injury Causation (2nd Ed).  Dr. Mooney noted that the aforementioned AMA 
publication had reviewed 100 peer-reviewed articles investigating potential causal 
factors of cervical and lumbar pain, including disc herniation, degenerative disc disease 
and chronic low back pain. Those articles did not support a causation connection 
between his work activities and neck and back conditions. It was noted that there was 
“insufficient scientific evidence to conclusively establish that any occupational or 
ergonomic risk factor is actually a medical cause of work age adult low back pain.  The 
additional studies on disabling lower back pain and on the prevention of low back pain 
reinforce this conclusion.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 30) Dr. Mooney stated that the authors noted 
that “work related activities including heavy physical work, neck posture, and prolonged 
sedentary position, did not have sufficient evidence to be considered a risk factor for 
neck pain, or have a positive association.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 31) 
Regarding Joaquin’s bilateral shoulder complaints, Dr. Mooney opined that 
Joaquin’s work activities did not reveal significant occupational risk factors including 
force and repetition or repeated use of the arms in greater than 60 degrees of 
flexion/abduction which would create a causal connection between his right and left 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
shoulder complaints and his work activities.  He felt this was especially true during 
Joaquin’s work as a supervisor. (Def. Ex. B, p. 31) Dr. Mooney stated that Joaquin 
demonstrated 2 personal risk factors which are strongly associated with shoulder 
symptoms which included being over age 60 and poor job satisfaction.  He opined that 
“there is no evidence that a ‘cumulative injury’ has occurred as it relates to any of these 
[bilateral shoulder] complaints.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 31) 
Dr. Mooney also addressed the issue of causation for bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome and arm pain.  He noted that for the last 3 years when Joaquin began having 
symptoms he was a supervisor which was very light activities and did not require any 
repetitive lifting, motion or hand or wrist repetition motion or grasp.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 31) 
He stated, “[d]espite that findings of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome are prevalent in 
individuals employed in the rendering process, there is no evidence that in Mr. 
Caballero’s case that known occupational risk factors were present or a significant 
contributor to his diagnosis.”  (Def. E. B, p. 31) On exam, Dr. Mooney could not find any 
reliable evidence that ulnar nerve dysfunction (or cubital tunnel syndrome) was present.  
He pointed out that the EMG testing on July 24, 2023 did not identify any ulnar nerve 
dysfunction.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 32) Dr. Mooney highlighted that there was no direct 
evidence that the work activities at Tyson were directly causal or a major contributing 
factor to his arm complaints.  Additionally, he did not feel that a diagnosis of cubital 
tunnel syndrome was appropriate.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 32) Dr. Mooney cited the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation to support his opinion that there were 
no causal relations between repetitive elbow motions and ulnar neuropathy.  (Def. Ex. 
B, p. 32) 
None of the treating physicians in this case have related Joaquin’s work activities 
at Tyson to his symptoms or conditions that he alleges to be work-related.  The three 
physicians who have offered their opinions are non-treating.   
Dr. Manshadi is the only physician to state that Joaquin had bilateral carpal 
tunnel which he believed Joaquin sustained as the result of his work activities while at 
Tyson.  (CE1, p. 5) Unfortunately, Dr. Manshadi does not provide his rationale for his 
opinion.  Dr. Gordon addressed the bilateral carpal tunnel allegations.  He concluded 
that Joaquin did not have exam features nor symptomology consistent with carpal 
tunnel on the right or the left.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 38) Dr. Mooney also opined there was no 
causal relation between Joaquin’s work activities at Tyson and his upper extremity 
complaints.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 31-32) Dr. Mooney provided his rationale, including that for 
the prior 3 years when the onset of symptoms occurred Joaquin was working as a 
supervisor.  He also cited an AMA publication on causation.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 32)  
Dr. Manshadi is the only physician to relate Joaquin’s neck condition to the 
activities at Tyson.  However, he failed to provide any rationale for his blanket statement 
that his work activities at Tyson significantly aggravated Joaquin’s neck condition.  
(CE1, p. 5) Dr. Mooney stated there was no evidence of any injury as it related to 
Joaquin’s findings of degenerative disc disease or thoraco-lumbar scoliosis, spondylosis 
or facet arthropathy.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 30) He felt that claims of cumulative trauma would 
not be consistent with the findings or related to his employment at Tyson. Dr. Mooney 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
cited to the AMA publication to support his position on causation.   (Def. Ex. B, pp. 30-
31)   
While Dr. Manshadi did state that Joaquin had evidence of bilateral shoulder 
pain, he did not state that this was related or aggravated by work activities at Tyson. 
(CE1, p. 5) I find there is no expert opinion in this case which causally related Joaquin’s 
neck condition to his work at Tyson. 
When the record as a whole is considered.  I find the opinions of Dr. Mooney and 
Dr. Gordon carry greater weight than that of Dr. Manshadi.  I do not find the blanket, 
cursory causation opinions of Dr. Manshadi to be as persuasive as those of Dr. Mooney 
and Dr. Gordon.  Therefore, I find that Joaquin has failed to carry his burden of proof to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained an injury that arose 
out of and in the course of his employment with Tyson on November 29, 2022. 
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs in this case.  I find that claimant was 
not successful in his case and therefore find that an assessment of costs is not 
appropriate.  Each party shall bear their own costs.   
Because claimant failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that 
he sustained a compensable injury all other issues are rendered moot.      
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant has failed to prove 
by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained an injury which arose out of and 
in the course of his employment with Tyson.  I found the greater weight of the evidence 
did not demonstrate that any of the alleged conditions were caused by his work at 
Tyson.  As such, claimant has failed to demonstrate entitlement to any workers’ 
compensation benefits. 
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing the 
case.  Because claimant was not successful in his case I exercise my discretion to not 
assess costs against the defendant in this case.  Each party shall bear their own costs.    
 
Because claimant failed to demonstrate that he sustained an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of his employment on November 29, 2022 all other issues are 
rendered moot. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs.  
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 
 

CABALLERO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Signed and filed this __16th __ day of May, 2025. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James Kalkhoff  
(via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
