Case Number: 5063710
Case Title:  HASTINGS JR, HOWARD V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hastings Howard-5063710d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
HOWARD HASTINGS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                      File No. 5063710 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
ORKIN PEST CONTROL, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE, 
  :                Head Note Nos.:  1803 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Howard Hastings seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer Orkin Pest Control (Orkin) and insurance carrier New Hampshire 
Insurance (NHI). The undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing on September 
24, 2021, held by internet-based video under order of the Commissioner. Hastings 
participated personally and through attorney Mark J. Sullivan. The defendants 
participated by and through attorney Tiernan T. Siems. 
ISSUES 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding deputy 
commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via an 
order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Is the stipulated work injury the cause of a temporary period during a period 
of recovery from July 23, 2018, through August 31, 2019? 
2) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
stipulated work injury? 
3) If Hastings is entitled to permanent disability benefits, what is the 
commencement date? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-15  09:41:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 2 
4) Is Hastings entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
5) Is Hastings entitled to a penalty under Iowa Code section 85.60? 
6) Is Hastings entitled to reimbursement of the medical expenses in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 12? 
7) Is Hastings entitled to reimbursement of the mileage in Claimant’s Exhibit 
15? 
8) Is Hastings entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Hastings and Orkin at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Hastings sustained an injury on August 11, 2016, which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment with Orkin. 
3) If the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the disability is an 
industrial disability. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Hastings’s gross earnings were seven hundred fifty-six and 91/100 
dollars ($756.91) per week. 
b) Hastings was married. 
c) Hastings was entitled to three exemptions. 
5) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to Hastings 101.571 weeks of 
compensation at the rate of five hundred four and 99/100 dollars ($504.99) 
per week. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
FINDINGS OF FACTS 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 7; 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 3 
 Claimant’s Exhibits (Cl. Ex.) 1 through 15;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits (Def. Ex.) B and C through J; and 
 Hearing testimony by Hastings and his wife, Michelle Hastings.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Hastings was fifty years of age at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 67) He is right-
hand dominant. (Def. Ex. F, p. 3, Depo. Tr. p. 9) The weight of the evidence establishes 
Hastings was born with an abnormality in his right shoulder, but he experienced no 
issues relating to this condition prior to August 11, 2016. 
Growing up, Hastings worked on his family’s farm. (Hrg. Tr. p. 69) He was a good 
student in high school, from which he graduated in 1991. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 67–68) During 
high school, he worked at a general store and doing summertime maintenance at the 
local college, which included mowing grass and janitorial work. (Hrg. Tr. p. 70) 
After high school, Hastings served in the United States Air Force. (Hrg. Tr. p. 68–
69) Hastings had his enlistment cut short because the recruiter did not provide the Air 
Force with all of his medical records, so he received an honorable discharge during his 
second year. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 68–69) He had not obtained a postsecondary degree or 
certificate before the hearing in this case. (Hrg. Tr. p. 68) 
After Hastings left the Air Force, he returned to the Dubuque area. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
70) He worked for a tree service trimming trees around powerlines. (Hrg. Tr. p. 70) This 
required him to climb trees and powerline poles, sometimes as high as one hundred 
feet in the air, while carrying chainsaws, to reach the tree branches he needed to trim. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 70–71) Hastings next worked performing construction work such as 
roofing, siding, remodeling, and pouring concrete. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 71–72)  
In 1998, Orkin hired Hastings. (Hrg. Tr. p. 72) Initially, Hastings worked 
seasonally spraying poison in barns to kill flies and spiders. (Hrg. Tr. p. 72–73) Orkin 
paid Hastings a commission for each job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 73) He then became an hourly 
employee who worked year-round for Orkin, doing a combination of sales and service 
work. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 73–74) 
Hastings voluntarily quit his job at Orkin in 2002 because he did not like the 
occasional layoffs that were part of his employment there. (Hrg. Tr. p. 75) He purchased 
a restaurant on contract that he operated. (Hrg. Tr. p. 75) The restaurant generated 
enough revenue to pay for its operations but not enough for Hastings to take a salary. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 76) Consequently, Hastings lost money on the venture and returned the 
restaurant to the people with whom he had contracted to buy it. (Hrg. Tr. p. 76)  
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 4 
Hastings got a job with BFI, a waste management company, driving a truck and 
collecting the contents of trash and recycling bins in small cities near Dubuque. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 76–77) In November of 2003, BFI discharged Hastings after the truck he was driving 
crashed into the back of another BFI truck due to a brake issue. (Hrg. Tr. p. 77) 
In or around June of 2004, Orkin hired Hastings again. (Hrg. Tr. p. 78) He started 
out doing farm jobs before moving to residential work. (Hrg. Tr. p. 78) Hastings worked 
in sales at Orkin from 2010 to 2015. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 79–80) He then transitioned back to 
doing a combination of sales and service work. (Hrg. Tr. p. 80) 
In March of 2015, Hastings fell while working a job for Orkin and injured his right 
wrist. (Hrg. Tr. p. 89) He ultimately underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of his 
injured arm, which showed a congenitally deformed right shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. p. 90–91) 
However, Hastings did not learn of this finding at the time. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 91, 102) 
On August 11, 2016, Orkin dispatched Hastings to treat a two-story home 
infested with bed bugs in Darlington, Wisconsin. (Hrg. Tr. p. 81) Typically, Orkin 
assigned two employees for a job of this size. (Hrg. Tr. p. 87) However, it sent only 
Hastings to perform this one. (Hrg. Tr. p. 87) 
A heat treatment consists of multiple steps. First, Hastings dusted the wall voids 
with a poisonous dust to kill any bed bugs that might have gotten into them. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
83–84) He then set up for the heating process, which involves stapling heat blankets on 
the windows and moving furniture. (Hrg. Tr. p. 84) Next, Hastings set up the heat-treat 
unit, which weighs about two hundred pounds, burns propane to create heat, and has a 
fan that blows the heat into the house. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 85–86) He also set up four fans, 
each weighing between fifty and seventy pounds, throughout the house to ensure the 
heat was properly distributed to kill the bed bugs. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 86, 106)  
Hastings set the heat-treat unit to raise the temperature in the home to one 
hundred fifty-eight degrees because the furniture in the house must reach one hundred 
twenty-eight degrees to kill the bed bugs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 86) He used a probe to measure 
the temperature of furniture and would move items as needed to ensure they reached 
the proper killing temperature. (Hrg. Tr. p. 86) It took Hastings five or six hours to 
complete the heat treatment. (Hrg. Tr. p. 87) 
After Hastings finished the heat treatment, he removed the equipment from the 
home. (Hrg. Tr. p. 97) When Hastings went to pick up a fan on the second floor of the 
home, he felt a pinch in the back of his right arm, around the area of his triceps muscle. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 97) His arm then felt heavy with pain in the area of his biceps after the pinch 
sensation. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 97, 105–06) Hastings also began to feel nauseous. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
98)  
Hastings telephoned his supervisor at Orkin and left a message. (Hrg. Tr. p. 98) 
He finished loading the trailer before his boss returned his call. (Hrg. Tr. p. 98) His boss 
asked if he had been drinking water, which he had, and then instructed him to drive 
back to the office with the vehicle’s air conditioning on high. (Hrg. Tr. p. 98)  

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 5 
Hastings followed his boss’s instructions. (Hrg. Tr. p. 98) He did not notice that 
his right arm swelled up during the drive. (Hrg. Tr. p. 99) When Hastings arrived at the 
office, his boss looked him over, told him he had “a Popeye arm,” and directed him to go 
home to ice his arm. (Hrg. Tr. p. 99) Hastings’s arm had also turned red in the biceps 
area. (Hrg. Tr. p. 99) He went home and iced his injured arm. (Hrg. Tr. p. 99) 
Hastings returned to work the next day and began performing paperwork. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 99) The redness of Hastings’s right arm had turned to purple. (Hrg. Tr. p. 100; Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 1) He felt pain throughout his right arm and in his right shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
102) Hastings was having a hard time lifting his right arm higher than his chest due to 
swelling. (Hrg. Tr. p. 101; Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) His boss observed that his right arm was more 
swollen than it had been the day before, so he called Orkin risk management. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 99–100) His boss then drove him to Tri-State Occupational Health to obtain care for 
his injured right arm. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 100–01)  
Erin Kennedy, M.D., examined Hastings and noted in pertinent part: 
[A]s exam ensues, he clearly becomes more uncomfortable. There is 
redness from the shoulder down the arm. It is most impressive over the 
bicep. There is small bruise over the bicep area. There is swelling 
throughout the right arm. He has [full range] of motion at right digits, 
wrists, elbow. He has difficulty lifting right arm over midchest level. He 
does so passively. Palpation of bicep and tricep are both sore. However, 
he reports abrupt worsening of throbbing pain and radiating pain after 
palpation of bicep. There is possible [P]opeye deformity. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1)  
Dr. Kennedy assigned Hastings work restrictions and ordered magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1–2) The MRI showed a “congenital glenoid 
abnormality with labral tearing.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) Dr. Kennedy noted the “markedly 
deformed and abnormal glenoid with posterior dysplasia was best demonstrated on the 
CAT scan of March 2015.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) Dr. Kennedy opined that, “even if there is a 
congenital or preexisting structural issue, something has happened to cause swelling, 
redness, bruising that is very evident even today and the abrupt reduction of function in 
terms of motion and strength of the shoulder.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Dr. Kennedy observed, “There appears to be significant separation of the 
posterior superior, posterior, and posterior inferior labrum either representing a tear or 
congenital anomaly.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) She also noted, “The anterior labrum is somewhat 
difficult to evaluate and is intact inferiorly. There may be a large labral foramen or less 
likely a partial tear of the anterior labrum.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) Because the “vascular 
concern” was out of Dr. Kennedy’s “realm of expertise,” she referred Hastings to James 
Nepola, M.D., at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) 
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 6 
Hastings had an appointment with Dr. Nepola on September 27, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 13) Dr. Nepola noted Hastings complained of continued pain in his triceps, cramping 
in his forearm and upper arm, burning near his axilla in his upper arm, and venous 
streaking. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 13) He opined Hastings had a “congenital dysplastic glenoid and 
hypertrophic labrum” and “traumatic findings on imaging or exam today.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
14) Dr. Nepola referred Hastings to a vascular specialist. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 14) 
Andrei Odobescu, M.D., examined Hastings on October 25, 2016, to determine if 
he had a venous malformation. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 17) He noted the discoloration and swelling 
in Hastings’s arm had subsided and he complained of some cramping in the forearm 
and upper arm. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 17) Dr. Odobescu concluded, “The swelling appears to 
have been posttraumatic which is not in keeping with a venous malformation.” (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 18) The MRI and history Hastings relayed reinforced this conclusion. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 18) 
Dr. Odobescu concluded Hastings had a “partial occlusion of the right subclavian vein” 
and referred him to the UIHC vascular surgery department. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 18) 
On October 31, 2016, Rachael Nicholson, M.D., examined Hastings and ordered 
magnetic resonance venography (MRV) to determine if Hastings had thoracic outlet 
syndrome and a multiplanar MRI of the brachial plexus. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 19–21) The MRV 
was consistent with thoracic outlet syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 23) The MRI did not show an 
injury to the brachial plexus. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 24) A subsequent electromyography (EMG) 
did not show any permanent nerve damage suggestive of cramps in the forearm. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 25) 
Chandan Reddy, M.D., saw Hastings on November 29, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 25) 
He noted Hastings was still having problems moving his arm. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 25) Dr. 
Reddy diagnosed Hastings with subclavian vein thrombosis and thoracic outlet 
syndrome, recommended continuing physical therapy and deferred to Luigi Pascarella, 
M.D., on the question of surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 25–26) 
Dr. Pascarella examined Hastings on December 1, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) He 
noted Hastings complained of ongoing pain and numbness in his arm. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) 
Dr. Pascarella recommended right thoracic outlet decompression with a brachial plexus 
neurolysis. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) On December 21, 2016, Drs. Reddy and Pascarella 
performed a brachial plexus neurolysis, resection of the first rib, and resection of 
anterior scalene muscles. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 37–47) Because the blood clot in Hastings’s 
neck was larger than anticipated, Dr. Pascarella informed him that they were worried 
about how well they were able to seal the artery after removing the clot. (Hrg. Tr. p. 117) 
On December 25, 2016, UIHC discharged Hastings. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 50) 
The next day, Hastings experienced shortness of breath, coughing, nausea, and 
neck issues. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 50; Hrg. Tr. p. 118) He telephoned the nurse case manager 
assigned to his workers’ compensation claim and she directed him to go to the 
emergency room (ER). (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 50; Hrg. Tr. p. 118) Hastings did as instructed and 
went to the Finely Hospital ER in Dubuque, where the doctors arranged for 
transportation by ambulance to UIHC in Iowa City. (Hrg. Tr. p. 118) A chest x-ray and 
CT scan showed fluid had built up in the area where he had undergone surgery. (Jt. Ex. 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 7 
4, pp. 50–52) UIHC placed Hastings on oxygen and sent him home. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55; 
Hrg. Tr. pp. 118–19)  
Hastings continued to have shortness of breath and on January 9, 2017, he woke 
up coughing and gasping for air. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55) He complained of feeling feverish with 
chills and experiencing fatigue and lack of appetite. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55) Physicians at UIHC 
performed thoracentesis, which revealed the fluid to be blood. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 58–59; Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 119–20) On January 13, 2017, Hastings underwent right thoracoscopic 
decortication by Evgeny Arshava, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 60–61) Dr. Arshava removed the 
fluid that had built up in Hastings’s chest cavity and repaired his damaged artery. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 121–23) Hastings had to wear a cast to immobilize his shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. p. 125)  
Hastings followed up with Dr. Pascarella on February 16, 2017, complaining of 
weakness in his right arm after the thoracoscopic decortication. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 68) Dr. 
Pascarella referred him to Dr. Reddy and prescribed valium and aggressive physical 
therapy. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 69) Dr. Reddy agreed with Dr. Pascarella’s prescription of 
aggressive physical therapy for at least three months and assigned Hastings work 
restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 69–70)  
Hastings participated in physical therapy in an effort to rehabilitate his shoulder. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 127) Hastings had eighty physical therapy appointments from February 
2017 through August 2017. (Hrg. Tr. p. 127) Physical therapy initially helped reduce the 
pain Hastings felt in his neck and improved his mobility. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 71–76) 
On April 11, 2017, Dr. Pascarella noted after a long discussion with Hastings on 
his surgeries, “I believe his current symptoms may be ascribed to a locked shoulder 
problem due probably to inactivity, that predates his TOS surgery and had worsened 
after the VATS thoracoscopy.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 76) Hastings began to have issues as he 
progressed in physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 77) He dislocated his shoulder three times 
in late April when attempting to lift a five-pound weight, which was extremely painful. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 77; Hrg. Tr. p. 128) Drs. Pascarella and Reddy referred Hastings to Dr. Nepola 
for further evaluation of his shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 78) 
Hastings began to receive care for his mental health in April of 2017. (Jt. Ex. 6, 
pp. 174–85) The defendants authorized care at Hillcrest Family Services. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 
137–38) Hastings treated at Hillside with psychiatrist, Mark Mittauer, M.D., and therapist 
Richard Corfman. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 186–222)  
The first attorney to serve as claimant’s counsel in this case sent Dr. Reddy a 
check-box letter dated May 15, 2017. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 15–16) On the question of whether 
Dr. Reddy referred Hastings for treatment of a shoulder condition caused, aggravated, 
or materially contributed to by the work injury, Dr. Reddy indicated in the positive. (Cl. 
Ex. 3, p. 15) He also indicated that the need for surgery, if recommended by Dr. Nepola, 
was caused by the work injury. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 15) Dr. Reddy signed and dated his 
answers on May 19, 2017. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 15) 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 8 
On July 18, 2017, Hastings saw Dr. Nepola, who noted, “He inexplicably has had 
worsening of his shoulder, possibly due to neurologic dysfunction versus residual 
stiffness secondary to immobilization.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 84) Dr. Nepola ordered an MRI and 
CT scan, which showed no rotator cuff tear, mild degenerative changes, and glenoid 
dysplasia. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 93) Dr. Nepola recommended a glenohumeral injection to 
determine if this is the main source of Hastings’s shoulder pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 93)  
Two weeks later, Eric Aschenbrenner, M.D., administered the injection. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 97) Hastings informed Dr. Nepola on the day after the injection it had substantially 
improved his shoulder pain for a short time. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 98–99; Hrg. Tr. p. 132) Dr. 
Nepola opined Hastings’s congenitally dysplastic glenoid was “likely leading to internal 
derangement and early arthritis in his shoulder.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 100) He recommended 
conservative treatment for as long as possible before considering a total shoulder 
replacement. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 99) 
On September 26, 2017, Hastings saw Dr. Nepola complaining of aching and 
stabbing shoulder pain, intermittent numbness in his right forearm and right upper chest, 
pain in his right shoulder when he lifts his left arm, and sensitivity to heat and cold. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 104) Dr. Nepola and Hastings “had a long discussion that he may be at the 
beginning of a series of surgeries that will result in worse, untreatable shoulder pain” 
and that “[t]here is not shoulder treatment that will make his shoulder normal.” (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 106) Hastings decided to move forward with a total right shoulder replacement with 
custom glenoid prosthesis. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 106–117) He continued care with Dr. Nepola 
while the custom prosthesis was fabricated. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 119–22; Hrg. Tr. p. 135)  
Defense counsel arranged for Hastings to undergo an IME with Robert L. 
Broghammer, M.D., on January 8, 2018. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1) Dr. Broghammer reviewed 
medical records relating to Hastings’s care and issued an IME report. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 
1–15) On the question of whether further surgical intervention was reasonable and 
necessary, he opined that a total shoulder replacement by Dr. Nepola was “[t]he only 
long-term solution.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 15) 
In a letter dated January 19, 2018, the attorney who first represented Hastings in 
this case asked Dr. Nepola to opine with respect to what caused the need for the total 
shoulder replacement surgery. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 17) Dr. Nepola responded in a letter dated 
May 25, 2018. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 18–19) On the question of whether Hasting’s work injury 
caused or contributed to the need for the procedure, Dr. Nepola opined: 
Yes, to the nearest degree of medical certainty, it is likely that the reported 
work injury at least exacerbated his congenital shoulder condition. I have 
not seen any documentation indicating Mr. Hastings complained of 
shoulder pain or dysfunction prior to the reported work incident, despite 
his congenital condition. The mechanism of injury (distraction of the 
shoulder with heavy lifting) is consistent with at least exacerbating and 
possibly materially aggravating his underlying condition. He has continued 
to complain of symptoms since the time of his injury, despite other 
interventions. For these reasons it is likely that the reported work injury at 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 9 
least contributed to the need for surgery, again, to the nearest degree of 
medical certainty. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 18–19) 
In response to the question Hastings’s work injury at Orkin caused his shoulder 
condition to become symptomatic requiring the surgery, Dr. Nepola stated: 
Yes, according to the history given by the patient and the provided 
documentation, Mr. Hastings had a functional shoulder prior to the work 
incident. As above, the mechanism is consistent with causing at least an 
exacerbation or “lighting up” of the pre-existing shoulder condition, and 
possibly materially aggravated it. To the nearest degree of medical 
certainty the work injury contributed to the current need for surgery. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 19) 
In response to a letter from defense counsel, Dr. Broghammer issued a second 
IME report on June 22, 2018, after reviewing additional medical records. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 
17–18) As an initial matter, Dr. Broghammer did not address whether the work injury 
aggravated or lighted up Hastings’s previously asymptomatic congenital defect. (Def. 
Ex. B, pp. 28–29) This fact makes his opinions less persuasive. As discussed below, 
there are additional facts that make his opinions lack credibility. 
Defense counsel asked if Dr. Broghammer was “able to determine that the 
claimed injury was due to a congenital abnormality.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 26) He answered in 
the affirmative, explaining: 
The medical records are quite clear in this regard. Mr. Hastings was noted 
on several imaging examinations to have a congenitally dysplastic glenoid 
with hypertrophy of the labrum. As you know the congenital means 
present from birth. In addition, an imaging study completed prior to the 
worker’s alleged injury with a CAT scan completed in March 2015 
demonstrated an abnormal glenoid with posterior dysplasia. These 
changes and findings would not be consistent with an acute injury but 
would instead be due to a congenital abnormality. 
(Def. Ex. B, p. 27)  
Dr. Broghammer makes no mention of Hastings being asymptomatic before he 
lifted the fan while working for Orkin. He does not explain why Hastings would develop 
symptoms immediately after lifting the fan because of the congenital abnormality that 
was asymptomatic before lifting the fan. This undermines the credibility of his opinion on 
causation. 
The defendants denied liability for Hastings’s ongoing medical care after Dr. 
Broghammer issued his report on causation. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 137–38; Cl. Ex. 14, p. 135; 
Def. Ex. D, pp. 2–3) The defendants’ denial of Hastings’s claim effectively meant he had 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 10 
to cease care at Hillside for his mental health. (Hrg. Tr. p. 138) At the time of the denial, 
Hastings was under a health insurance policy provided through Michelle’s work. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 138) Under that policy, he would have had to pay two hundred dollars per 
appointment at Hillside. (Hrg. Tr. p. 138) That amount was too expensive, given their 
financial status with him off work and no longer receiving workers’ compensation, so 
Hastings stopped seeing Dr. Mittauer and Corfman. (Hrg. Tr. p. 138) 
Dr. Nepola performed the total shoulder replacement surgery on August 31, 
2018. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 123–26; Hrg. Tr. p. 138–39) In a letter dated September 4, 2018, 
Dr. Nepola restricted Hastings from pushing or pulling with his right arm for two months 
and gave him permanent work restrictions of no lifting more than five pounds with his 
right arm. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 131) He participated in approximately thirty sessions of physical 
therapy following the surgery to help build up strength in his arm. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 142–44; 
Jt. Ex. 4, p. 145) 
On August 19, 2020, claimant’s counsel wrote to Dr. Nepola requesting he 
provide his opinion on causation with respect to thoracic outlet decompression surgery 
and to provide permanent functional impairment for all conditions he believes to be 
related to Hastings’s work injury. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 20–21) Dr. Nepola responded in a letter 
dated September 22, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 22–23) With respect to the surgeries 
Hastings underwent before his total shoulder replacement, he opined: 
To the nearest degree of medical certainty, I believe Mr. Hasting[s]’s need 
for the right thoracic outlet decompression surgery on 12/21/2016 by Dr. 
Chandan Reddy and Dr. Luigi Pascarella for venous outlet syndrome, was 
directly caused by the marked compromise of his right upper extremity 
vasculature, which ensued at the time of the injury he sustained at work 
on 08/11/2016. The recovery from the surgery was complicated by 
persistent pleural effusion/hemothorax, which necessitated the VAT 
thorascopic decortication procedure, completed by Dr. Arshava on 
01/13/2017. Therefore, to the nearest degree of medical certainty, the 
need for both surgeries were caused by the work injury sustained on 
08/11/2016. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 22) Dr. Nepola refused the request to opine on permanent functional 
impairment. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 23) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for an IME with Robin Sassman, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 7) Dr. 
Sassman performed a records review and examined Hastings on December 9, 2020. 
(Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 60–78) On causation, Dr. Sassman opined the work injury was the most 
likely cause of Hastings’s thoracic outlet syndrome and the persistent pleural effusion 
was a sequela of his thoracic outlet decompression surgery. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 80) With 
respect to the right total shoulder replacement, Dr. Sassman opined that because 
Hastings was asymptomatic in his shoulder before the work injury, had his right 
shoulder immobilized for about two months following the thoracic outlet decompression 
and the strength and neurological status of his shoulder deteriorated during this time, 
the work injury and the subsequent care Hastings received for it were substantial 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 11 
aggravating factors of his congenital shoulder condition, necessitating the procedure. 
(Cl. Ex. 7, p. 80)  
Dr. Sassman found Hastings reached maximum medical improvement on August 
31, 2019, one year after the date of Dr. Nepola’s surgery. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 82) Dr. Sassman 
used the Fifth Edition of the American Medical Association (AMA) Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides) to opine on Hastings’s permanent 
functional impairment. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 82) She used Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46 to 
conclude Hastings sustained a twenty-four percent impairment to the right upper 
extremity. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 82) Dr. Sassman found he sustained a twenty-four percent 
upper extremity impairment due to the arthroplasty based on Table 16-27. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 
82) For Hastings’s residual nerve impairment relative to the brachial plexus and thoracic 
outlet syndrome, she used the procedures set forth in Guides, Example 16-10, and 
Tables 16-10 and 16-11 to conclude he sustained a forty-seven percent upper extremity 
impairment or twenty-eight percent to the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 83–84) Dr. 
Sassman then used the Combined Values Chart on page 604 to find Hastings has 
sustained a forty-six percent whole person impairment caused by the work injury. (Cl. 
Ex. 7, p. 84) 
Defense counsel shared Dr. Nepola’s opinions with Dr. Broghammer and asked 
his opinion after reading them. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 30–34) In a letter dated December 16, 
2020, he affirmed his opinion on the cause of Hastings’s need for thoracic outlet 
decompression surgery “was necessitated by his congenital abnormalities, including his 
cervical rib” and doubled down on the cervical rib as the most likely cause without 
addressing Dr. Nepola’s observation, based on his firsthand experience as a treating 
physician, that Hastings did not have a cervical rib. (Def. Ex. B, p. 32–34) Dr. 
Broghammer did not address Dr. Nepola’s opinion that the work injury was the cause of 
the need for Hastings to undergo total shoulder replacement surgery. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 
32–34) Nor did Dr. Broghammer specifically address whether the work injury 
aggravated or lighted up Hastings’s congenital condition. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 32–34) 
Defense counsel shared Dr. Sassman’s report with Dr. Broghammer and 
requested his assessment, which he provided in a letter dated January 26, 2021. (Def. 
Ex. B, pp. 35–38) Dr. Sassman’s report did not change Dr. Broghammer’s opinion on 
causation. (Def. Ex. B, p. 37) He affirmed that he believed Hastings’s subclavian 
thrombosis was likely caused by the presence of a cervical rib. (Def. Ex. B, p. 37) 
Claimant’s counsel followed up with Dr. Nepola in multiple letters seeking 
additional information. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 24–28) In a letter dated February 22, 2021, Dr. 
Nepola stated he had reviewed Hastings’s medical records, including the report by Dr. 
Broghammer of January 26, 2021, and the report by Dr. Sassman of January 4, 2021. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 29) Dr. Nepola concurred with Dr. Sassman’s permanent functional 
impairment rating. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32) 
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 12 
As discussed above, Dr. Broghammer opined Hastings developed thoracic outlet 
syndrome because of he had a cervical rib. (Def. Ex. B, p. 27) He also stated the cause 
of Hastings requiring total shoulder replacement was his congenital condition as 
opposed to the work injury. (Def. Ex. B, p. 27) Dr. Nepola explained that he disagreed 
with Dr. Broghammer’s opinion because: 
Hasting[‘s] work related incident of 8/11/2016 was related to a change in 
the condition of his right arm and shoulder. As I have written before, the 
acute injury noted by both Drs. Erin Kennedy and Scott Schemmel of Mr. 
Hastings[‘s] right upper extremity, involving swelling, pain, and 
discoloration with distention of his venous system commensurate with the 
“varicosities” seen was to the nearest reasonable degree of medical 
certainty due to the incident lifting the 80-poung fan while he was working 
for Orkin on that day. This started the cascade of events that likely the 
acute thrombosis of his subclavian [sic] vein which then became chronic 
several weeks later. Dr. Broghammer states that in his medical opinion 
“while Mr. Hastings may not have had symptoms before his alleged injury[, 
i]n my medical opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty the 
active [act of] picking up a large fan would not rise to the level of materially 
exacerbating, accelerating beyond normal progression, or ‘lighting up’ the 
pre-existing condition.” This is not true. I have seen many cases of 
thoracic outlet syndrome. These are difficult diagnoses and are often 
missed by evaluating physician[s] unfamiliar with the condition. There is 
plentiful medical literature regarding thoracic outlet syndrome and its 
etiologies. Both traumatic and atraumatic etiologies have been 
documented in literature. One such trauma related injury, Paget-
Schroetter Syndrome is a known condition to be “effort-induced.” It is 
certainly rate, but it is very real. Treatment often involves requirement to 
decompress the thoracic outlet by releasing the scalenus anterior muscle 
and resecting the first rib when necessary. Dr. Broghammer as he is likely 
unfamiliar with this condition and its surgical treatment refers to the 
resection of a “cervical rib” which can be an instigating pathologic 
anatomic entity. Were he to have read the record carefully he would have 
noted that neither in the imaging report nor in the operative note does 
anyone refer to a cervical rib. Mr. Hastings had his first rib removed which 
is more usual when this procedure is undertaken. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 31) Dr. Nepola reiterated his opinion that the work injury caused the need 
for the surgeries performed by Drs. Pascarella and Reddy on December 21, 2016, and 
Dr. Arshava on December 21, 2016, “which was a sequela” of the first surgery. (Cl. Ex. 
4, p. 32) 
Further, Dr. Nepola opined: 
[R]egarding his shoulder problem associated with an injury to a 
congenitally abnormal right shoulder with a dysplastic glenoid, shoulder 
pain was never clinically noted as a problem by the patent before his injury 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 13 
of 8/11/2016. He certainly was predisposed to having a shoulder problem. 
But it was the incident lifting the fan on 8/11/2016 with subsequent effort 
induced thoracic outlet syndrome with all of its attendant trauma that 
reduced his shoulder from being able to be elevated overhead to 140 
degrees on the day of his visit with me in 2016 to a markedly painful and 
dysfunctional shoulder which can only lift to 40 degrees when he was 
referred back to me after his surgeries on 11/7/2017. Had this incident not 
happened I must opine that his shoulder may never have come to a 
shoulder replacement. But unfortunately, the trauma of 8/11/2016 started 
a chain of events which ultimately left the patient and I have no choice but 
to perform the shoulder arthroplasty which we did and which improved but 
did not restore his shoulder to [. . .] normal state. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32) 
Unlike Dr. Broghammer, who performed a records review, Dr. Nepola was 
personally involved in Hastings’s care at the time and later performed surgery on him. 
Dr. Nepola is also well known to the agency due to his extensive experience treating 
shoulders. Dr. Nepola’s statement regarding whether Hastings had a cervical rib is 
therefore most persuasive. Dr. Broghammer’s opinion on the cause of Hastings 
developing thoracic outlet syndrome is not credible. The same is true of his opinion that 
the need for thoracic outlet decompression was secondary to his congenital 
abnormality. Dr. Nepola’s opinion on what caused the need for total shoulder 
replacement more persuasive than Dr. Broghammer’s. 
Claimant’s counsel sought the opinion of Dr. Mittauer, Hastings’s psychiatrist, 
regarding his diagnoses, their cause, and any disability they caused. (Cl. Ex. 9, pp. 
100–01) In a letter dated July 25, 2021, Dr. Mittauer shared his diagnoses of Major 
Depressive Disorder (single episode, moderate severity), Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD), Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Other Specified Anxiety Disorder 
(stress-induced panic attacks), and Insomnia Disorder. (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 102) Dr. Mittauer 
opined all of these conditions were caused by the stipulated work injury and that he 
erroneously attributed the cause of Hastings’s PTSD to childhood abuse in his initial 
intake note and subsequently repeated that mistake. (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 103) Dr. Mittauer 
clarified that the sole cause of Hastings’s PTSD was the work injury. (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 103) 
Dr. Mittauer shared that he has prescribed antidepressants (venlafaxine, 
duloxetine, trazodone, and mirtazapine), antianxiety medications (hydroxyzine, 
prazosin, and gabapentin), and hypnotic medications for sleep (mirtazapine, solpidem, 
and trazodone). (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 102) He shared he has maximized the dose of some of 
these prescriptions. (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 102) Dr. Mittauer opined Hastings “will most likely not 
experience significant improvement of or resolution of his psychiatric conditions. As long 
as he has severe pain, and associated disability, his symptoms of depression, anxiety, 
and insomnia will persist.” (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 103) 
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 14 
Dr. Mittauer used Chapter 14 of the Guides to assess Hastings’s permanent 
impairment from psychiatric conditions caused by the work injury as follows: 
Regarding Activities of Daily Living, the rating is Class 3 (moderate 
impairment). His symptoms impair his sleep, ability to drive, sexual 
functioning, and personal hygiene. 
Regarding Social Functioning, the rating is Class 4 (marked impairment). 
His is very irritable and this interferes with interactions with others. 
Regarding Concentration, Persistence and Pace, the rating is Class 4 
(marked impairment). His symptoms interfere with his ability to 
concentrate on tasks, complete tasks efficiently and maintain pace. 
Regarding Adaptation, the rating is Class 5 (extreme impairment). His 
symptoms interfere with his ability to report to work consistently, interact 
with others, make decisions, and complete tasks especially complex ones. 
(Cl. Ex. 9, p. 103)  
Claimant’s counsel requested opinions from Corfman, Hastings’s therapist, about 
his mental health conditions and opinion on their cause. (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 93–94) In a letter 
dated July 30, 2021, Corfman opined Hastings was receiving psychotherapy with him 
for major depressive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), generalized 
anxiety disorder, and anxiety/panic disorder. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 95) Corfman also shared 
Hastings has symptoms of anxiety and depression and major insomnia related to body 
pain. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 95) He opined the diagnoses were “precipitated” by the stipulated 
work injury. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 95) Corfman has extensive experience treating individuals with 
these diagnoses. (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 96–98) 
Corfman described Hastings’s symptoms thusly: 
Mr. Hastings has moderate impairment of sleep, motivation, ability to drive 
and perform physical tasks, sexual functioning, and personal hygiene. He 
is irritable and agitated most of the time which interferes with his familial 
and social functioning and relationships. He has difficulty concentrating, 
focusing, and following through due to his sleep difficulties, physical pain, 
and psychological despair. 
(Cl. Ex. 8, p. 95) 
Corfman opined Hastings had “shown brief moments of positive response but 
none that have been of a lasting nature.” (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 95) According to Corfman, 
Hastings is unlikely to experience significant improvement or resolution of his 
psychiatric conditions because his ongoing physical symptoms fuel his conditions. (Cl. 
Ex. 8, p. 95) 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 15 
The opinions of Corfman and Dr. Mittauer are persuasive. The weight of the 
evidence in this case shows it is more likely than not the stipulated work injury caused 
Major Depressive Disorder (single episode, moderate severity), Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD), Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Other Specified Anxiety Disorder 
(stress-induced panic attacks), and Insomnia Disorder. The work injury is the cause of 
permanent mental impairment. Hastings has undergone care for these conditions with 
Corfman and Dr. Mittauer that is reasonable, necessary, and beneficial. Hastings 
incurred the costs for this care detailed in Claimant’s Exhibits  
On September 21, 2021, Dr. Pascarella testified in a deposition for this case. 
(Def. Ex. G) Between the care he provided to Hastings and the deposition, he changed 
employers from UIHC to the University of North Carolina. (Def. Ex. G, p. 18, Depo. Tr. 
p. 5) Dr. Pascarella testified that when making a determination on causation, he prefers 
to collect as much information as possible, including medical records from before the 
injury in question. (Def. Ex. G, p. 3, Depo. Tr. p. 10) However, he did not obtain any 
such preexisting records in this case. (Def. Ex. G, p. 3, Hrg. Tr. p. 10) 
Dr. Pascarella testified that in his experience more than seventy percent of 
people with cervical ribs do not have thoracic outlet syndrome and the remainder 
develop it. (Def. Ex. G, p. 2, Depo. Tr. pp. 6, 8) With respect to the stipulated work 
injury, Dr. Pascarella initially testified: 
I think he used to work at Orkin, he was an Orkin man, and he was lifting I 
think a fan or something really heavy. And I think it stretched the muscles 
in his neck -- or his upper extremity, following which he developed two 
conditions that are very important to consider; number one, upper 
extremity – neck and upper extremity pain, and number two, evidence of 
thrombosis, of a clot [. . .] of the subclavian vein. 
Okay. Now, before this accident at work, Mr. Hastings was a functional 
individual in my – in my recollection of Mr. Hastings in addition per the 
notes that I have been reading my notes as well. 
(Def. Ex. G, p. 2, Depo. Tr. pp. 6–7) 
When asked about the work injury Hastings sustained when lifting a fan, 
Dr. Pascarella further testified: 
So I see this very often actually in patients with thoracic outlet syndrome. 
Now, while etiology of thoracic outlet syndrome is essentially unknown, 
however, a number of patient[s] present[] to our observation after [m]any 
type[s] of incidents and accidents involving [the] neck, involve the upper 
extremity, including lifting heavy objects. Okay. And in particular in these 
patients there is an increased effort in the muscles in the neck, in 
particular in this area and in this area, and causing essentially stretching 
of these muscles and sometimes stretching of the nerve that runs here. 
**** 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 16 
And in some patients also the effort may cause clotting, clotting of veins. 
(Def. Ex. G, p. 6, Depo. Tr. pp. 22–23)  
Dr. Pascarella also explained that the work injury causing Hastings’s thoracic 
outlet syndrome was his hypothesis. (Def. Ex. G, p. 6, Depo. Tr. p. 24) When claimant’s 
counsel asked whether the work injury was more likely than not the cause of Hastings’s 
thoracic outlet syndrome, Dr. Pascarella initially testified, “Yes. For me, I mean, while I 
don’t do independent medical examinations, okay, the base of my experience with 
patients with thoracic outlet syndrome, these type of accidents at work may cause these 
problems. (Def. Ex. G, pp. 6–7, Depo. Tr. pp. 24–25)  
Dr. Pascarella testified that the work injury causing Hastings’s thoracic outlet 
syndrome was both “likely” and “possible.” (Def. Ex. F, p. 7, Depo. p. 27) He then 
explained that the words “likely” and “possible” have the same meaning to him. (Def. Ex. 
F, p. 7, Depo. Tr. p. 28) Dr. Pascarella was unable to articulate a clear explanation of 
how the words have the same meaning to him. Dr. Pascarella’s inability to clearly 
articulate the meaning he ascribes to both “likely” and “possible” and the fact he did not 
review all of Hastings’s medical records before testifying in the deposition undermine 
the persuasiveness of Dr. Pascarella’s opinion. 
For the reasons discussed above, the opinions of Drs. Broghammer and 
Pascarella are unpersuasive and the opinions of Drs. Nepola and Sassman are more 
credible. The weight of the evidence establishes the work injury Hastings sustained on 
August 11, 2016, was a significant factor in causing the need for the surgeries 
performed by Drs. Reddy, Pascarella, Arshava, and Nepola. It is more likely than not 
the work injury resulted in Hastings sustained a permanent functional impairment of 
forty-eight percent to the whole body. 
Dr. Mittauer and Corfman left Hillside after Hastings stopped receiving care from 
them as a result of the defendants denying his workers’ compensation claim. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 146–47) Hastings qualified for Medicare and has a new private health insurance 
policy. (Hrg. Tr. p. 146) This allowed him to resume care with Dr. Mittauer and Corfman 
for his continuing mental health conditions. (Hrg. Tr. p. 146–47) The care Dr. Mittauer 
and Corfman provide is beneficial to Hastings. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 161–62) 
Hastings received care after the defendants denied his workers’ compensation 
claim. While private insurance covered a share of the expenses for this care, Hastings 
has had to cover some of it out of pocket. It is more likely than not the expenses set 
forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 15 are related to the work injury. Further, the evidence shows 
the mileage itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 12 is related to that care. 
Hastings never returned to work at Orkin after a supervisor instructed him to 
leave the premises on August 13, 2016. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 102–103) While Hastings had a 
conversation about potentially taking a regional management job with Orkin, those talks 
fell through because of his ongoing workers’ compensation claim. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 129–30) 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 17 
The weight of the evidence establishes Orkin chose to end its employment relationship 
because it did not have work within his permanent work restrictions. 
In January of 2021, Barbara Laughlin, M.A., performed an employability 
assessment of Hastings. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 35) Laughlin reviewed medical records relating to 
Hastings’s injuries, interviewed Hastings, reviewed interrogatory answers from the 
litigation of this case, and performed labor market research before issuing a report 
dated January 2, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 35–55) She concluded he had sustained a 46.2 
percent loss of generally transferrable occupations under Dr. Nepola’s work restrictions 
and a 93.9 percent loss to all directly transferable occupations based on Dr. Sassman’s 
work restrictions. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 45–46) She noted Hastings is not skilled at using 
computers, he can no longer use his CDL as an over-the-road trucker, and his 
permanent work restrictions. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 48–49) Laughlin further opined Hastings 
would require a high level of accommodation and his physical limitations due to the will 
affect his ability to get hired. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 48–49) 
Hastings credibly described his symptoms at the time of hearing during his 
testimony. He testified he continued to experience pain in his shoulder area and arm. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 148) On a good day, he rates his pain at a level of two or three on a scale 
from zero to ten. (Hrg. Tr. p. 148) Activity and weather changes can increase his pain. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 148) He continued to experience what he described as a “charley horse” in 
his right biceps on a regular basis when his muscle knots up. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 150–51) 
Ongoing tingling and numbness are also a recurrent part of Hastings’s life. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 151) He experienced numbness in his right forearm and down through his ring 
and pinky fingers. (Hrg. Tr. p. 151) The tingling and numbness are constant. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
151) Using his right arm to perform tasks such as typing or picking up an object makes 
the sensation worse. (Hrg. Tr. p. 152) 
Hastings also experiences limited function with his right arm. He generally avoids 
using his right arm for lifting. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 149, 160–61) Hastings has problems writing 
longhand, typing, and texting with his right arm. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 149–50) He also has 
limited range of motion with his right shoulder and, consequently, his right arm as well. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 152) Hastings struggles opening jars because of the weakness in his right 
hand that has resulted from his total right shoulder replacement. (Hrg. Tr. p. 153) 
Hastings had muscles removed as part of the treatment for his shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 154–55) This has reduced the range of motion in his neck, which means he can no 
longer move his head like he could before the work injury. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 154–55) 
Hastings also experiences numbness in his upper right chest after the surgeries. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 155)  
The injury has permanently impacted Hastings’s ability to breath. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
156) Extreme hot or cold temperatures and humidity give him trouble breathing with his 
right lung. (Hrg. Tr. p. 156–57) This, in turn, makes physical activity such as walking 
more difficult for Hastings. (Hrg. Tr. p. 156) 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 18 
The physical limitations stemming from the work injury limit Hastings in his 
household and grooming activities. (Hrg. Tr. p. 163) He is unable to mow his lawn or 
shovel snow, so he hires neighborhood kids to do so. (Hrg. Tr. p. 163) Hastings is 
unable to reach under his left arm with his right arm, so he had to install a shower head 
that he can move to reach this area of his body. (Hrg. Tr. p. 163) He has had to develop 
new ways to dress himself, due to his right arm’s limited function, which makes it take 
longer. (Hrg. Tr. p. 163–64) 
Further, the stipulated work injury and resultant surgeries have limited Hastings’s 
hobbies. Hastings attempted to fish on one occasion and while he could cast left-
handed, he could not hold the rod and reel in a fish. (Hrg. Tr. p. 166) He attempted to 
shoot left-handed to see if he would still be able to hunt but he is not coordinated 
enough to do so. (Hrg. Tr. p. 166)  
There was also testimony during Hastings’s deposition and the hearing on dart-
throwing. This testimony is of little probative value regarding the disputed factual and 
legal issues submitted to the agency in this case. Nonetheless, the defendants have 
argued Hastings’s testimony regarding dart-throwing undermines his credibility to such 
an extent it renders all of his testimony unreliable. Defense counsel even accused 
Hastings of perjury during the hearing. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 240, 241, 243) The undersigned 
finds the defendants’ characterizations of Hastings’s testimony unpersuasive. Hastings 
generally provided credible testimony in this case. With respect to his dart-throwing, the 
weight of the evidence establishes the following. 
Hastings has fun throwing darts. (Def. Ex. F, p. 9, Depo Tr. pp. 30–31) Hastings 
was an avid dart-thrower before the stipulated work injury, throwing three or four nights 
per week in leagues and six or seven days per week total. (Hrg. Tr. p. 167) He 
participated in tournaments, once placing as high as seventeenth in singles in a world 
tournament held in Chicago. (Hrg. Tr. p. 168)  
After the injury, Hastings throws darts less often even though doctors 
encouraged him to participate because the motions involved in the activity would be 
beneficial to his right arm and shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 167–71; Def. Ex. F, pp. 8–9, 13–
14, Depo. Tr. pp. 29–33, 49–50, 60) The work injury has limited Hastings’s right-arm 
function such that he has to hold it up with his left hand to throw darts right-handed or 
he has to throw left-handed. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 14–16, Depo. Tr. pp. 50–60; Hrg. Tr. p. 59) 
The work injury’s impact on how often Hastings throws darts includes him quitting 
entirely for periods of time before trying again later. (Def. Ex. F. p. 16–17, Depo. Tr. pp. 
60–64; Hrg. Tr. pp. 198–201) At no time did Hastings intend to quit throwing darts 
forever. (Hrg. Tr. p. 240) Hastings has thrown in multiple dart leagues since the injury. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 206–240) 
There was also an issue that came to light at hearing regarding the failure to 
disclose a document relating to dart-throwing that Hastings obtained after defense 
counsel orally requested records showing “how often [Hastings had] thrown darts and 
how [he] did” during Hastings’s deposition, which took place on September 17, 2021, 
after discovery had closed under the Hearing Assignment Order the agency issued in 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 19 
this case. (Def. Ex. F, p. 19, Depo. Tr. pp. 72–73; Hrg. Tr. pp. 201–03, 216–18, 230) 
Hastings and his wife believed in good faith the document was of little probative value 
with respect to his dart-throwing activities. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 216–17, 230) Claimant’s 
counsel stated he reached the same conclusion which is why he did not turn over the 
document to defense counsel until its existence came to light during the hearing. (Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 217–18, 230) The undersigned finds that the record contains insufficient 
information from which to make findings of fact by a preponderance of the evidence 
regarding what the document’s contents reflects other than the fact that Hastings 
participated in dart-throwing leagues before and after his injury, which is undisputed 
between the parties. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 221–30) 
The record also establishes it is more likely than not that neither Hastings nor his 
wife knew there was a website containing information about their dart-throwing before 
the hearing. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 63, 201–16) Defense counsel independently discovered the 
website and Hastings learned of its existence during cross-examination at hearing. (Hrg. 
Tr. pp. 215–16) There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude 
Hastings or his wife knew of the website before the hearing and attempted to hide it 
from anyone.  
Hastings is motivated to work. He has applied for multiple jobs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 178) 
However, Hastings has been rejected due to the permanent work restrictions assigned 
by Dr. Nepola. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 178–80) Hastings applied for disability benefits from the 
federal Social Security Administration (SSA) through the carrier that held the long-term 
disability policy under which he collected benefits. (Hrg. Tr. p. 180) On September 28, 
2018, the SSA issued a decision finding him eligible for benefits. (Hrg. Tr. p. 182–84; Cl. 
Ex. 13, pp. 123–29)  
Hastings continues to receive care for his injuries. He is on a schedule to follow 
up annually with Dr. Nepola. (Hrg. Tr. p. 161) He sees Corfman biweekly for counseling 
that is helpful to his mental health. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 161–62) Hastings sees Dr. Mittauer 
approximately once per month for medication relating to his mental health, which helps 
his condition. (Hrg. Tr. p. 162) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred before July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act in effect before the 2017 amendments applies. Smidt v. JKB 
Restaurants, LC, File No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
1 .  
H e a l i n g  P e r i o d  B e n e f i t s .  
An injured employee is entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or healing 
period (HP) benefits when the employee is unable to work during a period of 
convalescence caused by a work injury. Iowa Code §§ 85.33(1), 85.34(1); see also 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 20 
Evenson v. Winnebago Indust., 881 N.W.2d 360, 373 (Iowa 2016). Temporary benefits 
compensate an employee for lost wages. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Travelers Ins. Co., 770 
N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009). Whether an employee’s injury causes a permanent 
disability dictates whether the employee’s temporary benefits are considered TTD or 
HP. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) 
(citing Clark v. Vicorp Rests., Inc., 696 N.W.2d 596, 604–05 (Iowa 2005)). If there is a 
permanent disability, the benefits are considered HP; if not, they are TTD. See id. As 
discussed below, Hastings has sustained a permanent disability so the type of 
temporary benefits at issue are healing period benefits. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides “alternative markers of the end of the 
healing period.” Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1, 9 (Iowa 2012); see also 
Evenson v. Winnebago Indus., 881 N.W.2d 360, 372 (Iowa 2012). The alternative 
markers are when the injured employee: 
 
1) Returns to work; 
2) Reaches maximum medical improvement (MMI) for the injury; or 
3) Is medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar to that 
which the employee was engaged at the time of injury. Iowa Code § 85.34(1); 
Evenson, 881 N.W.2d at 372. 
The first of the alternative markers to occur ends a healing period. Id.; Evenson, 
881 N.W.2d at 372 (Iowa 2012); Crabtree v. Tri-City Elec. Co., File No. 5059572, pp. 
2−3 (App., Mar. 20, 2020). PPD benefits “begin at the termination of the healing period.” 
Id. at § 85.34(2); Evenson, 881 N.W.2d at 372. As found above, Hastings reached MMI 
on August 31, 2019. He is therefore entitled to healing period benefits from July 23, 
2018, the last day before the defendants denied the claim and ceased payment of 
benefits, through August 30, 2019. This time period equals fifty-seven weeks and four 
days or 57.57 weeks. 
2 .  
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(3) is entitled, “Permanent total disability,” but does not 
define the term or contain a framework for determining whether an injured employee is 
permanently and totally disabled due to a work injury. The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held the factors used to evaluate industrial disability under section 85.34(2)(v) are also 
used to determine whether a work injury has caused permanent total disability under 
section 85.34(3). See Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 495 (Iowa 
2003) (quoting Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 103 (Iowa 1985)).  
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court 
formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an 
odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment 
in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 21 
if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106. 
The extent of an injured employee’s industrial disability is based on consideration 
of the following factors: functional disability, age, education, qualifications, work 
experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings before and after the 
injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics, and the employer’s inability to 
accommodate the injured employee’s functional limitations. See Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 
621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); E.N.T. Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 830 (Iowa 
1994); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). Even under the odd-lot 
doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of evidence in 
determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, and only in an 
exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a finding of total 
disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has quoted the Commissioner with approval for the 
principle that under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, “‘[t]otal disability does not 
mean a state of absolute helplessness.’” Caselman, 657 N.W.2d at 501 (quoting Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d at 633). “Such disability occurs when the injury wholly disables the 
employee from performing work that the employee's experience, training, intelligence, 
and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to perform.” Al-Gharib, 
604 N.W.2d at 633 (citing Diederich v. Tri–City Ry., 219 Iowa 587, 593–94, 258 N.W. 
899, 902 (1935)). A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's 
physical and educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total 
disability.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). “Simply put, the question is this: Are there jobs in the community that the 
employee can do for which the employee can realistically compete?” Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 815 (Iowa 1994) (citing Guyton v. Irving 
Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 103, 104 (Iowa 1985)). 
Moreover: 
Another important factor in the consideration of permanent and total 
disability cases is the employer's ability to retain the injured worker with an 
offer of suitable work. The refusal or inability of the employer to return a 
claimant to work in any capacity is, by itself, significant evidence of a lack 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 22 
of employability. Clinton v. All-American Homes, File No. 5032603 (App. 
April 17, 2013); Western v. Putco Inc., File Nos. 5005190 /5005191 (App. 
July 29, 2005); Pierson v. O'Bryan Brothers, File No. 951206 (App. Jan. 
20, 1995); Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 876894 (App. 
Jan. 22, 1993); see also Larson, Workers' Compensation Law, Section 
57.61, pps. 10-164.90-95; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark 385, 609 
S.W.2d 102 (1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 
F.Supp. 865 (W.D. La 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 
R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950). An employer knows the demands that are 
placed on its workforce. Its determination that the worker is too disabled 
for it to employ is entitled to considerable weight. If the employer in whose 
employ the disability occurred is unwilling or unable to accommodate the 
disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have more 
incentive to do so. 
McNitt v. Nordstrom, Inc., File No. 5065697 (Rehrg. July 20, 2020) (aff’d and adopted 
as final agency decision, App. Aug. 7, 2020). 
Hastings was fifty years old at the time of hearing. He was right-hand dominant 
before the work injury. The injury to his right shoulder has caused significant physical 
limitations with his once-dominant arm and hand.  
Hastings has a significant functional impairment rating from his physical injuries. 
He also has a permanent mental disability stemming from the work injury. He has 
significant permanent work restrictions due to his physical limitations following the work 
injury and resultant surgeries. 
The evidence shows him to be a motivated worker, primarily in jobs with physical 
demands beyond what he is currently capable of performing. Hastings’s permanent 
work restrictions prevent him from returning to his past jobs as a janitor, trimming trees, 
working construction, or as an employee of Orkin, as evidenced by Orkin never offering 
him employment after he was placed on restrictions following the work injury. As 
discussed above, Hastings’s work at Orkin was a hybrid of service and sales. There is 
an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Hastings could obtain 
employment in a job that is strictly sales. 
Further, Laughlin performed an employability assessment of Hastings in early 
2021 that noted he is not skilled at using computers, he can no longer use his CDL as 
an over-the-road trucker, and his permanent work restrictions. She concluded he had 
sustained a 46.2 percent loss of generally transferrable occupations under Dr. Nepola’s 
work restrictions and a 93.9 percent loss to all directly transferable occupations based 
on Dr. Sassman’s work restrictions. Laughlin further opined Hastings would require a 
high level of accommodation and his physical limitations due to the will affect his ability 
to get hired. The defendants did not offer any vocational analysis in rebuttal to 
Laughlin’s report. 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 23 
For these reasons, Hastings has met his burden of proof on permanent total 
disability under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. The jobs he is physically capable 
of performing “so limited in quality, dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable 
market for them does not exist.”  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 105. The evidence establishes 
the stipulated work injury prevents him from performing work that his experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit him to perform. 
Hastings has sustained permanent total disability from the work injury. 
3 .  
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated Hastings’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date 
were seven hundred fifty-six and 91/100 dollars ($756.91) per week. They also 
stipulated he was married and entitled to three exemptions at the time in question. 
Based on the parties’ stipulations, Hastings’s workers’ compensation rate is five 
hundred four and 99/100 dollars ($504.99) per week. 
4 .  
M e d i c a l  E x p e n se s .  
For all compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer 
must “furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1). Here, the defendants until they denied liability and 
refused care. After they did so, Hastings got care on his own. 
The defendants’ denial of liability means they lost the right to choose the care for 
the work injury. Winnebago Indus., Inc. v. Haverly, 727 N.W.2d 567, 575 (Iowa 2006) 
(citing Trade Prof’ls, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 124 (Iowa 2003)). Hastings could 
therefore obtain reasonable care from any provider for the injury, at his expense, and 
seek reimbursement for such care through this contested case proceeding. See Trade 
Prof’ls, 661 N.W.2d at 121–25 (affirming on judicial review an agency decision ordering 
the payment of medical expenses for unauthorized care because the defendants denied 
liability for the alleged injury and therefore lost the right to control care). As found above, 
Hastings is entitled to reimbursement for the medical expenses in Claimant’s Exhibit 15. 
5 .  
M i l e a g e .  
The employer must reimburse an employee who sustains a compensable injury 
under Iowa Code chapter 85 for the reasonable and necessary transportation costs 
incurred by the employee when obtaining care for the work injury. Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(1). An employee is required to submit for examination for the employee’s work-
related injury “without cost to the employee.” Iowa Code § 85.39(1). If an employee is 
required to leave work for which the employee is being paid wages to attend the 
requested examination, . . . the employee shall be furnished transportation to and from 
the place of examination, or the employer may elect to pay the employee the 
reasonable cost of the transportation.” Id.  
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 24 
Transportation costs under Iowa Code sections 85.27 and 85.39 include, but are 
not limited to, all mileage incident to the use of a private auto. 876 IAC 8.1(2). “For 
annual periods beginning July 1, 2006, and thereafter, the per-mile rate shall be the rate 
allowed by the Internal Revenue Service for the business standard mileage rate in effect 
on July 1 of each year.” Id. As found above, Hastings is entitled to reimbursement for 
the mileage as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 12. 
6 .  
P e n a l t y.  
“Because penalty benefits are a creature of statute, our discussion begins with 
an examination of the statutory parameters for such benefits.” Keystone Nursing Care 
Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 307 (Iowa 2005). Under Iowa Code section 
86.13(4)(a) 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
This provision “codifies, in the workers’ compensation insurance context, the common 
law rule that insurers with good faith disputes over the legal or factual validity of claims 
can challenge them, if their arguments for doing so present fairly debatable issues.” 
Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993) (citing Dirks v. Farm Bureau Mut. 
Ins. Co., 465 N.W.2d 857, 861 (Iowa 1991) and Dolan v. Aid Ins. Co., 431 N.W.2d 790, 
794 (Iowa 1988)). “The purpose or goal of the statute is both punishment and 
deterrence.” Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 237 (Iowa 1996). 
The legislature established in Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b) a burden-shifting 
framework for determining whether penalty benefits must be awarded in a workers’ 
compensation case. See 2009 Iowa Acts ch. 179, § 110 (codified at Iowa Code 
§ 86.13(4)(b)); see also Pettengill v. Am. Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 740, 
746–47 (Iowa App. 2015) as amended (Feb. 16, 2016) (discussing the burden-shifting 
required by the two-factor statutory test). The employee bears the burden to establish a 
prima facie case for penalty benefits. See Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b). To do so, the 
employee must demonstrate a denial, delay in payment, or termination of workers’ 
compensation benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b)(1). If the employee fails to prove a 
denial, delay, or termination, there can be no award of penalty benefits and the analysis 
stops. See id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. However, if the 
employee makes the requisite showing, the burden of proof shifts to the employer. See 
id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 25 
To avoid an award of penalty benefits, the employer must “prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits.” 
Iowa Code§ 86.13(4)(b)(2). An excuse must meet all of the following criteria to be “a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse” under the statute: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
Id. § 86.13(4)(c).  
This paragraph creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in 
showing it had a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for the 
termination of benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(c)(1)-(3). First, the 
employer's excuse for the termination must have been preceded by an 
investigation. Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the investigation 
were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” relied on by the employer 
in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.” Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3) 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747 (emphasis in original). “An employer cannot unilaterally 
decide to terminate an employee's benefits without adhering to Iowa Code section 
86.13; to allow otherwise would contradict the language of that section.” Id. 
“A ‘reasonable basis’ for denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly 
debatable.’” Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307 (quoting Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996)). A claim may be fairly 
debatable because of a good faith legal or factual dispute. See Covia, 507 N.W.2d at 
416 (finding a jurisdictional issue fairly debatable because there were “viable arguments 
in favor of either party”).  “[T]he reasonableness of the employer’s denial or termination 
of benefits does not turn on whether the employer was right. The issue is whether there 
was a reasonable basis for the employer’s position that no benefits were owing.” 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr., 705 N.W.2d at 307–08.  
The defendants denied Hastings’s claim and ceased payment of benefits 
because of Dr. Broghammer’s opinion on causation. The weight of the evidence shows 
this position was reasonable under the circumstances. Even after Dr. Nepola’s opinion, 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 26 
the question was fairly debatable. Therefore, Hastings has failed to prove entitlement to 
a penalty. 
7 .  
I M E .  
Under Iowa Code section 85.39, an injured employee is entitled to get an IME 
with a doctor of the employee’s choice in response to an opinion on permanent disability 
issued by a doctor of the employer’s choice with which the employee disagrees. Before 
September 1, 2021, the Commissioner recognized a distinction between a medical 
opinion on causation and one on the nature and extent of permanent disability when 
determining whether the cost of an IME may be reimbursed to the claimant under Iowa 
Code section 85.39. Barnhart v. John Deere Dubuque Works of Deere & Company, File 
No. 5065851, p. 2 (App. Mar. 27, 2020) (citing Reh v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 
5053428 (App. Mar. 26, 2018)). Under this agency precedent, an injured employee 
could only obtain reimbursement for an IME in response to an opinion on permanent 
impairment by an employer-chosen doctor. Id. No reimbursement was available if the 
employer-chosen doctor opined only on causation. Id. 
On September 1, 2021, the Iowa Court of Appeals issued its opinion in Kern v. 
Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 20-1206 (Iowa App. Sep. 1, 2021). The court 
reversed an agency decision denying IME reimbursement because the employer-
chosen doctor had opined only on causation and had not addressed what, if any, 
disability the claimant had sustained. Id. In doing so, the court determined the agency 
had erroneously interpreted Iowa Code section 85.39 and Iowa Supreme Court 
precedent construing it. Id. The court concluded that an employer-chosen doctor’s 
opinion finding that a workers’ alleged injury or condition did not arise out of and in the 
course of the workers’ employment constitutes an opinion of no disability and the cost of 
an IME sought due to disagreement with such an opinion is reimbursable under section 
85.39. Id.  
In this case, Dr. Broghammer issued an opinion on causation. He then affirmed 
this opinion multiple times. It is effectively an opinion of no permanent disability 
stemming from the work injury. Therefore, Hastings is entitled to reimbursement for the 
full cost of Dr. Sassman’s IME, which equals six thousand six hundred dollars 
($6,600.00). 
8 .  
C o s t s .  
Iowa Code section 86.40 gives the agency the discretion to tax costs. “Fee-
shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement 
for litigation expenses to those allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 
806 N.W.2d 643, 660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for 
recovery of costs are strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 
N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 1996)).  
 
 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 27 
Rule 876 IAC 4.33 allows taxation of the following costs: 
 Attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical 
means at hearings and evidential depositions, 876 IAC 4.33(1); 
 Transcription costs when appropriate, 876 IAC 4.33(2);  
 Costs of service of the original notice and subpoenas, 876 IAC 4.33(3); 
 Witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 
and 622.72, 876 IAC 4.33(4); 
 Costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that 
said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 
622.69 and 622.72, 876 IAC 4.33(5); 
 Reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, 876 IAC 4.33(6); 
 Filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees incurred by 
using the payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES), 876 IAC 4.33(7); and 
 Costs of persons reviewing health service disputes, 876 IAC 4.33(8). 
The assessment of costs includes “the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports.” 876 IAC 4.33.  
A “report” is a “formal oral or written presentation of facts or a 
recommendation for action.” Black's Law Dictionary 1492 (10th ed.2014). 
The word “obtain” is used as a modifier in the rule and means “[t]o bring 
into one's own possession; to procure, esp[ecially] through effort.” Id. at 
1247. Thus, the concept of obtaining a report for a hearing is separate 
from the concept of a physical examination. A “physical examination” is 
“[a]n examination of a person's body by a medical professional to 
determine whether the person is healthy, ill, or disabled.” Id. at 680. The 
concept of “obtaining” a report is separate from the process of “obtaining” 
an examination. Our legislature recognized as much by separately 
authorizing the commissioner to appoint “a duly qualified, impartial 
physician to examine the injured employee and make report.” Iowa Code § 
86.38. A medical report for purposes of a hearing is aligned with a 
prehearing medical deposition. In the context of the assessment of costs, 
the expenses of the underlying medical treatment and examination are not 
part of the costs of the report or deposition. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 845–46. The Commissioner has ruled “the court’s rationale 
equally applicable to the expenses incurred by vocational experts.” Simmer v. Menard, 
Inc., File No. 5041139 (App. Apr. 29, 2020) (citing Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 28 
Corp., File No. 5055494 (App. Dec. 17, 2009) and Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, 
Inc., File No. 5056857 (App. Sep. 27, 2019))  
Under Rule 876 IAC 4.33 allows taxation as a cost “the reasonable costs of 
obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports.” As an administrative rule 
that provides for recovery of costs, it is strictly construed.  Young, 867 N.W.2d at 846 
(quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 1996)). The “no 
more than two” language limits taxation of costs to two or less reports. Simmer v. 
Menard, Inc., File No. 5041139 (App. Apr. 29, 2020) Consequently, only the cost of Dr. 
Mittauer’s report ($1,350.00) and Barbara Laughlin’s vocational report ($1,240.00) are 
taxed against the defendants.  
The one hundred eighty-two and 60/100 dollars ($182.60) for the hearing 
transcript is also taxed against the defendants under rule 876 IAC 4.33(2). However, the 
cost of the SSA file relating to Hastings’s claim for disability benefits is not taxed 
because an agency rule does not expressly allow it. 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to Hastings fifty-seven point five seven (57.57) 
weeks of healing period benefits at the rate of five hundred four and 99/100 
dollars ($504.99) per week. 
2) The defendants shall pay to Hastings permanent total disability benefits at the 
rate of five hundred four and 99/100 dollars ($504.99) per week from the 
commencement date of August 31, 2019. 
3) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
4) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
5) The defendants are to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the 
stipulated amount. 
6) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
7) The defendants shall reimburse Hastings for the medical expenses in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 15. 
8) The defendants shall reimburse Hastings for the mileage in Claimant’s Exhibit 
12. 
9) The defendants shall reimburse Hastings six thousand six hundred dollars 
($6,600.00) for Dr. Sassman’s IME. 

HASTINGS V. ORKIN PEST CONTROL 
Page 29 
10) The defendants shall pay to Hastings the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a) One hundred dollars and 00/100 ($100.00) for the filing fee; 
b) One thousand three hundred fifty dollars ($1,350.00) for the cost of the 
expert report by Dr. Mittauer; 
c) One thousand two hundred forty dollars ($1,240.00) for the cost of the 
vocational report by Barbara Laughlin; and 
d) One hundred eighty-two and 60/100 dollars ($182.60) for the cost of 
the arbitration hearing transcript. 
11) The defendants shall hold Hastings harmless for reasonable care relating to 
his work injury, including but not limited to follow-up care with Dr. Nepola for 
his right total shoulder replacement, and ongoing mental health care with Dr. 
Mittauer, and Corfman. 
Signed and filed this 15th day of July, 2022. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Mark J. Sullivan (via WCES) 
 
Tiernan T. Siems (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
