Case Number: 22700525.02
Case Title:  PAULLIN, REX V. MIDWEST VIKING INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Paullin Rex-22700525.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
REX PAULLIN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
 File No. 22700525.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
MIDWEST VIKING, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SERVICE AMERICAN INDEMNITY CO.,  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.: 1402.20, 1402.30, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                   1402.40, 1804, 2206, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
Rex Paullin, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Midwest Viking, Inc., 
as the employer, and Service American Indemnity Company, as the insurance carrier. 
This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on May 6, 2024, via 
Zoom.  
  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
  
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant's Exhibits 1 
through 11, and Defendants' Exhibits A through F. All exhibits were received without 
objection.1 
  
Mr. Paullin testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing. All parties served their post-hearing briefs on July 
26, 2024, at which time this case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
   
                                                 
1 Claimant’s Exhibit 9 is the First Report of Injury (FROI). The FROI is only admissible to show a 
defendant had notice under Iowa Code section 10A.313. While the document remains in the record, it 
was not reviewed or considered in any way by the undersigned. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-04  15:14:05     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
  
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the 
course of employment, on October 5, 2021; 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery; 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability; 
 
4. The extent of claimant's entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any; 
 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits;  
 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to payment of medical expenses; 
 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination under 
Iowa Code section 85.39; and  
8. Costs. 
  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
  
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
On the date of hearing, Rex Paullin was a 54-year-old individual.  He is a high 
school graduate who attended approximately one year of college. (Hearing Transcript, 
page 10)  Several years later, Mr. Paullin obtained a commercial drivers’ license. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 11)  His past employment included stints as a bartender, casino dealer, call 
center representative, insurance salesperson, field-marketing representative, customer 
service representative, and truck driver.   
 
The matter at hand involves injuries to Mr. Paullin’s neck and back.  Prior to the 
alleged date of injury, Mr. Paullin had treated for neck or back pain on at least two 
occasions.  In April 2011, Mr. Paullin presented to Broadlawns Medical Center Walk-in 
Clinic and reported neck and right shoulder pain that radiated into his right arm. (Joint 
Exhibit 1, p. 1)  According to the medical notes, the described pain had been present for 
approximately one week. (Id.)  Mr. Paullin reported that the pain began after lifting 
heavy boxes in a warehouse. (Id.)  X-rays of the cervical spine revealed osteophyte 
formation at C6-C7 with narrowed disc space and considerable posterior element 
degenerative character bilaterally in the lower mid cervical spine. (See id.)  Mr. Paullin 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 3 
 
testified that his pain eventually resolved and he was able to return to his normal job 
duties. (Hr. Tr., p. 33) 
 
Then, on May 10, 2021, Mr. Paullin presented to another emergency department 
and reported shooting pain in his right hip, right buttocks, and right leg. (JE2, p. 14)  
According to Mr. Paullin, the pain had developed over the previous four weeks. (Id.)  Mr. 
Paullin told the attending physician that he was a truck driver and performed quite a bit 
of sitting. (Id.)  Mr. Paullin denied experiencing any weakness, paresthesia, changes in 
bowel or bladder habits, and saddle paresthesia. (Id.)  Mr. Paullin was diagnosed with 
sciatica and prescribed muscle relaxers and anti-inflammatories. (JE2, p. 17)  Mr. 
Paullin testified that he did not miss any time from work due to this onset of low back 
pain. (Hr. Tr., p. 35)    
 
Both instances of medical treatment appear to address conditions or flare-ups 
that were temporary in nature.  Neither instance hindered Mr. Paullin from returning to 
full duty work.   
 
Mr. Paullin began working as an over-the-road truck driver for Midwest Viking, 
Inc., in July 2020. (Hr. Tr., p. 16)  In this position, Mr. Paullin delivered refrigerated 
trailers to a handful of locations for Mom’s Meals, a client of Midwest Viking, Inc. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 16-17)  The routine destinations included Paris, Texas, Chicago, Illinois, and 
Madison, Wisconsin. (Hr. Tr., p. 17) 
 
On October 5, 2021, Mr. Paullin was scheduled to transport a refrigerated load 
from Ankeny, Iowa to Paris, Texas.  During his drive, Mr. Paullin experienced some 
mechanical issues with his truck.  More specifically, Mr. Paullin heard a hissing sound 
coming from his truck and decided to pull off to a truck stop in Okmulgee, Oklahoma to 
investigate the issue. (Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20)  At this point, Mr. Paullin began 
communicating with Brad Steffen and Chad Rasmus.  Mr. Steffen is the owner of 
Midwest Viking.  Mr. Rasmus is a mechanic at Midwest Viking.2  Mr. Rasmus and Mr. 
Paullin decided to implement a temporary fix instead of having Mr. Paullin drive an 
additional 45 minutes to the nearest repair shop. (Hr. Tr., pp. 21-23) 
 
After speaking with Mr. Rasmus, Mr. Paullin crawled underneath his trailer to 
repair the leak in the air line.  Once he finished, Mr. Paullin turned his body to get out 
from under his trailer and felt a pop and sharp pain in his back. (Hr. Tr., p. 23)  After 
some time, Mr. Paullin rolled over and crawled to his tandem tires for support.  Once 
upright, Mr. Paullin had a difficult time balancing himself. (Id.) 
 
 
Unfortunately, the initial repair did not hold, and Mr. Paullin had to purchase 
additional supplies from the Love’s truck stop. (Hr. Tr., p. 24; Claimant’s Exhibit 6, pp. 
52-53)  With the newly purchased supplies, Mr. Paullin crawled back underneath his 
trailer and fixed the leak as best he could. (See Hr. Tr., p. 24)  After repairing the line for 
a second time, Mr. Paullin called Mr. Rasmus to update him on the vehicle’s status. Mr. 
                                                 
2 Mr. Paullin testified that Mr. Rasmus is “kind of the one in charge of the maintenance.” (Hr. Tr., p. 22) 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Paullin did not report or mention his alleged work injury during the phone call. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 72-73)  However, he testified at both his deposition and hearing that he told Mr. 
Rasmus that the defendant employer would have to send someone out to repair his 
truck if the makeshift repairs did not hold because he could not crawl back under his 
truck. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 38; Hr. Tr., p. 73)   
 
The Google GPS data submitted into evidence indicates that Mr. Paullin was at 
the Love’s truck stop from 12:40 p.m. until 3:33 p.m. (Ex. 6, p. 32)  Mr. Paullin then 
drove 139 miles to Paris, Texas.  By the time he arrived in Paris, Texas, he had missed 
his window to make his delivery.  As a result, Mr. Paullin found another Love’s Truck 
Stop and parked his truck for the night. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  Mr. Paullin testified that he was 
able to shower at the Love’s Truck Stop; however, it took him a substantial amount of 
time. (Hr. Tr., pp. 25-26) 
 
The following day, Mr. Paullin made his delivery in Paris, Texas before driving to 
Garland, Texas to pick up a load to take back to Ankeny, Iowa. (Ex. 6, p. 31)  
Unfortunately, he had to wait approximately nine hours to load up once he got to 
Garland, Texas.  During this nine-hour stretch, Mr. Paullin decided to rest in his sleeper 
cab. (Id.)  He did not report the alleged injury or present for medical treatment during 
said downtime. (Hr. Tr., p. 76) 
 
Mr. Paullin began his drive back to Ankeny, Iowa on October 7, 2021. (Id.)  
Between 6:15 a.m. and 10:09 a.m., Mr. Paullin drove 251 miles to Kansas City, Kansas 
without making any stops, where he stayed until 9:01 p.m. (Ex. 6, p. 34; Hr. Tr., p. 77)  
During his time in Kansas City, the GPS data provides that Mr. Paullin spent time at 
Hollywood Casino at Kansas Speedway and Harrah’s Kansas City. (Ex. 6, p. 34)  He 
was at Harrah’s for 1 hour and 15 minutes. (Id.)  Mr. Paullin testified that he stopped at 
Harrah’s to get something to eat at the casino and, while waiting for his food, he 
possibly played a slot machine. (Hr. Tr., p. 78)  Mr. Paullin left Harrah’s at 9:01 p.m. and 
drove to the Employer’s Ankeny, Iowa location, arriving at 1:10 a.m. on October 8, 
2021. (Hr. Tr., pp. 78-79)  Mr. Paullin stayed at the Employer’s Ankeny, Iowa location 
for six hours. (Ex. 6, p. 35) 
 
Later that morning, Mr. Paullin set out to make deliveries in Orange City, Iowa 
and Sioux Falls, South Dakota. (Id.)  He returned to the Ankeny area on October 9, 
2021, and spent the bulk of the day on October 10, 2021, at his home. (Ex. 6, p. 37)  
Mr. Paullin did not work on October 11, 2021.  In the early hours of October 12, 2021, 
Mr. Paullin spent approximately one hour at a casino. (Ex. 6, p. 39)  Later that morning, 
he delivered a load to Grinnell, Iowa.  
 
Mr. Paullin testified that his symptoms remained the same between October 5, 
2021, and October 12, 2021.  Despite the persistence of pain during this time, Mr. 
Paullin did not seek any medical treatment.  Mr. Paullin testified that he did not seek 
medical treatment because he did not want to miss work, and he did not believe a trip to 
the hospital would be worthwhile. (See Defendants’ Exhibit B, Depo. p. 47)  Mr. Paullin 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 5 
 
testified that the last time he presented to the hospital with back pain they prescribed 
“muscle relaxers, exercises, and sent me home.” (Ex. B, Depo. p. 47) 
 
Mr. Paullin asserts the defendants were aware of the alleged work injury by 
October 11, 2021.  Defendants did not assert a notice defense or call a representative 
from the defendant employer to rebut Mr. Paullin’s assertion; however, there is 
conflicting evidence as to how and when Mr. Paullin reported his alleged injury.  For 
instance, in Mr. Paullin’s initial discovery responses, he stated that he “suffered an 
injury to his low back on or about October 11, 2021.”  Claimant’s attorney asserts that 
October 11, 2021, was originally identified as the date of injury because it was the date 
listed on the First Report of Injury. The discovery responses further provide that Mr. 
Paullin called his dispatcher (presumably Mr. Rasmus) the following morning and 
notified him of the injury. (Ex. A, p. 3)  However, during his January 11, 2024, 
deposition, Mr. Paullin testified that his work accident occurred on October 5, 2021. (Ex. 
B, Depo. p. 27)  He further testified that he called Mr. Rasmus and mentioned that his 
back was hurting on the date of injury, but he was unsure as to whether he described 
the alleged work injury. (See Ex. B, Depo. pp. 38-39)  Mr. Paullin implied that if he did 
not specifically report the work injury, it could have been because he had experienced 
similar back pain in the past and was able to “deal with it.” (Ex. B, Depo. pp. 38-39)  Mr. 
Paullin provided similar testimony at the evidentiary hearing. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 72-73) 
 
On October 13, 2021, Mr. Paullin made deliveries to Newton, Iowa and 
Davenport, Iowa. (Ex. 6, p. 40)  Mr. Paullin then spent the majority of October 14, 2021, 
at home, before setting out for Chicago at 10:00 p.m. (Hr. Tr., pp. 85-86)  He arrived in 
Chicago at approximately 4:27 a.m. (Hr. Tr., p. 86; Ex. 6, pp. 41-42)  Roughly four hours 
later, Mr. Paullin left Chicago, Illinois for Madison, Wisconsin. (Ex. 6, p. 42)  According 
to Mr. Paullin, his symptoms worsened, and he started experiencing numbness and 
tingling in his hand during the drive from Chicago, Illinois to Madison, Wisconsin. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 28, 86-87; Ex. B, Depo. p. 49)  This worsening of symptoms prompted Mr. 
Paullin to schedule a chiropractic appointment. (Ex. B, Depo. pp. 47-48) 
 
On October 18, 2021, Mr. Paullin set out to make a delivery in North Jackson, 
Ohio. (Ex. 6, p. 45)  He arrived at his destination at approximately 5:45 p.m. on October 
19, 2021. (Ex. 6, p. 46)  He stated that while his truck was being unloaded, “everything 
got really worse” and he “couldn’t hardly move.”  From there, Mr. Paullin drove to a 
nearby truck stop and parked his truck for approximately 18 hours. (Ex. 6, p. 47; Hr. Tr., 
p. 29) 
 
Mr. Paullin began driving back to Iowa at 12:00 p.m. on October 20, 2021.  
According to GPS data, it took him just over seven hours to drive approximately 110 
miles. (Ex. 6, p. 47)  Mr. Paullin stopped at Erie Islands Travel Plaza in Clyde, Ohio, for 
24 hours. (Ex. 6, pp. 47-48)  During the stop, Mr. Paullin called Mr. Steffen and 
described the troubles he was experiencing.  Following this conversation, Mr. Steffen 
texted Mr. Paullin the location of a nearby hospital he could present to for medical 
treatment. (Hr. Tr., pp. 30-31; Ex. 6, p. 56)  Instead of presenting to the hospital, Mr. 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Paullin decided to drive home. (Hr. Tr., p. 31)  Mr. Paullin testified that he had to take 
several breaks during the drive. (Hr. Tr., p. 95)   
 
Mr. Paullin made it back to Ankeny, Iowa on October 22, 2021. (Id.)  By the time 
he made it back to Midwest Viking, Mr. Paullin struggled to stand on his own and 
decided to lie down. (Hr. Tr., pp. 31-32)  Mr. Steffen approached Mr. Paullin and offered 
to drive him to his chiropractic appointment; however, Mr. Paullin declined as he 
believed he would not make it to his appointment in time. (Hr. Tr., pp. 31-32, 97-98)  
Due to his symptoms, Mr. Paullin determined he could not drive and called his dad to 
come pick him up. (Hr. Tr., pp. 31-32) 
 
After realizing he would not be able to make his previously scheduled 
appointment, Mr. Paullin presented to a different chiropractor at Bountiful Life 
Chiropractic for an adjustment. (Joint Exhibit 3, p. 71)  Mr. Paullin described lower and 
middle back pain, neck pain, leg pain, knee pain, foot pain, and sciatica. (Id.)  Mike 
Miller, D.C. performed chiropractic adjustments on October 22, 2021, and October 25, 
2021. (JE3, pp. 72-73)  Mr. Paullin testified that the treatment did not relieve his pain. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 36-37) 
 
Mr. Paullin presented to the Emergency Department of Iowa Methodist on 
October 28, 2021. (JE2, p. 19)  He reported a two-week history of worsening back pain, 
numbness and tingling to the groin and down both legs, and difficulty walking. (Id.)  Mr. 
Paullin also reported paresthesia in his arms and legs. (Id.)  He was diagnosed with 
back pain of the lumbar region with sciatica, COVID-19, and myalgia. (JE2, p. 24) 
 
The next day, Mr. Paullin experienced spastic movements in his legs and an 
inability to move his legs to stand or walk. (See JE1, p. 6)  He also experienced “sharp 
zinging pain” all the way up his back and a heaviness to his arms and legs. (See JE1, p. 
6)  Mr. Paullin tried to return to the ER, but the wait was 10 hours. (See JE1, p. 6)  
There is conflicting evidence with respect to whether Mr. Paullin waited 10 hours or 
simply left when he learned of the wait. (See Ex. B,  Depo. pp. 60-61) 
 
On November 3, 2021, Mr. Paullin called for an ambulance after attempting to 
stand and falling onto a mattress. (JE5, p. 82)  According to the ambulance report, Mr. 
Paullin described a two-week history of weakness that had significantly worsened over 
the past week.  The report also provides that Mr. Paullin had been unable to drive for 
two weeks because of “sciatic nerve” issues. (Id.)  He was transported to Broadlawns. 
(Id.) 
 
Mr. Paullin presented to Broadlawns Medical Center on November 3, 2021. (JE1, 
p. 6)  He exhibited tenderness throughout the thoracic and lumbar spine on 
examination, and it is noted that he had a bruise to the right flank. (JE1, p. 8)  Mr. 
Paullin demonstrated decreased sensation and strength in all four extremities and he 
was unable to pull himself to a sitting position or sit at the bedside. (Id.)  A CT scan of 
the head revealed no acute intracranial abnormality. (JE1, p. 13)  Unfortunately, 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Broadlawns did not have the ability to perform the necessary MRIs of Mr. Paullin’s 
spine, so he was transferred to UnityPoint. (JE1, p. 10; JE2, p. 36) 
 
The MRI of the lumbar spine revealed degenerative disc changes and facet 
osteoarthritis resulting in moderate spinal canal narrowing at L3-L4 and L4-L5. It also 
showed mild bilateral neural foraminal narrowing at L3-L4, L4-L5 and L5-S1 as well as a 
significantly distended urinary bladder. (JE2, p. 32).  
 
The thoracic MRI was essentially normal. (JE2, p. 31) 
 
The cervical MRI was read as showing a disc osteophyte complex at C4-C5 
causing severe spinal canal narrowing with evidence of cord edema/myelomalacia. 
There was degenerative multilevel spinal canal narrowing, which was moderate at the 
C6-C7 level. The radiologist also believed there to be multilevel degenerative neural 
foraminal narrowing, with the worst and most severe being on the right at the C6-C7 
level. (JE2, pp. 33-34) 
 
A neurosurgery consultation was immediately performed by John Piper, D.O. (JE 
2, pp. 46-47)  Mr. Paullin informed the doctor that over the past 4-5 days he had a fairly 
precipitous decline in neurologic function to the point that he could not walk. (JE 2, p. 
46)  Dr. Piper believed that the lumbar imaging showed mild to moderate stenosis, but 
the cervical imaging showed a fairly prominent disk osteophyte complex with severe 
myelomalacia that appeared to be responsible for the vast majority of his severe 
weakness. (JE2, pp. 46-47)  Dr. Piper noted that there were other areas of pathology in 
his neck at C5-6 and C6-7, but they seemed to be more mild and did not seem to be 
causing any myelomalacia changes. (JE2, p. 46)  Ultimately, Dr. Piper recommended 
addressing the “most acute issue” at C4-C5 with immediate surgery. (JE2, p. 47) 
 
Dr. Piper performed an anterior cervical diskectomy and decompression of the 
spinal canal exiting nerve roots at C4-C5 with arthrodesis. (JE2, p. 48)  Following 
surgery, Dan Shamir, M.D. provided a Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation consultation 
to determine Mr. Paullin’s rehabilitation needs. (JE2, p. 61)  Mr. Paullin was discharged 
from the hospital and transferred to Younker Rehabilitation on November 9, 2021. (JE2, 
p. 40) 
 
Mr. Paullin received treatment at Younker Rehabilitation for 28 days.  He was 
ultimately discharged from Younker Rehabilitation on December 7, 2021 with an 
understanding that he would be receiving in-home physical/occupational therapies, 
nursing, social work and bath aide services. (JE6, pp. 105, 118)  Mr. Paullin was sent 
home with assistive devices, including a hospital bed, a walker, a foot and ankle brace, 
a shower chair, and a gait belt. (JE6, p. 106) 
 
For two months, Mr. Paullin received assistance from Wesley Home Health 
workers, who provided physical therapy, occupational therapy, and skilled nursing care. 
(Joint Exhibit 7)  Christine Blessing provided skilled nursing services to Mr. Paullin until 
May of 2022. (Hr. Tr., pp. 47-48) 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
Following his release from Younker Rehabilitation, Mr. Paullin presented to 
Midwest Viking to get his car, which had been sitting on the lot since October 22, 2021. 
(See Hr. Tr., p. 52)  During his visit, Mr. Paullin spoke with Brad about the status of his 
workers’ compensation claim. (Hr. Tr., pp. 51-52)  The defendant employer completed a 
first report of injury form on December 13, 2021, identifying it first had notice of the 
alleged injury on October 11, 2021. (Ex. 9, p. 65) 
 
Mr. Paullin returned to Dr. Piper in follow-up on January 18, 2022. (JE8, p. 140)  
The medical record provides that Mr. Paullin was making good progress with respect to 
his neck, but he was still experiencing problems with lumbar radiculopathy. (JE8, p. 
141)  Dr. Piper referred Mr. Paullin for pool therapy and an injection to his lumbar spine. 
(Id.) 
 
Pain Management specialist Jun Xu, M.D. conducted an initial evaluation of Mr. 
Paullin on February 25, 2022. (JE8, p. 142)  During the evaluation, Mr. Paullin reported 
experiencing low back pain for several years, but noted that it had worsened in the last 
few months. (Id.)  Mr. Paullin denied experiencing significant pain in the lower 
extremities, but noted significant lower extremity fatigue with short-term standing and 
walking. (Id.)  According to Mr. Paullin, his strength in the upper and lower extremities 
had improved since undergoing surgery; however, the low back pain remained 
significant. (Id.)  Dr. Xu assessed neurogenic claudication due to lumbar spinal stenosis 
and bilateral SI joint dysfunction. (JE8, p. 143)  Dr. Xu recommended and administered 
a lumbar epidural injection at L4-5 to address the persistent symptoms in the low back. 
(JE8, pp. 143-145) 
 
Mr. Paullin continued to report low back pain when he returned to Dr. Piper’s 
office on March 1, 2022, and June 2, 2022. (JE8, pp. 146, 149)  Dr. Piper felt as though 
the fusion was progressing quite nicely, and Mr. Paullin was not having any major 
radicular issues anymore. (JE8, p. 149) 
 
Following the June 2, 2022, examination, Dr. Piper explained to Mr. Paullin that 
surgery would not be a good option for his low back pain.  He recommended Mr. Paullin 
“look into other options like the pain clinic to see if perhaps he may be harboring some 
facet mediated pain or other potential considerations.” (JE8, p. 150) 
 
On June 17, 2022, Mr. Paullin reported low back pain, but no neck pain or 
muscle pain. (JE8, p. 151)  He further reported intermittent radiating pain in the lower 
extremities as well as numbness and tingling in the lower extremities, but no radiating 
pain, numbness, or tingling in the upper extremities. (Id.) 
 
Mr. Paullin returned to Dr. Xu on June 23, 2022, reporting that the epidural 
steroid injection at L4-5 significantly improved his symptoms for approximately one 
month. (JE8, p. 153)  Dr. Xu noted that Mr. Paullin’s remaining symptoms likely stem 
from underlying facet arthropathy as well as sacroiliac joint dysfunction. (JE8, p. 155)  

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Following his physical examination, Dr. Xu recommended and administered bilateral 
medial branch blocks at L4-5 and L5-S1. (JE8, pp. 155-157) 
 
Currently, Mr. Paullin’s biggest complaint is the lack of function in his lower torso 
and from the waist down. (Ex. B, Depo. pp. 76-77)  He testified he does not necessarily 
experience pain in his legs but will sometimes experience an “extreme burning 
sensation” in both legs after sitting for extended periods of time. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 77)  
He cannot bend or kneel, and he considers his balance to be “very bad.” (Hr. Tr., p. 56)  
He regularly goes outside of his home and uses a walker to ambulate. (Hr. Tr., pp. 49-
50)  He can drive his car for short periods of time.  He believes he has the ability to sit 
for two to three hours before his low back pain becomes unbearable. (Hr. Tr., pp. 56-57) 
 
At deposition, Mr. Paullin indicated that his low back pain never improved 
following the alleged work injury; however, his arm symptoms have, “[w]ithout a doubt,” 
significantly improved since undergoing surgery on his cervical spine.  Additionally, he 
has regained strength in his upper extremities.  He still experiences some numbness 
and tingling in his fingers, but not nearly as bad as prior to surgery. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 66)  
Mr. Paullin is not actively treating for his cervical condition; however, he continues to 
take medications related to the same. (Id.)   
 
Due to his injury and resulting physical disabilities, Mr. Paullin has not returned to 
work for Midwest Viking or any other employer.  Mr. Paullin testified he would not be 
able to return to his former trucking jobs because he can no longer climb in and out of 
truck cabs. (Hr. Tr., p. 60)  In addition, he asserts he cannot safely operate semi-
tractors, due to his inability to operate foot controls, shift gears, and steer safely. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 60-61)  There is no evidence that Midwest Viking offered to return Mr. Paullin to 
work in any capacity.  Mr. Paullin applied for and was awarded Social Security Disability 
benefits. (Ex. 7, p. 62) 
 
The first issue to be addressed by this decision is whether Mr. Paullin sustained 
an injury, which arose out of and in the course of his employment, on October 5, 2021.  
Defendants’ argument is two-fold.  First, defendants assert that the alleged October 5, 
2021, work accident did not occur. 
 
Aside from the injury itself, the events of October 5, 2021, are largely undisputed.  
While there is a substantial amount of evidence corroborating the fact Mr. Paullin 
stopped at a Love’s truck stop in Okmulgee, Oklahoma to make repairs on his semi-
truck, defendants assert there is no evidence the alleged work injury occurred during 
this time period.  Moreover, defendants assert there is a fair amount of circumstantial 
evidence to suggest an injury did not occur at all.   
 
Defendants argue that Mr. Paullin’s actions following the alleged work injury do 
not support a finding that he sustained a significant injury on October 5, 2021.  For 
instance, defendants note that Mr. Paullin drove his semi-truck for several hours 
immediately after the alleged injury, and in the days that followed, without issue.  
Similarly, despite reportedly experiencing significant pain, Mr. Paullin did not request or 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 10 
 
seek any medical treatment for 17 days following the alleged work injury.  While it is not 
uncommon for injured workers to take a wait-and-see approach with respect to medical 
treatment, it is somewhat concerning Mr. Paullin waited as long as he did given the 
symptoms he was reportedly experiencing. 
 
Defendants next point out that Mr. Paullin passed up several opportunities to 
report the alleged injury to the defendant employer on the date of injury and in the days 
that followed.  Similarly, Mr. Paullin failed to describe the alleged work injury to his 
medical providers until approximately January 2022. Mr. Paullin testified he first 
mentioned his alleged work accident to Dr. Edel on approximately November 15, 2021. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 106). However, there is no documentary evidence in the record of such 
discussion taking place.  While the lack of reporting in the medical records is 
concerning, it is important to acknowledge that once Mr. Paullin actually decided to seek 
medical treatment, his condition required emergency surgery.  In this situation, it is 
possible the urgency of addressing his critical medical needs took precedence over 
providing a detailed account of the alleged injury.   
 
Alternatively, defendants assert Mr. Paullin failed to prove a causal connection 
between the alleged work accident and his injury to the cervical spine.  First, defendants 
argue there is little evidence to establish that Mr. Paullin actually injured his cervical 
spine on October 5, 2021.  To this end, defendants point out that Mr. Paullin felt a “pop” 
in his low back and experienced immediate lower back pain.  At no point did Mr. Paullin 
report experiencing pain in his neck. (Hr. Tr., p. 72)  I do not find this argument to be 
particularly convincing.  The presence of pain, while common, is not a prerequisite to a 
finding of causation.  While the onset of the majority of his symptoms was delayed, Mr. 
Paullin clearly developed motor and sensory deficits in his upper and lower extremities 
in the days and weeks following his work injury.  As explained by one expert physician, 
the progression to myelopathy, characterized by spinal cord impingement manifesting 
as weakness, numbness, and autonomic dysfunction, suggests Mr. Paullin experienced 
significant neurological impact from the work injury. (Ex. 3, p. 19) 
 
Second, defendants assert the expert opinions submitted into evidence support a 
finding that Mr. Paullin failed to prove that he sustained an injury on October 5, 2021. 
 
In total, three expert physicians addressed causation.  On December 1, 2023, 
claimant’s counsel wrote to Dr. Piper and requested “yes” or “no” opinions regarding his 
treatment of Mr. Paullin. (Ex. 1, pp. 1-2; Ex. 2, p. 3)  In the December 1, 2023, letter, 
claimant’s counsel advised Dr. Piper that Mr. Paullin sustained a work injury on October 
11, 2021, and he began experiencing noticeable numbness and tingling in his arms 
approximately three days later. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  The letter does not provide what medical 
records, if any, were provided to Dr. Piper for review.   
 
Dr. Piper completed the “check the box” style report on January 17, 2024.  Dr. 
Piper agreed that Mr. Paullin’s pre-existing cervical spondylosis with myelopathy was 
materially aggravated by his work injury on October 11, 2021. (Ex. 2, p. 3)  He also 
agreed the cervical anterior spinal fusion at C4-5 that he performed was reasonable and 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 11 
 
necessary care. (Id.)  Based on Mr. Paullin’s post-surgical condition, Dr. Piper assessed 
28 percent whole person impairment. (Id.)  The impairment rating was provided 
pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. 
(Id.)  Lastly, Dr. Piper agreed that Mr. Paullin would be expected to have significant 
limitations and restrictions in his physical capacity. (Id.) 
 
In March 2024, claimant’s counsel wrote to Dr. Piper stating that Mr. Paullin 
amended his Petition to plead October 5, 2021 as the injury date following his 
deposition. (Ex. 2, p. 4)  Dr. Piper completed an updated “check the box” style report on 
March 27, 2024, indicating that the change in the date of injury did not change his 
opinions on causation. (Ex. 2, p. 5)  There is no indication that Dr. Piper was provided a 
copy of the deposition transcript to review.  
 
Around the same time, defendants scheduled Mr. Paullin to present for an 
independent medical evaluation with Trevor Schmitz, M.D.  Dr. Schmitz reviewed Mr. 
Paullin’s medical records and conducted a physical examination on January 5, 2024. 
(Ex. E, p. 32)  Dr. Schmitz assessed Mr. Paullin with cervical myelopathy and 
neurogenic claudicatory-type low back and bilateral leg symptoms which were the result 
of multilevel cervical and lumbar stenosis secondary to a disc osteophyte complex and 
facet arthropathy.  Dr. Schmitz opined that Mr. Paullin’s diagnostic imaging was 
consistent with chronic degenerative changes without evidence of an acute injury.  He 
further commented that Mr. Paullin did not mention any specific work injury while he 
was in the hospital.  As a result of these two findings, Dr. Schmitz opined that Mr. 
Paullin’s diagnoses were not causally related to the alleged work injury of October 11, 
2021. (Ex. E, p. 39) 
 
Mr. Paullin sought an independent medical evaluation with Sunil Bansal, M.D.  
Like Dr. Schmitz, Dr. Bansal reviewed the pertinent medical records and conducted a 
physical examination of Mr. Paullin on January 17, 2024. (Ex. 3)  In addressing 
causation, Dr. Bansal opined,  
 
[T]he aggravation of his C4-C5 disc protrusion with myelopathy which 
necessitated surgical fusion can be attributed to and compounded by an 
initial misdiagnosis. At the time of his injury he was engaged in a physically 
demanding task under his trailer involving forceful pulling, twisting, and 
working in an awkward position. This scenario likely placed significant 
stress on his cervical spine, particularly if his head was held at an unusual 
angle. Such a position could lead to abnormal loading on the spinal discs 
and vertebrae. The act of twisting to emerge from under the trailer, coupled 
with his forceful movements, would have created shear forces on the spine, 
potentially leading to a disc injury or exacerbating any pre-existing 
condition. 
 
(Ex. 3, p. 19)  Dr. Bansal opined the work injury likely aggravated a previously mild or 
asymptomatic disc protrusion at C4-5. (Id.)   
 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Dr. Bansal estimated that Mr. Paullin reached maximum medical improvement on 
January 17, 2024, the date of his IME.  Utilizing the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. 
Bansal assigned 28 percent whole person impairment for the cervical fusion, 10 percent 
whole person impairment for upper extremity dysfunction, 30 percent whole person 
impairment for station and gait disorder, 5 percent whole person impairment for 
neurogenic bladder, and 9 percent whole person impairment for sexual impairment.  In 
total, Dr. Bansal assigned 61 percent whole person impairment. (Ex. 3, pp. 18, 20) 
 
With respect to permanent restrictions, Dr. Bansal recommended sedentary work 
only with the ability to take frequent short breaks to stand, stretch, or walk to reduce the 
strain on his spine. (Ex. 3, p. 20)  He also recommended that Mr. Paullin avoid activities 
that require repeated neck motion, or activities that place his neck in a posturally flexed 
position for any appreciable duration of time. (Id.) 
 
The undersigned is concerned about Dr. Bansal’s understanding of Mr. Paullin’s 
alleged injury and the symptoms he experienced on the date of injury.  For example, Dr. 
Bansal’s report provides that Mr. Paullin may have twisted his neck while crawling out 
from under the semi-truck. (Ex. 3, p. 14)  While plausible, Mr. Paullin’s testimony and 
the evidentiary record as a whole does not support such an assertion.  Dr. Bansal’s 
report also provides that Mr. Paullin “immediately felt as if he could not move his arms 
or legs normally.”  While evidence in the record supports the claim that Mr. Paullin felt 
as though he could not move his legs normally on the date of injury, the same cannot be 
said with respect to his arms.  Lastly, Dr. Bansal’s report asserts that Mr. Paullin called 
his dispatcher and told him the employer needed to send another driver to come get his 
trailer and complete his delivery. (Id.)  While similar, the evidentiary record provides a 
slightly different rendition.  Mr. Paullin testified that he called Chad and told him the 
defendant employer would have to send someone out to repair his truck if the makeshift 
repairs did not hold because he could not crawl back under his truck. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 
38)   
 
Defendants provided portions of Mr. Paullin’s deposition transcript, as well as the 
reports of Dr. Bansal and Dr. Piper, to Dr. Schmitz for review. (Ex. D, p. 30)  In an April 
3, 2024, letter, Dr. Schmitz opined that there are significant discrepancies concerning 
causation and he could “in no way state” that Mr. Paullin’s condition was work-related. 
(Ex. E, p. 41)   
 
It is concerning to the undersigned that both of Dr. Schmitz’s reports seemingly 
dismiss the possibility that the alleged work incident actually occurred. At the January 5, 
2024, IME appointment, Mr. Paullin told Dr. Schmitz that he was injured on October 5, 
2021, “when he was attempting to clamp a hose underneath his semi-trailer and he felt 
a pop in his back with immediate sharp pain and he was unable to move.” (Ex. E, p. 33)  
Rather than addressing the described mechanism of injury and whether the same could 
result in a material aggravation, Dr. Schmitz focused primarily on discrepancies in the 
medical records and Mr. Paullin’s prior medical history.  By failing to analyze the 
mechanics of the alleged work injury and whether the described event could have 
caused or materially aggravated Mr. Paullin’s underlying condition, Dr. Schmitz’s 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 13 
 
opinions lack a comprehensive causation analysis.  In other words, Dr. Schmitz is, in 
effect, evaluating Mr. Paullin's credibility and questioning whether the alleged injury 
occurred, rather than focusing on his role as a medical professional to assess whether 
the described event could have exacerbated Mr. Paullin’s underlying condition. 
 
All three expert reports contain notable flaws; however, with respect to causation, 
I find Dr. Bansal provided the most comprehensive analysis.  Dr. Bansal reviewed the 
pertinent medical records and conducted a physical examination of Mr. Paullin.  He is 
the only expert physician in this case to analyze the mechanism of injury and whether 
the described event could have materially aggravated Mr. Paullin’s underlying condition.  
I acknowledge that Dr. Bansal inaccurately believed that Mr. Paullin experienced a loss 
of function in his arms on the date of injury when the evidentiary record shows he did 
not lose function in his arms until approximately two weeks later.  I do not find that Dr. 
Bansal’s misunderstanding greatly detracts from the credibility of his causation opinion.  
I similarly do not find his belief that Mr. Paullin reported the injury to his supervisor on 
the date of injury to be detrimental to his causation opinion. 
 
Admittedly, the issue of claimant’s credibility was a close call.  There is a fair 
amount of evidence that could support a finding that claimant is not credible.  However, 
claimant presented as a credible witness at the evidentiary hearing.  He appeared 
genuine in his attempts to answer questions on direct and cross-examination.  
Moreover, claimant’s testimony at both his deposition and the hearing was consistent.  
On one hand, it is concerning that the medical records do not reference or describe the 
alleged work injury until January 2022.  On the other hand, the evidence suggests 
defendants had timely notice of the alleged injury and elected not to call Mr. Steffen or 
Mr. Rasmus to dispute claimant’s testimony or elaborate on the extent of their 
knowledge regarding claimant’s injury.  After analyzing the evidentiary record as a 
whole, I find claimant to be generally credible.   
 
Having accepted Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion as the most comprehensive and 
convincing, I find Mr. Paullin sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment on October 5, 2021.   
 
The next issue to be addressed is whether Mr. Paullin is entitled to healing period 
benefits from October 23, 2021, through January 16, 2024.  The parties stipulated that 
Mr. Paullin was off work during this period of time.  Due to his injury and resulting 
physical disabilities, Mr. Paullin has not returned to work for Midwest Viking or any other 
employer.   
 
There are two opinions in the record as to when Mr. Paullin reached maximum 
medical improvement.  Dr. Schmitz placed Mr. Paullin at maximum medical 
improvement on February 4, 2022, just three months after his cervical fusion procedure.  
Three weeks after Dr. Schmitz’s MMI  date, Mr. Paullin presented for his first 
appointment with a pain management specialist.  Following the examination, Dr. Xu 
recommended and administered a lumbar epidural injection at L4-5 to address the 
persistent symptoms in the low back. (JE8, pp. 143-145)  Four months later, Dr. Xu 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 14 
 
recommended and administered bilateral medial branch blocks at L4-5 and L5-S1. (JE8, 
pp. 155-157)  It cannot be said that Mr. Paullin reached maximum medical improvement 
on or before February 4, 2022.  Therefore, I reject Dr. Schmitz’s opinion in this regard.   
 
Alternatively, Dr. Bansal placed Mr. Paullin at maximum medical improvement on 
January 17, 2024, the date of his independent medical examination.  This is also the 
date in which Dr. Piper assigned an impairment rating to Mr. Paullin’s condition. (Ex. 1, 
p. 3)  Given the lack of evidence demonstrating ongoing treatment between July 2022 
and January 2024, it is likely that Mr. Paullin reached MMI before January 17, 2024.  
Nevertheless, I accept Dr. Bansal’s opinion as the more reasonable and accurate 
estimate of Mr. Paullin’s date of maximum medical improvement. 
 
Mr. Paullin sustained a significant spinal cord injury, which necessitated an 
emergency cervical fusion.  As a result of his injury, Mr. Paullin experiences significant 
ongoing symptoms.  He has significant restrictions that prevent him from returning to 
employment for which he is best suited by his education, training, and experience.  
Considering Mr. Paullin’s age, educational background, employment history, permanent 
functional impairment, his inability to return to work, the severity of his injuries, and all 
other factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that Mr. 
Paullin proved he is permanently and totally disabled as a result of the October 5, 2021, 
work injury. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 15 
 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
In this case, I found that the claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence 
that he sustained a material aggravation and injury to his spinal cord as a result of his 
work activities on October 5, 2021.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant carried his 
burden of proof to establish that he sustained an injury that arose out of and in the 
course of his employment on October 5, 2021.   
 
Having found the expert medical opinions of Dr. Bansal to be the most 
convincing, I further found that claimant carried his burden of proving he sustained 
permanent disability as a result of the October 5, 2021, injury.  On the Hearing Report, 
the parties stipulated that if the injury was found to be a cause of permanent disability, 
the disability is an industrial disability. 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 
258 N.W. 899 (1935). 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 16 
 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
I considered all of the relevant available factors outlined by the Iowa Supreme 
Court to assess industrial disability. I found that Mr. Paullin proved he is not capable of 
working in his prior employment or at any other employment for which he would 
otherwise be qualified and physically capable as a result of the October 5, 2021, work 
injury. Ultimately, I found that Mr. Paullin is permanently and totally disabled as a result 
of the October 5, 2021, work injury. Accordingly, I conclude that claimant is entitled to 
an award of permanent total disability benefits under the traditional industrial disability 
analysis. Iowa Code section 85.34(3). 
 
Claimant never returned to work for this employer or any other employer since 
the date of injury. Accordingly, I conclude that permanent total disability benefits 
commence on October 23, 2021, the day after Mr. Paullin’s last date of employment. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(3). Permanent total disability benefits shall continue from 
October 23, 2021, through the present and continue into the future until claimant is no 
longer permanently and totally disabled. Iowa Code section 85.34(3)(a). 
 
Mr. Paullin seeks an award for past medical expenses. 
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 
Having concluded that claimant has proven a compensable work injury to his low 
back, neck, and spinal cord, I further conclude that defendants are responsible for 
providing claimant's medical care, including payment of the past medical expenses 
contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 10. Iowa Code section 85.27.  However, defendants are 
not liable for treatment related to his mental health. (Ex. 10, pp. 87-88) 
 
Mr. Paullin also seeks reimbursement of his independent medical evaluation 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. Claimant has clearly presented a compensable 
claim for benefits. Accordingly, he is entitled to reimbursement for his independent 
medical evaluation fees if he establishes the other pre-requisites of Iowa Code section 
85.39. 
 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  Defendants are 
responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's independent medical 
examination. Claimant has the burden of proving the reasonableness of the expenses 
incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 
855298 (App. April 26, 1991). 
 
Defendants scheduled Mr. Paullin to present for an independent medical 
evaluation with Trevor Schmitz, M.D. on January 5, 2024.   Dr. Bansal performed his 
independent medical examination on January 17, 2024; however, Dr. Bansal produced 
his report one day earlier than Dr. Schmitz.  As such, defendants assert there was no 
impairment rating for Mr. Paullin to assert was too low. 
 
Defendants' argument is technical and procedural. The typical informal practice 
in Iowa does not necessarily require the technical and procedural precision defendants 
now urge.  However, defendants in this case are accurate that Dr. Schmitz did not issue 
a permanent impairment rating until after claimant's IME occurred. It is not technically 
possible for claimant to believe the defense evaluation is too low prior to issuance of the 
defense opinion. Although I acknowledge this is a procedural defense, defendants are 
correct: the plain language of the statute requires that the defense evaluation be 
performed and that the employee believes this evaluation to be too low before obtaining 
his own evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39(2). Antunez-Erazo v. Brand FX Body 
Co., File Nos. 21012704.01, 21008748.01 (App. Dec. December 28, 2023) 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court provided a literal interpretation of the plain language of 
Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section 85.39 ‘only allows the employee to obtain 
an independent evaluation at the employer's expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation 
arranged by the employer. Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015) (quoting Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015)). Claimant could not be dissatisfied with the evaluation 
arranged by the employer before that opinion was issued. Accordingly, I find claimant 
failed to establish the pre-requisites of Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
 
Lastly, Mr. Paullin seeks assessment of his costs associated with this contested 
case proceeding.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code 
section 10A.328. Considering that claimant prevailed and established he is permanently 
and totally disabled, I exercise the agency's discretion and conclude that it is reasonable 
to assess claimants' costs in some amount. 
 
Mr. Paullin seeks the cost of his filing fees ($206.00).  The filing fees are 
reasonable costs and granted pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Mr. Paullin also seeks 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 18 
 
assessment of the cost of his deposition ($220.00).   The deposition transcript is a 
reasonable cost and granted pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
 
Next, Mr. Paullin seeks the costs associated with Dr. Piper’s medical report 
($200.00).  Dr. Piper’s billing statement indicates that he charged $200.00 for a 15-
minute conference call. Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(6) permits the agency to assess the 
reasonable cost of obtaining up to two doctors' reports. However, this rule does not 
permit assessment of the cost of a conference between the attorney and the physician 
in advance of requesting such a report. I conclude this is not a taxable cost. Therefore, 
claimant's request to tax this cost is denied. 
 
Mr. Paullin’s affidavit of costs also lists a request to assess the IME fee from Dr. 
Bansal ($4,390.00) pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
 
In Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 436 
(Iowa 2015), the Iowa Supreme Court held, “a physician's report becomes a cost 
incurred in a hearing because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor's testimony.” 
However, only the cost for preparation of the report, introduced in lieu of the expert's 
trial testimony, is a permissible cost. Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 436 (Iowa 2015); Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., 
File No. 5055494 (Appeal December 2018). 
 
In this case, Dr. Bansal did not itemize his billing to delineate the amount of time 
spent reviewing records, performing an evaluation, and preparing a report. As such, I 
find it would not be appropriate to assess the cost of his evaluation. 
 
In total, I conclude a total of $426.00 of claimant’s costs should be assessed 
against defendants. 
    
ORDER 
  
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
  
Defendants shall pay claimant weekly permanent total disability benefits 
commencing on October 23, 2021, through the date of this decision and continuing into 
the future until claimant is no longer permanently and totally disabled. 
  
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated weekly rate of seven hundred 
seventy-six and 45/100 dollars ($776.45). 
  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent as required by Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 

PAULLIN V. MIDWEST VIKING, INC. 
Page 19 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for all out-of-pocket medical expenses, 
reimburse any third-party payor for past medical expenses paid on behalf of claimant, 
and satisfy any outstanding past medical expenses by either paying those funds directly 
to claimant or to the medical providers, but in all events shall hold claimant harmless for 
the past medical expenses and mileage. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant's costs in the amount of four hundred 
twenty-six and 00/100 dollars ($426.00). 
 
Defendants shall timely file all reports as required by 876 IAC 11.7. 
  
Signed and filed this ___4th __ day of December, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Thomas Palmer (via WCES) 
Justin Burroughs (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
 
  
