Case Number: 21012392.01
Case Title:  TREMAINE, JAMES V. ARCONIC CORP.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Tremaine James-21012392.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JAMES TREMAINE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 21012392.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
ARCONIC CORP., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AIU INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
         Head Notes: 1108; 1800; 1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
The claimant, James Tremaine, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Arconic, Inc. (“Arconic”) and its insurer, AIU Insurance Co. 
(National Union Fire of Pitts. PA). Rocco Motto appeared on behalf of the claimant. Troy 
Howell appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
 
The matter came on for hearing on February 8, 2024, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips. Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-3, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-O. All of the exhibits were received into evidence without 
objection.   
 
The claimant testified on his own behalf. Heidi Krafka was appointed the official 
reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding. The evidentiary record closed at 
the conclusion of the hearing, and the matter was considered fully submitted following 
briefing by the parties on March 27, 2024.     
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-22  10:40:11     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 2 
 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
  
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on August 12, 2021.   
 
3. That, although entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits cannot be stipulated, the claimant was off work from December 7, 
2021 to January 18, 2022.   
 
4. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the claimant 
returned to work at the same or higher wages and thus pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v), any permanent partial disability benefits would be 
considered upon a functional basis rather than a reduction in earning 
capacity.   
 
5. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the proper 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded, is December 16, 2022. 
 
6. That, at the time of the work injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were one 
thousand four hundred seventy-nine and 74/100 dollars ($1,479.74) per 
week, that the claimant was married and entitled to five exemptions. The 
resulting stipulated weekly compensation rate was nine hundred sixty-four 
and 60/100 dollars ($964.60).     
 
7. That the defendants are entitled to a credit pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.38(2) for payment of sick pay or disability benefits in the amount of two 
thousand five hundred seventy-eight and 97/100 dollars ($2,578.97) for short-
term disability benefits paid from December 7, 2021 to January 18, 2022. 
 
8. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibits 2 and 3 were paid.   
 
 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.     
 
 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 3 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits from December 7, 2021 to January 18, 2022.   
 
4. The extent of permanent partial disability benefits, should any be awarded. 
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
  
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to a specific taxation of costs, and the 
amount of those costs.  
 
The defendants note in several spots in the hearing report that it is their contention that:  
 
Claimant temporarily injured his left hip and left groin on August 12, 2021 
but affirmatively state: 1) that such injuries were only temporarily 
exacerbated and subsequently returned to their pre-August 12, 2021 
baseline; 2) that such injuries did not cause Claimant’s left hip replacement 
and/or December 7, 2021 left hip replacement surgery; and 3) that such 
injuries did not cause any permanent impairment or permanent disability.   
 
See Hearing Report, pg. 1.   
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
James Tremaine, the claimant, was 42 years old at the time of the hearing. 
(Hearing Transcript, p. 10) He graduated from high school. (Id.) Subsequent to his 
graduation from high school, he joined the United States Marine Corps. (Hr. Tr., p. 11) 
He served in the Marine Corps until 2002, at which time he was medically retired due to 
suffering a face injury and subsequent migraines. (Id.) This incident impaired his long-
term memory. (Hr. Tr., pp. 12-13) His accident also resulted in the implantation of two 
plates, one in his cheek and one under his right eye. (Id.) The Veterans’ Administration 
(“VA”) determined that the claimant suffered a 60 percent disability due to his facial 
and/or head injuries. (Hr. Tr., p. 11) At the time of the hearing, Mr. Tremaine continued 
to take medications for his migraines. (Hr. Tr., p. 13) He continued to see a neurologist 
every three months for treatment. (Hr. Tr., pp. 13-14) 
  
Mr. Tremaine earned two bachelor's degrees from Kaplan University in 2010. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 10) His degrees are in business management and professional studies. (Id.)   
 
The claimant began working for Arconic in 2014. (Hr. Tr., p. 15) For the last eight 
years, he has been a union steward. (Hr. Tr., p. 16) Since joining Arconic, he worked as 
an NC operator and a thermal equipment operator. (Hr. Tr., p. 15) Since 2017, he 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 4 
 
worked as a complex operator. (Id.) As a complex operator, he lifted 50 pounds, 
climbed in and out of a truck, and climbed on tabletop molds. (Id.) 
  
The claimant previously suffered a back injury while working for Arconic in 2014 
or 2015. (Hr. Tr., p. 14) Since that time, he has had three back surgeries. (Id.) Mr. 
Tremaine could not recollect any injuries to his left hip during his employment at 
Arconic. (Hr. Tr., pp. 16-18) He previously treated for left hip issues, but could not recall 
this due to his long-term memory issues. (Id.) 
 
For example, in 2015, he had abdominal x-rays taken, which showed a 
prominent femoral neck that may have caused bilateral femoral acetabular 
impingement. (Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-2) In October of 2016, he wanted to lose weight due 
to pain in his knees, hips, back and feet. (JE 1, p. 3) An MRI was ordered in August of 
2017 due to Mr. Tremaine’s complaints of low back pain that extended into both of his 
hips and his left knee. (JE 1, p. 5) The MRI showed the results of a previous spinal 
surgery and mild disc bulging at several levels. (JE 1, p. 7)   
 
In January of 2018, Mr. Tremaine called a doctor’s office complaining of low back 
and left hip pain. (JE 2, p. 4) He opined that it felt as though his left hip shifted to the 
side. (Id.) He denied trauma to the hip. (Id.) X-rays performed in February of 2018 
showed bilateral osteophyte formation at the lateral femoral head neck junctions with 
some mild narrowing. (JE 2, p. 17) He was diagnosed with low back pain and told to see 
an orthopedic physician for further evaluation. (JE 2, p. 19)  
  
On December 28, 2018, Mr. Tremaine visited Matthew Christophersen, M.D., at 
Davenport Surgical Group. (JE 1, pp. 8-11) Mr. Tremaine complained of left groin pain 
that extended back over several years. (JE 1, p. 8) He also experienced occasional pain 
on the right. (Id.) Lifting heavy weight and physical activity aggravated his issues. (Id.) 
He was diagnosed with an inguinal hernia and scheduled for a laparoscopic repair. (JE 
1, p. 11)  
 
Mr. Tremaine visited with Peter Merrell, PA-C, at ORA Orthopedics on August 6, 
2019. (JE 4, pp. 27-28) He complained of left anterior hip pain dating back about six 
weeks. (JE 4, p. 27) There was no traumatic onset of the pain. (Id.) Upon examination, 
he displayed pain with flexion in his left hip along with positive impingement. (Id.) X-rays 
of the left hip were ordered, which showed “very large pistol-grip deformities of bilateral 
hips with some superior joint space narrowing and acetabular osteophyte formation.” 
(Id.) He was provided with an injection of Kenalog and recommended physical therapy. 
(Id.) 
 
He returned to ORA Orthopedics on October 8, 2019, with continued complaints 
of left hip issues. (JE 4, p. 30) Specifically, he noted no more pain in his left hip, but 
complained that he felt as though his hip was catching with range of motion. (Id.) He 
was diagnosed with left hip “FAI with very large CAM lesion and early arthritis.” (Id.) It 
was recommended that he have another left hip injection. (Id.) 
 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 5 
 
Andrea Wehrle, PA-C, examined Mr. Tremaine at an urgent care at ORA 
Orthopedics on November 4, 2020, for complaints of “several joint pains” following a fall 
while carrying boxes. (JE 4, pp. 33-34) He located some of his pain to the lateral aspect 
of his left hip, especially while standing and walking. (JE 4, p. 33) He also experienced 
pain while walking up his stairs. (Id.) The physician’s assistant recommended that the 
claimant rest, use ice or heat, and take anti-inflammatories for pain relief. (Id.) He was 
offered a work release, but declined. (JE 4, p. 34) 
 
On November 13, 2020, Andrew Bries, M.D., visited with Mr. Tremaine at ORA 
Orthopedics. (JE 4, pp. 35-36) Mr. Tremaine continued to complain of pain in his left 
hip, and clicking in his groin. (JE 4, p. 35) He displayed pain with internal rotation and 
positive impingement signs. (Id.) Dr. Bries reviewed the prior imaging, which he opined 
showed “FAI with joint space narrowing…” along with about 2 mm of joint space in the 
left hip with a large cam lesion. (Id.) Dr. Bries diagnosed Mr. Tremaine with left hip pain, 
FAI with a probable labral tear, and early osteoarthritis. (Id.) Dr. Bries recommended 
and performed an injection into the left hip, to be followed by over-the-counter anti-
inflammatory medication, and physical therapy. (JE 4, pp. 35-36)   
 
Mr. Tremaine stopped attending physical therapy in December of 2020, at which 
time he was discharged. (JE 5, p. 65)   
 
Dr. Bries re-examined Mr. Tremaine on January 5, 2021, for his continued off-
and-on left hip pain. (JE 4, p. 38) The left hip pain depended upon what activities he 
undertook. (Id.) Dr. Bries recommended that Mr. Tremaine proceed with exercises for 
his hip “…until he is ready to move forward with surgery.” (Id.) It is unclear what that 
surgery might be. (Id.) 
 
During a visit with Quad City Family Physicians, P.C., on January 26, 2021, Mr. 
Tremaine told the provider that he had pain in his hips. (JE 3, pp. 23-26) He was told to 
work on losing weight. (JE 3, p. 26) 
 
During February and March of 2021, Mr. Tremaine visited Rheumatology 
Associates for complaints of mild diffuse joint pain. (JE 6, pp. 81-91) There is minimal 
mention of the left hip or groin. (Id.) By the end of March, Mr. Tremaine had a consult for 
chronic severe low back pain. (JE 7, pp. 92-94)   
 
On August 12, 2021, the claimant was working in an unfamiliar pit at Arconic. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 20) He prepared to load buckets with scalpings, which are tiny pieces of metal, 
which would then be loaded into a melter. (Id.) He carried a load of cardboard as he 
descended stairs to enter the well of the pit. (Id.) While doing so, he fell on broken 
steps. (Id.) As he fell, he caught himself, but instantly felt a stabbing pain in his left side 
and left groin area. (Id.) He testified that he never previously felt pain that severe in that 
part of his body. (Hr. Tr., p. 21) He then told his supervisor, Amanda Lux, about the 
injury. (Id.) She took photos of the stairs, asked Mr. Tremaine if he was okay, and told 
him if he needed anything to let her know. (Hr. Tr., p. 22) He never asked to see plant 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 6 
 
medical providers, nor was he directed to plant medical providers. (Defendants’ Exhibit 
O, p. 64)   
 
Two weeks later, Ms. Lux approached Mr. Tremaine and advised that he should 
go to “medical.” (Hr. Tr., p. 22) This happened on August 26, 2021, when first aid was 
provided by a nurse at Arconic. (JE 8, pp. 95-99) He recounted the incident on the stairs 
and the onset of left groin pain to the nurse. (Id.) He told the nurse that his left groin 
pain did not show improvement, and had worsened. (JE 8, p. 98; Ex. O, p. 64) He 
favored his left side while walking. (JE 8, p. 98) The nurse recommended that he 
alternate ibuprofen and Tylenol. (JE 8, p. 99) He was allowed to work with no 
restrictions, and told to work at a slower pace. (Id.) 
 
 
Mr. Tremaine saw Arconic medical again on August 27, 2021, for his left groin 
pain. (JE 8, p. 100) He complained of unchanged left groin pain located deep into his 
groin. (Id.) The nurse recommended he alternate ice and heat, and continue to take 
over the counter medication. (Id.) He was again returned to work with no restrictions. 
(Id.) 
  
On September 2, 2021, Mr. Tremaine had imaging done of his left pelvis and 
lateral hip. (JE 1, pp. 12-13; JE 8, p. 102) The imaging showed a prominent bony 
protuberance at the junction of each femoral head and neck. (Id.) The radiologist opined 
that this was commonly seen with femoroacetabular impingement syndrome. (Id.) The 
imaging also showed bilateral joint space narrowing which was worse on the left. (Id.) 
The radiologist opined that this appeared to be osteoarthritis. (Id.) 
 
Theodore Koerner, M.D., of Arconic’s medical team, evaluated Mr. Tremaine on 
September 7, 2021. (JE 8, pp. 103-104) Mr. Tremaine recounted the details of his 
incident wherein he claims to have hyperextended his left leg causing left groin pain. 
(JE 8, p. 103) Dr. Koerner observed the claimant to have full passive range of motion in 
the left hip, along with mild subjective tenderness with adduction. (Id.) Dr. Koerner also 
reviewed the x-rays done on September 2, 2021, and opined that they showed left 
osteoarthritis. (Id.) He diagnosed the claimant as follows:  
1. Pre-existing, non-work-related, bilateral Femoro-acetabular Impingement 
Syndrome.   
2. Pre-existing, non-work-related, bilateral osteoarthritis, L greater than R. 
3. Mild work-related exacerbation of #1 and #2, resolved to baseline after 26 
days of conservative therapy. 
4. The above opinions on medical causation are based on medical certainty, as 
determined by a preponderance of the available evidence.   
(Id.) Dr. Koerner placed the claimant at maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) and 
opined that the claimant had a work-related exacerbation of his pre-existing pathologies. 
(Id.) Furthermore, Dr. Koerner opined that the claimant returned to his pre-injury 
baseline, and returned him to work without restrictions. (Id.)    
 
After having an x-ray, he was told that he had arthritis and should seek his own 
medical care, as it was not work related. (Hr. Tr., p. 24) He testified that his pain 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 7 
 
increased over the next few weeks, including his experiencing additional difficulties with 
walking from the gate to his production location. (Id.) At that time, he decided to visit 
ORA. (Id.) 
 
On November 10, 2021, Mr. Tremaine had his first visit at ORA following his fall 
at Arconic. (JE 4, pp. 39-42) In anticipation for his visit, he filled out a form indicating 
that he slipped down stairs while at work, feeling an immediate pain in his left groin. (JE 
4, p. 39) He located his pain mostly to his groin, but indicated that it migrated to his 
lateral hip. (Id.) He also claimed issues with lifting his left leg. (Id.) Dr. Bries noted that 
Mr. Tremaine had pain since September, and that he slipped which “really kind of flared 
it up.” (JE 4, p. 41) He denied a history of injections, or physical therapy for his left hip. 
(Id.) Dr. Bries observed that the claimant had pain with passive hip flexion, along with 
pain during internal rotation. (JE 4, p. 42) Dr. Bries reviewed prior x-rays, from 
September 2, 2021, which showed “…severe osteoarthritis with a large cam lesion and 
joint space obliteration, worse on the left than the right.” (Id.) Based upon his 
examination and review, Dr. Bries diagnosed Mr. Tremaine with left hip osteoarthritis 
“…who is too far gone for hip arthroscopy for the CAM lesion.” (Id.) Dr. Bries 
recommended a surgical solution for the claimant’s left hip issues, with a left hip 
injection in the interim. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Bries referred Mr. Tremaine to Joseph Martin, M.D., for continued care, on 
November 30, 2021. (JE 4, pp. 45-46) Mr. Tremaine complained of left groin pain 
following his work incident. (JE 4, p. 45) His symptoms worsened with walking, stairs, 
exercising, and kneeling. (Id.) Dr. Martin ordered x-rays and reviewed them. (Id.) He 
opined that the x-rays showed “severe bone on bone osteoarthritis with superior wear, a 
cam lesion, and osteophyte formation”. (Id.) He diagnosed the claimant with severe 
chronic primary left hip osteoarthritis. (Id.) Dr. Martin recommended a total left hip 
arthroplasty. (Id.) 
 
On December 7, 2021, Dr. Martin performed a left total hip replacement on Mr. 
Tremaine due to his diagnosis of osteoarthritis in the left hip. (JE 4, p. 48; JE 9, pp. 106-
107) His surgery was uncomplicated. (JE 9, p. 106) He started physical therapy almost 
immediately following surgery. (JE 5, pp. 67-69) 
 
The claimant attended his first outpatient physical therapy session with Rock 
Valley Physical Therapy on December 10, 2021. (JE 5, pp. 70-73) Mr. Tremaine noted 
doing “ok,” but had some questions about using a walker versus a cane. (JE 5, p. 70) 
Therapy was performed. (Id.) 
 
Mr. Tremaine had a post-surgical follow-up visit with Dr. Martin on December 17, 
2021. (JE 4, p. 49) He walked with help from a cane and noted beginning physical 
therapy. (Id.) Dr. Martin opined that Mr. Tremaine was doing great, and removed his 
staples. (Id.) He recommended that the claimant continue physical therapy, exercise on 
his own, and gradually walk further. (Id.) 
 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 8 
 
On December 27, 2021, Jessica McKearney, NP-C examined Mr. Tremaine at 
ORA’s urgent care clinic for complaints of left knee pain. (JE 4, pp. 50-51) Mr. Tremaine 
noted that he was getting into the shower when he slipped. (JE 4, p. 50) He caught 
himself, but had pain in his left knee, which he rated 6 out of 10. (Id.) Ms. McKearney 
offered the claimant a left knee injection, which he accepted. (Id.) 
   
Mark Hichborn, PA-C, examined Mr. Tremaine at ORA on January 18, 2022. (JE 
4, p. 52) Mr. Tremaine continued to attend physical therapy following his left hip 
replacement. (Id.) He continued to complain of left knee pain during this visit. (Id.) He 
was provided with prescriptions and told to return in six weeks for additional follow-up 
care. (Id.) Mr. Hichborn provided Mr. Tremaine with a return to work with no restrictions. 
(JE 4, p. 53) Mr. Tremaine testified that it was Dr. Martin that provided him with a work 
release based upon his request to be released to work without restrictions. (Hr. Tr., pp. 
25-26) Mr. Tremaine further testified that he requested a work release without 
restrictions because he experienced financial problems while only being paid short-term 
disability. (Hr. Tr., p. 26) 
 
Mr. Tremaine had a return to work evaluation at Arconic on January 18, 2022. 
(JE 8, p. 104) He had no noticeable limp, and denied pain or numbness on examination.  
(Id.) He was not cleared to work yet, as he continued to attend physical therapy. (Id.) 
 
Arconic conducted another return to work evaluation on January 19, 2022. (JE 8, 
pp. 104-105) The record documented Mr. Tremaine telling the evaluator, “I am so much 
better, could barely walk before surgery.” (JE 8, p. 104) He again denied numbness, 
weakness, or tingling in his left hip. (Id.) He walked with a normal gait. (Id.) He displayed 
full range of motion in his hip and knee, and could squat without difficulty. (JE 8, p. 105) 
He was allowed to return to work without restrictions. (Id.)  
   
Mr. Tremaine was discharged from physical therapy on January 25, 2022, 
following his attendance at nine sessions of physical therapy. (JE 5, pp. 77-80) Mr. 
Tremaine told the therapist that he returned to work, had no issues, and felt better than 
he did before the surgery. (JE 5, p. 77) He exhibited a low pain score. (Id.) The therapist 
opined that Mr. Tremaine met his goals. (Id.) 
 
On March 8, 2022, Mr. Hichborn again examined Mr. Tremaine’s left hip. (JE 4, 
p. 54) Mr. Tremaine explained that his left hip was “doing better and better…” and felt 
“…stronger and stronger.” (Id.) He was observed ambulating with a normal gait pattern, 
and advised to continue his exercises. (Id.) Mr. Hichborn counseled Mr. Tremaine to 
continue strengthening his left leg and progress his activities as he could tolerate. (Id.)  
Mr. Tremaine was asked to return in nine months, as that would be one year since his 
surgery. (Id.) 
 
Mr. Tremaine saw Dr. Martin again on December 9, 2022, for his one-year post 
surgery follow-up. (JE 4, p. 56) Mr. Tremaine noted doing well overall, despite lingering 
weakness on the left side. (Id.) Dr. Martin noted no limp by the claimant. (Id.) Dr. Martin 
opined that Mr. Tremaine had a well-functioning left hip arthroplasty and that he also 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 9 
 
had moderate to severe osteoarthritis in his right hip. (Id.) Dr. Martin recommended that 
Mr. Tremaine avoid high impact activities, such as running or jumping. (Id.)    
 
On December 16, 2022, Dr. Martin wrote a letter in response to a missive from 
Mr. Tremaine’s counsel. (JE 4, pp. 57-58) The letter contained Dr. Martin’s opinions as 
to Mr. Tremaine’s condition. (Id.) Dr. Martin noted that the claimant had a slip and fall at 
work, and was then diagnosed with left hip osteoarthritis. (JE 4, p. 57) Based upon this, 
Dr. Martin opined that Mr. Tremaine exacerbated a pre-existing condition when he fell at 
work. (Id.) Dr. Martin placed the claimant at maximum medical improvement (“MMI”), 
and provided an impairment rating based upon the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Id.) Dr. Martin felt that Mr. Tremaine had a good 
functioning left hip replacement, and was entitled to a 37 percent lower extremity 
impairment. (Id.) This equated to a 15 percent whole person impairment. (Id.) He 
recommended Mr. Tremaine avoid crawling at work, as well as avoiding repetitive lifting 
over 40 pounds. (JE 4, p. 58) 
 
Dr. Martin later revised his December 16, 2022 letter, in a February 10, 2023 
letter, also addressed to claimant’s counsel. (JE 4, pp. 59-60) Dr. Martin added a 
paragraph indicating that, “…it is likely that Mr. Tremaine would have required hip 
replacement surgery at this point.  It is probably reasonable to say that his injury at work 
may have made it necessary to do this procedure sooner than if he had not had the 
injury at work.” (JE 4, p. 60) 
 
Dr. Martin responded to a check-box type letter from defendants’ counsel dated 
July 31, 2023. (Ex. F, pp. 19-21) Dr. Martin went to special lengths to remove 
information from the letter indicating that he did not agree with statements that Mr. 
Tremaine would have required left hip replacement surgery regardless of his August 12, 
2021, work incident. (Ex. F, p. 20) Though Dr. Martin agreed that “…it [was] impossible 
to state how much, if any, of your permanent impairment rating is causally related to the 
August 12, 2021[,] work incident at Arconic given Mr. Tremaine’s pre-existing left hip 
problems.” (Id.) 
 
On July 5, 2023, Dr. Bries responded to a letter from defendants’ counsel 
indicating that he agreed that Mr. Tremaine would have needed a left hip replacement 
surgery prior to the August 12, 2021 work incident. (Ex. G, p. 25) He further agreed that 
the left hip surgery was not causally related to the August 12, 2021 work incident. (Id.) 
He further indicated that Mr. Tremaine would have required the left hip surgery 
regardless of the August 12, 2021 incident. (Id.) Dr. Bries concluded with the opinion 
that the impairment rated provided by Dr. Martin is unrelated to the August 12, 2021 
work incident. (Id.) 
 
On November 3, 2023, Mr. Tremaine visited with Sunil Bansal, M.D., M.P.H. for 
an IME. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pp. 1-14) The IME was arranged by claimant’s counsel.  
(Id.) Dr. Bansal is board certified in occupational medicine. (Ex. 1, p. 1) Following the 
IME, Dr. Bansal issued a report outlining the findings of his examination on January 3, 
2024. (Ex. 1, pp. 9-14) 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 10 
 
Dr. Bansal began his report by outlining the claimant’s medical care. (Ex, 1, pp. 
1-8) Mr. Tremaine outlined the work incident wherein he missed a step and almost fell 
causing an immediate stabbing pain in his left groin. (Ex. 1, pp. 7-8) Mr. Tremaine told 
Dr. Bansal that he had no issues or treatment in his left hip prior to the August of 2021 
work incident. (Ex. 1, p. 8) Mr. Tremaine felt that he recovered well from his left hip 
replacement, but that he could “…definitely feel the difference.” (Ex. 1, p. 9)  He felt that 
his left hip was better than prior to the surgery, though it was “…not perfect.” (Id.) He 
could walk normally with no problem, but reported pain with bending, kneeling, and 
using stairs. (Id.) Mr. Tremaine noted that he did not work on his feet all day, and mostly 
sat for 75 percent of his day. (Ex. 1, p. 11) He reported bending and squatting for 10 
percent of his day, and standing or walking to the remainder. (Id.) Finally, he noted no 
difficulty with his job duties, despite some residual soreness by the end of the day. (Id.) 
  
The report transitioned to a recounting of Dr. Bansal’s examination of the 
claimant. (Ex. 1, p. 9) Dr. Bansal found no tenderness to palpation over the left hip, nor 
any leg length discrepancy. (Id.) There also was no “accentuation of pain” when he 
internally and externally rotated the claimant’s left hip. (Id.) Dr. Bansal found Mr. 
Tremaine to have full range of motion and strength in his left hip. (Id.) Mr. Tremaine also 
showed no loss of sensory discrimination in his left lower extremity. (Id.) Finally, Dr. 
Bansal noted that Mr. Tremaine ambulated with a normal gait. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Bansal continued the report by offering his opinions as to Mr. Tremaine’s 
condition. (Ex. 1, p. 10) First, he diagnosed Mr. Tremaine with aggravation of left hip 
osteoarthritis, and aggravation of femoroacetabular impingement. (Id.) Dr. Bansal 
opined that Mr. Tremaine aggravated his left hip osteoarthritis and femoroacetabular 
impingement when he fell on the broken steps at work on August 12, 2021. (Ex. 1, p. 
11) This accelerated the need for a hip replacement. (Id.) Namely, Mr. Tremaine’s 
hyperextension of his left lower extremity can cause “…excessive strain on the anterior 
structures, including the muscles, tendons, and the joint capsule.” (Id.) Dr. Bansal felt 
that the claimant’s pre-existing femoroacetabular impingement and osteoarthritis were 
particularly concerning in light of his hyperextension, as the hyperextension “…likely 
exerted significant stress on the already compromised hip joint.” (Id.) According to Dr. 
Bansal, this additional trauma aggravated the mechanical stress on the claimant’s hip 
joint resulting in an acceleration of the wear and tear of the joint surfaces and cartilage. 
(Id.) This combination, per Dr. Bansal’s report, “…often results in a more rapid 
progression of the disease than would be expected from the degenerative condition 
alone.” (Ex. 1, p. 12) Dr. Bansal opined that the pre-injury medical records for his left hip 
indicated “…a consistent pattern of left hip pain and early signs of arthritis.” (Id.) Dr. 
Bansal agreed with the opinion of Dr. Martin insofar as he felt that the claimant’s pre-
existing osteoarthritis was significantly worsened by his work injury. (Id.) Dr. Bansal 
referenced Table 17-33 of the Guides to provide the claimant with the same 37 percent 
left lower extremity impairment or 15 percent whole person impairment, which is 
identical to the rating provided by Dr. Martin. (Ex. 1, p. 14) 
  
Dr. Bansal opined that the claimant would likely need a revision hip replacement 
for future medical care. (Ex. 1, p. 13) Dr. Bansal recommended permanent restrictions 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 11 
 
of avoiding frequent kneeling, squatting, using multiple stairs, or climbing ladders. (Ex. 
1, p. 14) 
 
Rick Garrels, M.D. performed an IME on the claimant, at the arrangement of 
Arconic, on December 29, 2023. (Ex. L, pp. 39-44) Dr. Garrels is board certified in 
occupational medicine. (Ex. M, p. 47) Subsequent to the examination, Dr. Garrels 
issued a report outlining the findings of the IME. (Ex. L, pp. 39-1) 
 
In preparing his report, Dr. Garrels reviewed a number of medical records. (Ex. L, 
pp. 43-44) He also interviewed the claimant regarding his job duties and how his injury 
occurred. (Ex. L, p. 42) Mr. Tremaine reported a perceived weakness when he 
attempted to get up. (Id.) He proceeded to examine the claimant and found him to have 
a mild restriction in range of motion with extension and external rotation of 10 degrees.  
(Ex. L, p. 43) He had no issues with strength, though he had issues with fully squatting. 
(Id.) He displayed a normal gait. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Garrels continued his report by answering a series of questions based upon 
his examination of Mr. Tremaine. (Ex. L, p. 39) Dr. Garrels opined that Mr. Tremaine’s 
left hip osteoarthritis “…was a well-established pre-existing condition prior to the alleged 
August 12, 2021 work incident…  It was not caused by the alleged August 12, 2021 
work incident at Arconic.” (Id.) Additionally, Dr. Garrels felt that Mr. Tremaine’s left hip 
femoroacetabular impingement (“FAI”) was also a pre-existing condition that was not 
caused by his work incident at Arconic. (Id.) Dr. Garrels noted that Dr. Bries 
recommended surgical intervention for the claimant’s left hip on January 5, 2021, and 
that based upon this, the surgery would have happened even if the claimant had not 
had an incident on August 12, 2021. (Ex. L, p. 40) Since the claimant’s left hip issues 
pre-existed the work incident and were not related to the August 12, 2021 work incident, 
Dr. Garrels concluded that Mr. Tremaine had no permanent impairment pursuant to the 
AMA Guides. (Id.) Dr. Garrels agreed with Dr. Martin’s recommendations for permanent 
restrictions; however, they were not related to any incident at Arconic. (Id.) Dr. Garrels 
recommended no further medical treatment for the claimant. (Ex. L, p. 41) 
 
Mr. Tremaine testified to walking with a slight limp, and needing to use handrails 
when climbing stairs. (Hr. Tr., pp. 26-28) He could not take a first step with his left lower 
extremity. (Id.) Further, he experienced weakness in his left lower extremity. (Id.) At 
work, he struggled with roping off molds and walking from the gate of Arconic to his 
work location. (Id.) 
 
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Tremaine had no additional medical treatment 
planned. (Hr. Tr., p. 27) However, he testified that due to his age, Dr. Martin felt that he 
would need another hip replacement in 10 to 15 years. (Id.) 
 
According to pay records submitted in the record, Mr. Tremaine earned sixty-five 
thousand seven hundred thirty-nine and 31/100 dollars ($65,739.31) in 2020. (Ex. A, p. 
1) He earned seventy-five thousand eight hundred eighty-six and 76/100 dollars 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 12 
 
($75,886.76) in 2021. (Ex. A, p. 2) In 2022, the claimant earned eighty-five thousand 
nine hundred ninety-two and 98/100 dollars ($85,992.98) at Arconic. (Ex. A, p. 3) 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
 
Causation 
 
The parties dispute whether or not the claimant sustained a permanent disability 
to his left hip as a result of his work injury on August 12, 2021. The claimant alleges that 
the incident on August 12, 2021 resulted in the need for a left hip replacement surgery 
and permanent impairment to his left hip. The defendants allege that the claimant 
suffered a temporary aggravation to his pre-existing left hip issues, and that the 
temporary aggravation did not necessitate the resulting left hip replacement. The 
defendants further argue that the claimant already required a left hip replacement 
surgery prior to the work incident.   
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable, 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).    
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011). The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.” Id. The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part. Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156. When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore, is also relevant and material to the 
causation question.    
 
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920). While a 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 13 
 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).    
 
It is well established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation. Iowa Dep’t. of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990). The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
 
[A] disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to 
finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause or whether the employment 
was a proximate contributing cause.   
 
Musselman v. Ce. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).   
 
It is also well settled in Iowa that an employer is liable for all consequences that 
naturally and proximately flow from an accident to an employee in the usual course of 
their employment. Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-68, 255 N.W. 480, 
482 (1936). Further disability is compensable when the further disability is the proximate 
result of the original injury. Id.   
 
Before addressing the bulk of the matter, it is vital to address the claimant’s 
credibility. The claimant sustained injuries to his face and head while in the Marine 
Corps. He testified to having significant memory issues as a result of these injuries. His 
memory issues were so significant that he failed to remember complaints to his left hip 
that predated the August 12, 2021 work incident. He also changed his testimony as it 
related to the distance between broken steps and the bottom of the “well” in which he 
was working on the day of the accident. It is unclear if this is due to his memory issues.  
He also changed his version of the incident on at least one occasion, indicating a fall 
rather than his testimony of his catching himself prior to falling. Considering the 
foregoing, especially the claimant’s significant acquired memory issues, it is difficult for 
me to consider the claimant to be a credible witness when he recounts his injury history. 
    
As noted, the claimant alleges that he sustained a left hip injury as a result of a 
work incident on August 12, 2021. The claimant alleges that his hip injury resulted in the 
need for a left hip replacement. The claimant has a significant history of left hip 
complaints that predate the alleged work injury. In 2015, Mr. Tremaine had x-rays taken 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 14 
 
which showed a prominent femoral neck that the radiologist opined may have caused 
bilateral femoral acetabular impingement (“FAI”). He reported pain in his hips again in 
October of 2016, when he expressed a desire to lose weight.   
 
By January of 2018, Mr. Tremaine called a doctor’s office complaining of left hip 
pain and a feeling as though his left hip shifted to one side. X-rays showed osteophyte 
formation at the lateral femoral head neck junctions with mild narrowing. He was 
referred to an orthopedic physician for further evaluation. He eventually treated with 
ORA in August of 2019, with complaints of left anterior hip pain dating back six weeks. 
X-rays again showed “very large pistol-grip deformities of bilateral hips with some 
superior joint space narrowing and acetabular osteophyte formation.” (JE 4, p. 27) At 
that time, he was provided with an injection into his hip, and it was recommended that 
he pursue physical therapy.   
 
Mr. Tremaine returned to ORA in October of 2019 with additional complaints of 
left hip issues. He specifically noted that his pain dissipated following the previous 
injection; however, he described a feeling of his hip catching when he moved. He was 
diagnosed with left hip FAI with a very large CAM lesion, along with early arthritis. 
Another injection was recommended. He again complained of joint pain following a fall 
in November of 2020.   
 
Dr. Bries then saw Mr. Tremaine on November 13, 2020, for continued 
complaints of left hip pain and a clicking feeling in his groin. Dr. Bries observed that Mr. 
Tremaine had FAI with joint space narrowing. He noted only 2 mm of joint space in the 
claimant’s left hip along with a large cam lesion. Dr. Bries recommended physical 
therapy and provided the claimant with another injection into his left hip.   
 
Mr. Tremaine attended physical therapy before being discharged in December of 
2020. In January of 2021, Dr. Bries again saw Mr. Tremaine to follow-up on his left hip 
pain. Mr. Tremaine told Dr. Bries that the left hip pain varied depending on what 
activities he performed. Dr. Bries recommended that Mr. Tremaine proceed with hip 
exercises at home until he was ready to proceed with a surgical option. It is unclear 
what that surgical option may mean based solely upon this record. Unfortunately, due to 
Mr. Tremaine’s poor memory, he had no recollection of any hip treatment. However, Dr. 
Bries responded to a letter from defendants’ counsel in July of 2023, clarifying that he 
was referring to a left hip replacement surgery.   
 
The claimant continued complaining of joint pain, including in his left hip during 
several visits to a rheumatologist in February and March of 2021.   
 
Then, on August 12, 2021, Mr. Tremaine slipped and began to fall while carrying 
cardboard into a pit. He testified that he felt a stabbing pain immediately in his left groin. 
He likened the pain to nothing that he ever previously felt. He informed his supervisor of 
the issue, but never was taken to the plant medical providers, nor did he seek any 
treatment on his own. Two weeks later, he was taken to see the nurse at Arconic, where 
he complained of left groin pain. He continued to complain of left groin pain.   

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 15 
 
 
On September 2, 2021, imaging was taken of the claimant’s left pelvis and lateral 
hip, which showed a prominent bony protuberance at the junction of the femoral head 
and neck. The radiologist opined that this was commonly seen with FAI syndrome. The 
imaging also showed narrowing of the joint space on the left, which the radiologist felt 
was osteoarthritis.   
 
Mr. Tremaine then followed-up with Dr. Koerner at Arconic. Mr. Tremaine told Dr. 
Koerner he hyperextended his left leg, which caused him to have groin pain. He 
displayed some mild tenderness to adduction in the left hip, though there is limited 
mention of his hip being his pain generator. Dr. Koerner diagnosed Mr. Tremaine with 
pre-existing, non-work-related bilateral FAI and pre-existing non-work-related 
osteoarthritis. Dr. Koerner further opined that the claimant’s condition was a mild work-
related exacerbation of the pre-existing issues with a return to baseline. He returned Mr. 
Tremaine to work without restrictions. 
   
Over the following few weeks, Mr. Tremaine felt that the pain increased in his left 
hip. He thus returned to ORA in November of 2021. Mr. Tremaine indicated that a slip at 
work flared his pain that he experienced. Dr. Bries diagnosed Mr. Tremaine with left hip 
osteoarthritis and opined that the condition was too advanced to proceed with an 
arthroscopic surgery. Dr. Bries referred the claimant to Dr. Martin, who ordered 
additional x-rays. According to Dr. Martin, the x-rays showed “severe bone on bone 
osteoarthritis with superior wear, a cam lesion, and osteophyte formation.” (JE 4, p. 45) 
He recommended a total left hip arthroplasty. This was performed on December 7, 
2021.   
 
After the surgery, Mr. Tremaine began physical therapy, and continued his 
follow-ups with Dr. Martin and ORA. By January 18, 2022, Dr. Martin released the 
claimant to return to work without restrictions. Mr. Tremaine testified that he requested 
this release, but there is no mention in the medical record of his requesting the same. 
Additionally, with Mr. Tremaine’s admitted memory issues, it is difficult to fully believe 
that he could remember specifically asking Dr. Martin for a release from care.   
 
Mr. Tremaine returned to work with Arconic on January 19, 2022, following an 
evaluation with an Arconic employee. He told the Arconic employee that he had a great 
deal of improvement since his surgery. Arconic determined he could return to work 
without restrictions.   
 
He was then discharged from physical therapy with a low pain score and no 
issues in his left hip on March 25, 2022. The therapist opined that Mr. Tremaine met his 
therapeutic goals.   
 
Mr. Tremaine continued his follow-up visits with Dr. Martin and ORA through 
December of 2022.   
 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 16 
 
Dr. Martin responded to a letter from claimant’s counsel on December 16, 2022.  
He opined that Mr. Tremaine exacerbated his pre-existing osteoarthritis when he fell at 
work.  He placed Mr. Tremaine at MMI and opined that the claimant had a good 
functioning left hip replacement, thus entitling him to a 37 percent lower extremity 
impairment, or a 15 percent whole person impairment pursuant to the Guides. This 
opinion was later edited with a paragraph stating, “…it is likely that Mr. Tremaine would 
have required hip replacement surgery at this point. It is probably reasonable to say that 
his injury at work may have made it necessary to do this procedure sooner than if he 
had not had the injury at work.” (JE 4, p. 60) 
 
Dr. Martin then responded to a check-box letter from defendants’ counsel in July 
of 2023. He went to special lengths to remove information from the letter, indicating a 
lack of agreement with statements opining that Mr. Tremaine would have required the 
left hip surgery regardless of the August 12, 2021, work incident. However, Dr. Martin 
agreed that, “…it [was] impossible to state how much, if any, of your permanent 
impairment rating is causally related to the August 12, 2021[,] work incident at Arconic 
given Mr. Tremaine’s pre-existing left hip problems.” (Ex. F, p. 20) 
 
Dr. Bries then responded to a check-box letter from defendants’ counsel, wherein 
he agreed that Mr. Tremaine required a left hip replacement surgery prior to the August 
12, 2021, work incident. He also agreed that the left hip surgery lacked a causal 
relationship to the August 12, 2021 work incident. He further concluded that the 
impairment rating provided by Dr. Martin was entirely unrelated to the August 12, 2021 
work incident.   
 
Mr. Tremaine then had an IME at the arrangement of his counsel with Dr. Bansal.  
Dr. Bansal interviewed the claimant, and the claimant recounted missing a step and 
having an immediate stabbing pain in his left groin. Mr. Tremaine told Dr. Bansal that he 
had no issues or treatment to his left hip prior to this incident; however, Dr. Bansal 
noted in his report that he reviewed records regarding left hip treatment that predated 
the claimant’s alleged work injury.   
 
Dr. Bansal diagnosed the claimant with an aggravation of left hip osteoarthritis 
and aggravation of femoroacetabular impingement, which occurred when he fell on 
broken steps at work on August 12, 2021. According to Dr. Bansal, this accelerated the 
need for a left hip replacement surgery. Dr. Bansal opined that the claimant’s 
hyperextended his left leg, and that this hyperextension exerted excess stress on the 
claimant’s damaged hip joint. This aggravated the mechanical stress on the claimant’s 
left hip, resulting in an acceleration of the wear and tear of the joint surfaces. This 
combination, according to Dr. Bansal “…often results in a more rapid progression of the 
disease than would be expected from the degenerative condition alone.” (Ex. 1, p. 12). 
Dr. Bansal concurred with Dr. Martin’s previously provided impairment rating.  
  
The defendants sent Mr. Tremaine to an IME with Dr. Garrels, who opined that 
Mr. Tremaine had well-established left hip osteoarthritis that was not caused by the 
August 12, 2021 work incident. The claimant’s left hip FAI was also a pre-existing 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 17 
 
condition that was not caused by his work incident at Arconic. Dr. Garrels noted Dr. 
Bries’ surgical recommendation in January of 2021, and used this as the basis for his 
opinion that the left hip surgery would have occurred regardless of the August 12, 2021, 
work incident. Considering the claimant’s left hip problems predated his August 12, 
2021 work incident, Dr. Garrels opined that Mr. Tremaine did not have any permanent 
impairment to his left hip related to the August 12, 2021 work incident.   
 
The question is whether the claimant’s work injury caused temporary disability 
and/or permanent disability. This question hinges on whether or not the claimant’s work 
injury necessitated his left hip replacement. The claimant points to the opinions of Drs. 
Martin and Bansal. Dr. Martin, who is a treating physician of the claimant, provides 
strong opinions in an initial letter, opining that Mr. Tremaine exacerbated or lit up his 
pre-existing arthritic condition. However, Dr. Martin proceeds to eviscerate his own 
opinion by amending his initial letter to include, “…it is likely that Mr. Tremaine would 
have required hip replacement surgery at this point. It is probably reasonable to say that 
his injury at work may have made it necessary to do this procedure sooner than if he 
had not had the injury at work.” This kind of wishy-washy language significantly 
discredits Dr. Martin’s opinions as his changes now indicate his opinion was that it was 
“probably reasonable” that Mr. Tremaine’s left hip surgery and permanent impairment 
were caused by his work injury. Dr. Martin further damaged his credibility in this case by 
his response to defendants’ check box letter, wherein he agreed that, “…it [was] 
impossible to state how much, if any, of [his] permanent impairment rating is causally 
related to the August 12, 2021[,] work incident at Arconic given Mr. Tremaine’s pre-
existing left hip problems.” It becomes apparent when reviewing all three of Dr. Martin’s 
opinions that he significantly watered them down over time, thus making them difficult to 
rely upon in arriving at a decision in this case.  
  
The next opinions are those of Dr. Bansal. In preparing his report, Dr. Bansal 
relied, at least somewhat, on the claimant’s representations of his prior treatment 
history. This included a failure to mention his substantial hip treatment in the past. 
However, Dr. Bansal did review medical records, including those that predated the work 
incident. Dr. Bansal opined that the claimant hyperextended his left leg, and that this 
hyperextension exerted excess stress on his damaged hip joint. This aggravated the 
mechanical stress on the claimant’s left hip, resulting in an acceleration of the wear and 
tear of the joint surfaces. The combination of these two issues, according to Dr. Bansal 
“…often results in a more rapid progression of the disease than would be expected from 
the degenerative condition alone.” (Ex. 1, p. 12). Dr. Bansal provided a thorough 
explanation, but I am concerned by his reliance upon the subjective statements of the 
claimant, who admittedly is a poor historian.  
  
The defendants point to the opinions of Drs. Koerner, Bries, and Garrels in 
support of their position. Dr. Koerner saw the claimant at Arconic for complaints of groin 
pain and pain with motion in the left hip. It appears that Dr. Koerner only examined the 
claimant on a limited number of occasions, yet he opined that Mr. Tremaine had pre-
existing non-work-related bilateral FAI and osteoarthritis. Dr. Koerner opined that the 
claimant’s condition was a mild work-related exacerbation of these pre-existing issues 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 18 
 
followed by a return to his baseline. He allowed Mr. Tremaine to work without 
restrictions. Dr. Koerner only saw the claimant on a limited basis before providing these 
opinions. This reduces the value of his opinions in this case. 
   
Dr. Bries treated the claimant for his previous left hip complaints. Of note, Dr. 
Bries recommended a hip surgery in January of 2021, only eight months before the 
claimant’s work injury. The initial record was unclear as to what that surgical option was; 
however, Dr. Bries later clarified that he referred to a left hip replacement surgery. He 
saw the claimant again in November of 2021, and referred the claimant to see Dr. 
Martin for a surgical evaluation. Dr. Bries responded to a check-box letter indicating that 
the claimant’s left hip surgery lacked a causal relationship to the August 12, 2021 work 
incident, and that Dr. Martin’s impairment rating was entirely unrelated to the August 12, 
2021 work incident. Dr. Bries’ opinions hold significant weight in this matter, as he is the 
only doctor that treated Mr. Tremaine before and after the August 12, 2021 work 
incident.   
 
Finally, the defendants point to Dr. Garrels. Dr. Garrels provided brief opinions 
following an IME. Dr. Garrels opined that the claimant’s left hip surgery would have 
occurred regardless of the August 12, 2021 work incident, and that no permanent 
impairment resulted from the August 12, 2021 work incident. Dr. Garrels’ opinions are 
rather conclusory and lack detail as to how he arrived at them. However, they are 
consistent with the opinions of Drs. Koerner and Bries. 
 
I find the opinions of Dr. Bries to be the most persuasive. Dr. Bries treated the 
claimant prior to the alleged work injury for left hip pain. Mr. Tremaine did not remember 
his treatment with Dr. Bries; however, the medical records are clear. Dr. Bries 
recommended a left hip surgery to the claimant prior to his work injury. Dr. Bries later 
clarified that his medical record referred to a left hip replacement surgery, despite not 
explicitly saying as much. Dr. Bries is the person most knowledgeable about the 
meaning of his medical notes in a medical record. He also has no reason to be 
dishonest with the Agency or the parties, and there is no reason to doubt his memory of 
his treatment of Mr. Tremaine. Dr. Bries’ opinions are buttressed by those of Dr. Garrels 
and Dr. Koerner. Additionally, Dr. Martin’s opinion, or lack thereof, that it was “probably 
reasonable that his injury at work may have made it necessary” that Mr. Tremaine had 
his left hip surgery is not sufficient to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
claimant’s left hip injury was permanent in nature. There is insufficient evidence in the 
record to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the claimant’s work incident 
on August 12, 2021 lit up his pre-existing left hip issues. This is based on both the 
expert medical evidence and the claimant’s poor memory. Since Mr. Tremaine could not 
even remember significant left hip treatment prior to August 12, 2021, it made it difficult 
to assess whether there were significant changes to his left hip following the August 12, 
2021 work injury.   
 
Based upon the foregoing, I find that the claimant’s left hip replacement surgery 
did not arise out of and in the course of his employment, nor was it a cause of 
temporary disability, nor was it a cause of permanent disability.   

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 19 
 
 
IME Reimbursement Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for an IME performed by Dr. Bansal.   
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.     
. . .    
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for the cost of such 
an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined is 
determined not to be a compensable injury. A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.     
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).    
  
The Iowa Supreme Court determined that an “examination” required “to perform 
an impairment rating” must include certain steps as required under the AMA Guides.  
Mid American Construction, LLC, v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024). These steps 
include: determining whether an injured worker achieved MMI, reviewing past medical 
records to ascertain knowledge as to any past injuries to the injured worker, opining as 
to whether the work injury caused the impairment, conducting a physical examination of 
the claimant in order “to assess the employee’s status and perform accurate 
measurements…”, and determining a diagnosis. Id.   
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination. The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). This burden may 
be met either by “…evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to support or 
challenge the fee charged in a particular case…” or by agency expertise in adjudicating 
claims in the local area where the examination was conducted. Mid American 
Construction, LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024).   
 

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 20 
 
An opinion finding a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment 
rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. 2021).  
    
It is well accepted Iowa law that a claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for 
one IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 
842, 861 (Iowa 2009).   
 
I previously found that the claimant’s left hip injury did not arise out of and in the 
course of his employment, nor was it permanent in nature, nor was the claimant entitled 
to temporary disability benefits. Therefore, the injury is not compensable. Based upon 
the language in Iowa Code section 85.39, the claimant is not entitled to reimbursement 
for an IME in this case. 
 
Costs 
 
The claimant seeks an assessment of costs as listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 3.  
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the 
case. See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 10A.328. 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:  
 
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. 
   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the 
examination itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6). The Iowa 
Supreme Court reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing 
because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying 
medical expenses associated with the examination do not become costs of a report 
needed for a hearing, just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  
Id. (noting additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of 
the underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report 
or deposition”). The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts. See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 
5056857 (App. September 27, 2019).   

TREMAINE V. ARCONIC CORP. 
Page 21 
 
 
In my discretion, I decline to award the claimant costs. 
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
 
That the parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
 
Signed and filed this     22nd     day of May, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Rocco Motto (via WCES) 
Troy Howell (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
