Case Number: 5040800.01
Case Title:  STRONG, GREGORY V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Strong Gregory-5040800.01r.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
GREGORY STRONG, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 5040800.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY   : 
             REVIEW-REOPENING  
COLLEGE, 
  : 
 
 
DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IMPACC, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
              Headnote No.: 2905 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Gregory Strong, filed a petition for review-reopening and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from Western Iowa Tech Community College, 
employer, and IMPACC, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Dennis 
McElwain.  The defendants were represented by Nicholas Pellegrin. 
The matter came on for hearing on December 4, 2024, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 8; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 20; and defense exhibits A through H.  The claimant 
testified at hearing, in addition to Jackie Plendl.  Chris Quinlan served as the court 
reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on February 28, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The primary issue in this case is whether the claimant has proven the 
prerequisites to demonstrate he is entitled to review-reopening benefits under 
Iowa Code section 10A.317(2) (2023). 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 13, 15 and 17. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Sep-18  15:06:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination. 
4. Costs are disputed, including the medical evaluation of Sunil Bansal, M.D. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Gregory Strong was 64 years old as of the date of hearing.  He resides 
in Sloan, Iowa, and works at Western Iowa Tech Community College (WIT).  Mr. Strong 
testified live and under oath at the December 2024 hearing, and his testimony is found 
to be highly credible. 
Snapshot on June 6, 2017 
A previous arbitration hearing was held on June 6, 2017, with an arbitration 
award filed on June 18, 2018.  This decision provided a snapshot of Mr. Strong’s 
condition as of June 6, 2017, which is the law of the case.  (Defendants’ Exhibit G)  This 
decision was affirmed in an appeal decision dated December 6, 2019.  (Def. Ex. H) 
The facts set forth in Defendants’ Exhibit G constitute a snapshot of Mr. Strong’s 
condition as of June 6, 2017, and shall be summarized below.  Mr. Strong sustained a 
significant work injury on November 13, 2009, which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment.  He was 57 years old at the time and had been the Department Chair 
for Career & Technical Education since 1999. 
On November 13, 2009, Mr. Strong was in a life-altering automobile 
accident which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  On that 
date, he traveled with several co-workers to a conference.  He was in the 
front passenger seat.  Upon returning, an automobile collided into the right 
passenger door, where Mr. Strong was sitting.  (Cl. Ex. 16, p. 112)  Mr. 
Strong was assisted out of the van through the driver’s side.  He was 
taken to the closest hospital, St. Anthony’s in Carroll, Iowa.  Emergency 
treatment was provided, including a Toradol injection, and he was 
released.  His main concern at the hospital was his right shoulder.  He 
returned home with his fellow employees after he was released.  Since 
then, the claimant has undergone a long, arduous treatment regimen.  The 
medical file is complex and voluminous. 
(Def. Ex. G, p. 41)  Mr. Strong underwent approximately eight years of treatment for 
conditions in his right shoulder, low back and mental health.  There was an issue 
regarding whether a new injury to his left knee he sustained in 2012 was truly a new 
injury or a sequela of the original injury.  It was determined to be both; however, it was 
ordered to be included in the 2009 claim as a sequela in the decision. 
Mr. Strong underwent two right shoulder surgeries, two left knee arthroplasties 
and a host of pain management procedures including radiofrequency ablations and a 
dorsal ganglion root stimulator trial for his low back.  He also underwent significant 
mental health treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder, major depressive disorder 
and panic disorder.  All of these conditions were causally connected to his work injury 
and he was found to have a 60 percent loss of earning capacity.  The following is a 
precise snapshot of his condition at that time. 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 3 
 
The claimant was 57 years old at the time of hearing.  He is college 
educated and he is obviously very bright, accomplished and highly-
employable.  The defendants point out that his earnings have continued to 
go up significantly after his injury.  He has been employed with WITCC 
since 1999 and his employment is stable.  WITCC is obviously an 
excellent employer.  Mr. Strong serves as the Department Chair for 
Career & Technical Education.  This is a high-level and prestigious 
position.  Mr. Strong has a number of valuable skills which would make 
him highly employable in the competitive job market as well. 
The claimant’s impairments suffered as a result of his work injury, 
however, are quite severe.  Regarding his low back, claimant suffers from 
the following diagnoses which were caused or materially aggravated by 
his automobile accident:  (1) lumbar facet syndrome, (2) lumbar 
spondylosis, and (3) lumbar radiculopathy.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 262)  He has 
undergone continuous pain management treatment since 2009 for these 
conditions.  While three radiofrequency ablations have kept the symptoms 
related to these conditions in check, there is no doubt that these 
conditions, and their corresponding symptoms would severely impact 
claimant’s ability to earn wages in the competitive job market.  Regarding 
his shoulder, claimant underwent subacromial decompression and AC 
joint resection in 2011 as a direct result of the accident.  He has 
permanent impairment and limitations in his shoulder associated with this 
injury and resulting surgery.  This impairment may be the least disabling of 
his conditions, he still experiences ongoing pain and symptoms associated 
with it.  Regarding his left knee, claimant has suffered a 50 percent 
functional disability with a working diagnosis of CRPS, or at minimum 
chronic pain.  He has undergone two total knee replacements yet 
continues to experience significant difficulties with ambulation.  He has 
undergone a protracted and continuous course of treatment since the 
2012, sequela. 
The claimant has been treated for chronic pain with a substantial and 
continuous regimen of narcotic pain medications which has caused 
ancillary health problems. 
His work restrictions are best described by Dr. Sekundiak just prior to 
hearing as “sedentary activities only.”  (Jt. Ex. 16, p. 409)  The restrictions 
suggested by Dr. Bansal are much more specific, however, they 
essentially arrive at the same location.  Mr. Strong is substantially limited 
in his functional activities as a result of his work-related accident. 
On top of all of this, claimant has posttraumatic stress disorder and 
panic disorder as a result of his work injury.  There is a debate between 
the parties as to whether the panic disorder includes an element of 
agoraphobia.  I find this debate to be technical and ultimately of little value 
to the determination of claimant’s overall disability.  Dr. Ascheman 
suggests that the appropriate elements are not present to make such a 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 4 
 
diagnosis.  There is no question Mr. Strong suffers from posttraumatic 
stress disorder and panic attacks.  After significant treatment with 
medications and four years of psychotherapy, the conditions appear 
relatively controlled although he still suffers miserable symptoms of 
depression, anxiety, panic and sleep disturbance, which impact his ability 
to function.  His GAF score at the time of his last visit was 60.  His 
conditions are deemed to be permanent.  These conditions undoubtedly 
affect claimant’s employability in the competitive job market in a variety of 
ways. 
Mr. Strong is highly-motivated.  While he is appropriately employed in 
what is essentially a sedentary position, he was previously not limited to 
such.  His job universe has been dramatically and significantly limited as a 
result of his work injury.  His ability to maintain his employment while 
undergoing continuous treatment for these conditions since 2009, is a 
tribute to both his own dedication, as well as the good faith efforts of his 
employer.  As I found, the claimant is highly credible.  I believe his 
testimony regarding his ongoing symptoms, inabilities and difficulties with 
his life since his injury.  If this claim were to be assessed for actual 
damages, outside of the statutory limitations set by Chapter 85, I suspect 
his pain and suffering, emotional distress and other common law damages 
would be much higher.  Within the confines of the workers’ compensation 
system, I find that the claimant has suffered a 60 percent loss of access to 
the competitive employment market. 
(Def. Ex. G, pp. 47-49) 
Snapshot on December 4, 2024 
Following the June 2017 arbitration hearing, Mr. Strong continued to treat with 
his authorized physicians at Siouxland Pain Clinic.  He was seen there every couple 
months to review prescriptions and provide management care.  (Jt. Ex. 1) 
In December 2018, Mr. Strong experienced an acute onset of worsening pain 
and swelling in his left knee.  (Transcript, pages 30-31)  He sought medical care quickly, 
and within a few days an infection was diagnosed requiring immediate surgery.  One of 
the key disputes in this case is whether this care was authorized.  The facts surrounding 
this treatment therefore are examined in detail. 
On December 13, 2018, Mr. Strong had a routine follow-up with his primary care 
physician.  No signs of infection in his knee were noted in this examination.  (Jt. Ex. 5, 
p. 267)  Two days later Mr. Strong presented to Morningside Urgent Care.  The note 
stated he was unable to bear weight “since last night.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 270)  Mr. Strong 
testified that the knee pain and swelling came on suddenly on Friday evening, 
December 14, 2018.  (Tr., pp. 30-31)  The clinic suspected an infection.  The following 
Monday, December 17, 2018, Mr. Strong called his attorney to report this problem.  
Claimant’s counsel immediately contacted defense counsel.  (Cl. Ex. 18, p. 171)  
Defense counsel responded quickly stating defendants could not authorize surgical care 
with such little information.  “While we are sensitive to the apparent urgent nature of Mr. 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 5 
 
Strong’s need for surgery tomorrow, based on the currently available information we are 
unable to authorize the treatment under workers’ compensation.”  (Cl. Ex. 19, p. 172)   
Mr. Strong ended up being evaluated by Michael Nguyen, M.D., at CNOS on 
December 17, 2018.  He returned and saw David Nelson, M.D., the following day.  (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 167)  The infection was diagnosed and he was scheduled for emergency 
surgery on December 19, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 231)  I find that this was undoubtedly 
emergency care.  I further find that the defendants actually denied the claim pending 
investigation.  I find that this care was authorized by operation of law. 
Since the original arbitration decision, Mr. Strong has continued to receive 
extensive treatment for his medical conditions.  For his left knee, the sudden December 
2018, infection set off treatment which ultimately required surgery and eventually a 
lifetime prescription of antibiotics.  Since 2018, the left knee condition has been Mr. 
Strong’s primary physical disability.  Numerous non-invasive treatments have been 
attempted including cold laser therapy and compound cream.  These were impractical 
while he attempted to continue working.  He has mainly managed his chronic pain 
symptoms through opioid medications and limiting his activities.  (See Jt. Ex. 1, p. 121)  
Mr. Strong testified that these flare-ups happen “often” now.  (Tr., pp. 56-57)  The 
voluminous medical records are replete with descriptions of increased swelling and 
pain.  The record demonstrates that his opioid medication regimen has become less 
effective in treating his condition over time.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 184)  His IME physician, Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., had evaluated Mr. Strong in 2017, and then again in 2024.  In 2024, Dr. 
Bansal recommended even more significant restrictions for the left knee, including more 
frequent breaks which would be impractical in most employment settings.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 
104) 
Mr. Strong also complained that his right shoulder had worsened and this is 
substantiated in the medical file.  In January 2024, his medical file documented the 
following: 
On physical examination today, there was a great deal of limitation 
through range of motion through the right shoulder due to the severity of 
pain.  Even with slight external or internal rotation of the glenohumeral 
joint, the patient had severe pain stopping the range of motion.  He was 
unable to place his hand behind his back, adduct or abduct his arm away 
from his body without considerable pain.  There was notable weakness on 
examination today, also. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 137)  A full orthopedic workup was performed in May 2024.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
186)  Mr. Strong underwent additional physical therapy at that time and also had a failed 
injection for the pain.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 191)  It appears Mr. Strong will eventually need a 
shoulder replacement surgery.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 227) 
The record further reflects that Mr. Strong’s mental health condition has 
worsened since the original hearing.  (Jt. Ex. 1)  In 2022, Mr. Strong was referred to Dr. 
Patra because of his symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 109)  During periods when he was more 
active, his anxiety would increase significantly.  Furthermore, the risk of infection 
increased his anxiety.  Unfortunately, his life has essentially revolved around his chronic 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 6 
 
pain and the fears associated with this.  He had increased and more severe panic 
attacks.  In 2022, Dr. Patra diagnosed major depressive disorder, single episode, 
moderately severe, panic disorder with agoraphobia, dysthymia, and pain disorder with 
psychological factors.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 2)  Dr. Patra recommended Ketamine infusions, 
which Mr. Strong refused because of side effects.   
The claimant has submitted a number of medical expenses for which he seeks 
reimbursement.  Claimant’s Exhibit 13 is a prescription report from his pharmacy.  
Claimant’s Exhibit 15 is a summary of his medical mileage.  Claimant’s Exhibit 17 is a 
bare bones listing of medical expenses. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first issue is whether Mr. Strong is entitled to the medical expenses set forth 
in Claimant’s Exhibits 13, 15 and 17.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by Iowa Code section 
17A.14.  The agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge 
may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in the 
courts are not controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of evidence on which 
reasonably prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of serious affairs.  Health 
care is a serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 855-56, 124 N.W.2d 
548, 553 (1963).  
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 7 
 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File No. 1254118 
(App. May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
 There are two provisions in Iowa Code Section 85.27(4) which are relevant here.  
First:  “In an emergency, the employee may choose the employee’s care at the 
employer’s expense, provided the employer or the employer’s agent cannot be reached 
immediately.”  Second:  ”An employer is not liable for the cost of care that the employer 
arranges in response to a sudden emergency if the employee’s condition, for which care 
was arranged, is not related to the employment.” 
The primary issue herein is whether Mr. Strong’s medical treatment on 
December 17, 18, and 19, 2018, qualifies as emergency care under Iowa Code Section 
85.27(4).  I find that it does.  I further find that Mr. Strong properly notified the employer 
immediately after seeking the emergency care.  I find that he complied with all of the 
provisions of this Code section and acted reasonably at all relevant times.  Since the 
defendants effectively denied this claim on December 19, 2018, the defendants have no 
authorization defense.  Having reviewed the claimant’s exhibits, I find that the 
defendants are responsible for all of the treatment for the providers listed in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 17 (at Siouxland Surgical Center, CNOS and Mercy Infectious Disease).  The 
amounts are summarily listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 17, but have not been proven.  The 
defendants are responsible for these expenses in a manner consistent with this 
decision.  The defendants are also responsible for the medications from Mr. Strong’s 
pharmacy (Claimant’s Exhibit 13), as well as the medical mileage (Claimant’s Exhibit 
15). 
The next question is whether the legal elements for review-reopening have been 
met in light of the findings of facts set forth above.  Mr. Strong alleges that his left knee, 
right shoulder, low back, and mental health have all worsened, causing an increase in 
industrial disability.  The defendants argue that his condition has not changed 
significantly.  The defendants further argue that even if his condition has worsened, the 
claimant cannot prove that his current condition is causally related to the original injury. 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 10A.315, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon.  Iowa Code section 10A.317(2) (2023).  In order to 
demonstrate eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 10A.317(2), the 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 8 
 
claimant must demonstrate what his physical or economic condition was at the time of 
the original award or settlement.  At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant 
has the burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which 
warrants an increase in compensation.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 
(Iowa 2009).  The difference can be economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American 
Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 
(1959).  Essentially, snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each 
hearing or settlement.  The claimant must prove that there is something substantially 
different between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits.  
Gosek v. Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at 392.  Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to relitigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.”  The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot.  Id.   
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  When a work-related injury causes another injury to the 
worker, this new injury (sequela) may also be considered as a work-related injury under 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws. 
When an employee suffers from a compensable injury and another condition or 
injury arises that is the consequence or result of the previous injury, the sequelae rule 
applies.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and later suffers further disability, 
which is the proximate result of the original injury, such further disability is 
compensable.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and thereafter returns to 
work and, as a result, the first injury is aggravated and accelerated so that the employee 
is more greatly disabled than they were before returning to work, the entire disability 
may be compensable.  The employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and 
proximately flow from the accident.   Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-
68, 266 N.W. 480 (1936).  
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that the snapshot of Mr. 
Strong’s condition at hearing in December 2024 is substantially different than the 
snapshot in June 2017.  His conditions in his left knee and right shoulder are 
undoubtedly significantly worse.  Moreover, his mental health condition is significantly 
worse.  Mr. Strong was not compensated for the severity of these conditions in the 
original snapshot.  I find that this warrants an increase in his industrial disability.  These 
conditions demonstrate a moderately increased industrial disability from what was 
awarded as a result of the first snapshot. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 9 
 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
Considering all of the factors of industrial disability, I find that Mr. Strong has 
sustained a 75 percent loss of earning capacity as a result of his 2009 work injury.  It 
would be challenging for Mr. Strong to find any gainful employment outside of entry 
level sedentary positions, for which he is not particularly well-suited in any event.  I 
therefore find that he is entitled to an additional 75 weeks of compensation commencing 
on the date he filed for review-reopening. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant seventy-five (75) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of seven hundred eighty-five and 86/100 dollars ($785.86) 
per week from January 3, 2023. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 13, 15, and 17. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants. 
 
 

STRONG V. WESTERN IOWA TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 10 
 
Signed and filed this _18th __ day of September, 2025. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
 Dennis McElwain (via WCES) 
 
Nicholas Pellegrin (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal perio d will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
