Case Number: 22700648.02
Case Title:  MAAS, TERRI V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Maas Teri-22700648.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TERRI MAAS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                      File No. 22700648.02 
CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
ARCH INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 1402.40, 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
1802, 1803, 2501, 2502, 2701,  
 
 
  : 
 
2907, 3202 
 
Defendants. 
  :             
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Terri Maas, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, CTI Foods Holding Co, L.L.C., as the 
employer, and Arch Insurance, as the insurance carrier.  Ms. Maas also asserts a claim 
against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  Hearing was held on May 9, 2025 via Zoom 
video conference.  The evidentiary record was left open following the arbitration hearing 
through June 10, 2025, giving defendants the opportunity to secure depositions of 
additional witnesses.  Defendants did not secure any additional depositions to be placed 
into the evidentiary record.  The evidentiary record closed on June 10, 2025, without 
any additional evidence being submitted. Counsel filed post-hearing briefs on July 18, 
2025, at which time the case was deemed fully submitted. 
The evidentiary record in the case includes joint exhibits 1-22, 24-27 and 
claimant’s exhibits 1-2.  Claimant testified live.  No other witnesses testified at the time 
of hearing.  As noted above, no additional evidence or testimony was introduced within 
the 30 days allotted at the time of hearing. 
The parties also submitted a hearing report prior to the commencement of the 
evidentiary hearing.  On that hearing report, the parties entered into certain stipulations.  
Those stipulations are accepted and relied upon in this decision without further 
comment or factual findings. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Oct-23  10:23:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of a running healing period, or in the 
alternative, an award of healing period benefits from May 1, 2023 through 
October 22, 2024. 
2. Whether claimant’s January 7, 2021, work injury is limited to a scheduled 
member or includes an unscheduled injury that should be compensated with 
industrial disability. 
3. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are appropriate at this time. 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of past medical expenses contained 
at Joint Exhibit 21. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care. 
8. Whether claimant proved a qualifying first injury on June 25, 2019. 
9. The extent of claimant’s functional loss from the asserted first qualifying 
injury. 
10.  The extent of claimant’s functional loss from the second qualifying loss to her 
left leg on January 7, 2021. 
11. If Second Injury Fund benefits are awarded, the credit to which the Second 
Injury Fund is entitled. 
12. The proper commencement date for Second Injury Fund benefits, if any. 
13. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Terri Maas, claimant, is a 54-year-old woman.  Ms. Maas quit high school during 
her senior year.  She has not obtained a GED.  After leaving high school, Ms. Maas 
obtained a welding certificate.  However, that certificate is no longer current. 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
Claimant has an extensive and varied work history.  She started as a volunteer 
candy-striper at the age of 12.  She has worked as a waitress, dishwasher, cook, 
manager of a restaurant, in the paint department at Featherlite, welding, packaging 
meat at a meat packing plant, performed line work, hauled shingles for a roofing 
company, made pizzas at Casey’s, and worked as a nurse’s aide. 
In addition, Ms. Maas worked as a machine operator at CTI Foods Holding Co., 
L.L.C., the employer.  She testified that she worked full-time and that she loved her job.  
In her role as a machine operator, Ms. Maas stood constantly, reached with her arms 
and hands, and lifted up to 50 pounds.   
On the date of her injury, January 7, 2021, Ms. Maas was working at her typical 
job.  She was moving a rack full of pepperoni.  She testified that the racks held varying 
amounts of product and weighed between 400 and 1,100 pounds when loaded.  On the 
date of her injury, Ms. Maas estimated the rack she was moving weighed more than 700 
pounds. 
Unfortunately, as Ms. Maas moved the rack on January 7, 2021, one of the 
wheels caught on a piece of metal and the rack tipped.  Ms. Maas testified that she 
attempted to prevent the rack from tipping over, but ultimately the rack fell onto Ms. 
Maas’ left leg.  Claimant testified that four co-employees had to help her out from under 
the rack.  As a result of this accident, Ms. Maas sustained an admitted left leg injury.  
She also sustained a contusion to her left torso, which subsequently resolved without 
issue.   
In addition to the left leg injury, claimant asserts that she sustained a head injury 
that ultimately resulted in the development of seizures.  Defendants dispute any 
causation between the January 7, 2021 accident and claimant’s development of 
seizures.  Interestingly, the issue of causation was only addressed by one medical 
expert.  Specifically, Selden Spencer, M.D., provided claimant treatment for her 
seizures. 
Dr. Spencer signed a proposed e-mail report drafted by claimant’s counsel on 
August 21, 2024.  In that report, Dr. Spencer opined “to a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty that Terri’s seizure disorder is directly related to the head trauma sustained on 
1/7/21 when a rack of pepperoni fell on her causing her to fall backward hitting her 
head.”  (Joint Exhibit 17, page 245)  In a subsequent report dated September 7, 2024, 
Dr. Spencer indicated that claimant reported a history to him that she fell and hit her 
head without a hardhat.  He noted that claimant did not provide a similar history close in 
time to the accident.  (Joint Ex. 17, p. 253)  Having reviewed the initial medical records, 
Dr. Spencer opined, “Without serious head injury it is hard to ascribe her subsequent 
seizures to head injury.  Serious head injury in my view would be striking the 
unprotected head with sufficient force to cause pain and loss of consciousness.”  (Joint 
Ex. 17, p. 253)   
In a last-minute additional inquiry, claimant’s counsel asked Dr. Spencer to clarify 
his opinions.  In an e-mail to claimant’s counsel dated April 25, 2025, Dr. Spencer 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
opined, “No helmet, head injury, neurological problems.  Yes.  Helmet present, no head 
injury, neurological problems.  No.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 1) 
I interpret Dr. Spencer’s string of opinions to essentially set up a factual dispute 
to be determined.  If claimant fell and hit her head with a hard hat on her head, Dr. 
Spencer does not believe the seizures she developed nearly two years later to be 
related to the work injury.  On the other hand, if claimant fell and struck her head without 
a hard hat at the time of impact, then claimant’s head injury and subsequent seizures 
are causally related to the work injury. 
Although Dr. Spencer did a nice job of setting up the factual issue to be 
determined by this agency, the factual determination is not as easy as it may seem to 
be.  Claimant’s initial reports of injury do not report specific head injury.  She did not 
seek medical care for a head injury for quite some time after the accident.  More 
importantly, claimant’s version of events at the time of hearing is not consistent with 
either clear theory espoused by Dr. Spencer.   
Specifically, claimant testified that she fell and landed with her hard hat 
remaining on her head.  However, she testified that the hard hat flew off her head on 
impact and her head bounced and hit the concrete a second time causing her head 
injury.  This specific mechanism of injury was not contemplated by Dr. Spencer or any 
other medical expert. 
Moreover, Ms. Maas is not a very good historian.  She testified at hearing that 
she was unconscious for a few seconds after the accident occurred.  She also testified 
that she had headaches and experienced nausea after the accident occurred.  Yet, 
none of the medical records or other documents generated close in time to the accident 
recorded any complaints of nausea or headaches.  Claimant does not appear to have 
reported a head injury or symptoms to most of the initial medical providers. 
In fact, medical records close in time to the injury recorded that claimant was 
“Negative for dizziness, light-headedness and headaches.”  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 65)  Just 
over two months after the accident, claimant sought treatment at the emergency room.  
At that evaluation, the treating provider recorded that claimant was “alert and oriented to 
person, place, and time.”  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 68)  She demonstrated normal thought content 
and judgment.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 68) 
Defendants point out that the initial reports of a head injury to a medical provider 
occurred a year and ten months after the accident.  Defendants assert that the first 
report of injury did not record any issues related to head injury.  Defendants also 
contend that claimant gave a recorded statement and assert that claimant reported she 
had her hard helmet on at the time of the accident and did not hurt her head.  (Joint Ex. 
5, p. 52)  Ms. Maas denies she said this to the insurance representative.  Defendants 
did not produce an audio recording from the recorded statement or even a transcript of 
the statement.  Instead, the insurance carrier produced only the notes of the adjuster 
conducting the interview.  I do not find the notes of the adjuster to be the best or most 
reliable evidence.  I question why the defendants did not produce and introduce the 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
recorded statement in audio or transcript form.  It is possible those items were simply 
lost via negligence, but introducing only the adjuster’s notes is not terribly convincing to 
the undersigned. 
Interestingly, while defendants rely upon the claimant’s denial of a head injury in 
the recorded statement, there is also a note from the adjuster as a result of the recorded 
statement.  That note reads, “Describe current symptoms:  Unknown may have been 
unconscious for a few seconds.”  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 52)  This statement, if accurate, would 
support claimant’s contention that she lost consciousness at the scene of the accident 
and make it more likely that she sustained a significant head injury.  Again, it is 
unfortunate that the recorded statement transcript and/or audio recording are not 
available to verify the actual statements made by Ms. Maas.  However, these notes 
from the adjuster suggest that claimant reported a loss of consciousness by at least 
May 18, 2021.  Defendants purport the accuracy of these notes for at least certain 
purposes. 
Claimant also points out that the employer had a video of claimant’s accident.  
Claimant introduced an affidavit from an information technology (IT) expert that affirmed 
the video existed and was provided by IT to human resources.  However, sometime 
thereafter, the employer lost or destroyed that video.  Obviously, a video of the actual 
accident would provide the best evidence of how claimant’s accident occurred and 
whether she struck her head with or without her hard hat.  The employer’s inability or 
unwillingness to produce this video speaks volumes.  If the video definitively disproved 
claimant’s theory of events, one would expect the employer to maintain multiple copies 
of the video and protect it to defend this case.  The employer’s inability to produce this 
video leaves open an inference that the video would have demonstrated evidence 
adverse to the defense.   
Ultimately, this record does not contain definitive evidence to support or defeat 
the head injury claim.  Ms. Maas is not a good historian.  Moreover, there was at least 
one instance during the hearing where the undersigned heard someone off camera 
feeding answers to claimant.  Ms. Maas denied this was the case, but her denial was 
not credible and is not accepted.  There was clearly someone in the room with Ms. 
Maas, who was off camera and attempting to provide her answers during her testimony.  
This damages Ms. Maas’ credibility both as a poor historian and based on her denial of 
something clearly observed by the undersigned. 
Claimant introduced an affidavit from Marc Heslop, an information technology 
person with the employer.  Mr. Heslop indicated in his affidavit that he observed the 
surveillance video that was subsequently lost, misplaced, or destroyed.  He testified as 
to the configuration of the hard hat claimant wore on the date of injury, and opined 
“there was no way Terri’s hard hat stayed on her head in that fall.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 
4)  This sworn affidavit could be credible evidence that claimant’s head struck the 
concrete floor without a hard hat.  However, the problem is that claimant’s trial 
testimony somewhat contradicts Mr. Heslop’s affidavit. 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
Mr. Heslop indicated that the hard hat would fall off his head if he bent over.  Yet, 
claimant testified that the hard hat apparently remained on her head until the first impact 
with the ground.  These two statements are inconsistent.  Mr. Heslop was not asked to 
comment on the scenario claimant presented at hearing and he was not subjected to 
cross-examination at hearing.  Ultimately, Mr. Heslop’s affidavit is given little to no 
weight. 
On the other hand, defendants were given additional time at the time of trial to 
depose witnesses to inquire about the hard hat and the likelihood it would have 
remained on claimant’s head.  Defendants had the advantage of hearing claimant’s trial 
testimony and could have offered contrary evidence via deposition after the hearing 
pursuant to an oral ruling entered at the time of hearing based on late evidence being 
admitted.  Defendants ultimately elected not to take any depositions or introduce 
additional evidence on this issue.  This makes Ms. Maas’ testimony appear to be more 
credible and convincing, or at least not directly challenged. 
As this evidentiary record stands, the best evidence available pertaining to the 
date of injury is claimant’s testimony about how she hit her head, lost her hard hat, and 
lost consciousness on the second impact between her head and the concrete floor.  
While claimant’s testimony is not entirely credible, defendants lost or destroyed the 
evidence (recorded statement and surveillance video) that potentially could refute her 
testimony.  Defendants elected not to introduce contradictory depositions on the issue 
of whether claimant’s hard hat remained or would have remained on her head during 
this fall.  Ultimately, claimant’s testimony is the best evidence available, and therefore, 
is accepted with respect to how her alleged head injury occurred.  It is found that 
claimant fell, hit her head with a hard hat on, that her hard hat flew off after the initial 
impact, and her head bounced a second time on the concrete floor causing her a short 
period of unconsciousness. 
I find the actual accident and events are closest to the opinions of Dr. Spencer, 
when he opined that claimant’s subsequent seizures are related to striking her head 
without a hard hat and losing consciousness.  Ultimately, I find that the preponderance 
of the available evidence demonstrates claimant sustained a head injury that resulted in 
the development of seizures and epilepsy in November 2022. 
Claimant returned to work at CTI Foods Holding Co., L.L.C., after this work injury.  
(Transcript, p. 148)  Upon returning to work, claimant was under medical restrictions.  
The employer offered claimant accommodations and was adjusting claimant’s work 
duties in conformity with her medical restrictions.  (Tr., pp. 147-150)  Claimant testified 
that she struggled upon her return to work and her restrictions fluctuated to permit more 
physical work and regressed back to sedentary when she experienced physical 
difficulties.  (Tr., p. 149)  However, after returning to work for the employer, no physician 
took claimant off work entirely.  (Tr., pp. 149-150)  Claimant ultimately voluntarily 
resigned her employment with CTI Foods in April or May 2021.  (Tr., pp. 147, 149-150)  
I find that the employer offered claimant suitable work after the injury in conformity with 
any medical restrictions in place at a given time prior to her voluntary resignation of 
employment.   

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
On June 18, 2021, claimant’s treating medical provider released her to return to 
work at full-duty status without formal medical restrictions.  (Joint Ex. 19, p. 310)  Ms. 
Maas was able to locate alternate employment at Family Dollar shortly after voluntarily 
quitting her employment at CTI Foods.  She continued to work at Family Dollar until May 
2023.  (Tr., p. 150)  She worked approximately 35 hours per week at Family Dollar until 
she left that position. 
Ms. Maas asserts that she is not yet at maximum medical improvement.  With 
respect to her left knee and leg, four treating and evaluating physicians have weighed in 
on further treatment.  Dr. Anand indicated that he did not perceive an orthopaedic issue 
for which he could provide care.  (Joint Ex. 10, p. 133).  Dr. Worple indicated that he 
had no further interventions to offer and made a referral to Mayo Clinic for evaluation.  
(Joint Ex. 11, p. 146)  Mayo Clinic declined the referral and claimant understands that 
Mayo Clinic had no additional, or alternative, treatment to offer for her left leg.  Dr. 
Recinos indicated “there is nothing I can offer her surgically speaking.”  (Joint Ex. 12, p. 
163) 
Finally, claimant obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by John 
Kuhnlein, D.O.  Dr. Kuhnlein recommended a referral to Mayo Clinic for evaluation, 
which has already been attempted and rejected, as well as pain psychology counseling.  
I find that the referral to Mayo Clinic is not a realistic option, as that request for care has 
already been rejected by Mayo Clinic.  As for the pain psychology counseling, this 
appears to be for purposes of assisting claimant in coping with chronic pain, rather than 
improving her functional abilities with the left leg.  I find the pain psychology counseling 
recommendation to be reasonable and appropriate, but also find that it is for 
maintenance and management of pain, rather than improvement of functional abilities.  I 
find claimant has achieved maximum medical improvement for the left leg. 
Only Dr. Kuhnlein has offered a permanent impairment rating pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, for claimant’s left 
knee and left leg.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined that claimant sustained a 16 percent permanent 
functional impairment as a result of loss of range of motion in the left knee.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein offers an additional 2 percent permanent functional impairment under Chapter 
18 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, for chronic pain related to a neuroma in claimant’s 
left thigh.  Defendants challenge the award of the additional 2 percent functional 
impairment and cite to prior cases in which this agency rejected Dr. Kuhnlein’s use and 
award of permanent impairment under Chapter 18 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  
(Joint Ex. 27, p. 436) 
In this case, Dr. Kuhnlein explained that the additional 2 percent functional 
impairment of the whole person is the result of a neuroma in claimant’s left thigh.  She 
would not qualify for permanent functional impairment for the neuroma otherwise.  
There is not a competing medical opinion or impairment rating.  I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
explanation and award of additional permanent impairment for this condition to be 
reasonable in this case.  Therefore, I find that claimant proved she sustained 8 percent 
permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of this left leg work 
injury.  Pursuant to Table 17-3 on page 527 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, the 8 percent permanent functional impairment of 
the whole person is equivalent to 20 percent of the left leg.   
Dr. Kuhnlein also recommended permanent work restrictions for the left leg that 
include lifting 30 pounds occasionally below waist or above shoulder or lifting 50 pounds 
occasionally from waist to shoulder.  He also recommended claimant should be able to 
sit, stand, or walk on an as tolerated basis, occasionally crawl, kneel, or walk stairs.  He 
also recommended against using leg-operated machinery with her left leg.  (Joint Ex. 
27, p. 437)  I accept these restrictions as the most credible and convincing opinions and 
restrictions in the record. 
With respect to claimant’s head injury and resulting diagnoses of epilepsy and 
seizures, the only physician offering specific opinions related to those conditions is 
Selden Spencer, M.D., claimant’s treating neurologist at the University of Iowa Hospitals 
and Clinics.  Dr. Spencer noted in a report dated August 21, 2024, that claimant 
continues to experience seizures, cannot be cleared to drive at that time, and that he 
was “not convinced her seizures are under control currently.”  (Joint Ex. 17, p. 245) 
The last medical note in evidence from the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics neurology department is dated October 21, 2024.  At that appointment, Ms. 
Maas reported she had ongoing seizures approximately twice per month.  (Joint Ex. 17, 
p. 268)  The medical provider recommended titration of medications at that visit and 
noted that claimant may experience adverse side effects with increase in medication 
dosages.  (Joint Ex. 17, p. 269)  Based on the ongoing seizures, as well as medication 
changes, it does not appear that Ms. Maas has achieved maximum medical 
improvement from her epilepsy and seizures.  In fact, it appears that her medical 
providers expected changes in medications to manage her condition with potential side 
effects and return evaluations.  No medical provider has specifically opined that 
claimant achieved maximum medical improvement for her epilepsy or seizures at the 
time of trial.  Therefore, I find that Ms. Maas is not at maximum medical improvement 
and that her claim is not yet ripe for a determination of permanent disability, if any, 
related to the epilepsy and seizures. 
Ms. Maas also asserts a claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  In this 
respect, she asserts she sustained an injury to her left arm on June 25, 2019.  The 
medical evidence of injury at the time of this injury is limited.  It appears undisputed that 
Ms. Maas sustained a comminuted left arm fracture on June 25, 2019.  However, there 
was minimal treatment for the fracture at the time of that injury.  Claimant received no 
permanent impairment or permanent restrictions after her recovery from that injury.  She 
continued to work without restrictions after recovering from the left arm fracture until her 
work injury in this case on January 7, 2021. 
Only one medical expert has offered an opinion about whether claimant 
sustained permanent impairment as a result of the left arm fracture.  Specifically, Dr. 
Kuhnlein opined in his independent medical evaluation report that Ms. Maas sustained 
four percent permanent functional impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition, resulting from reduced ranges of motion as well as a bony overgrowth in the left 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
wrist following the fracture.  (Joint Ex. 27, p. 436)  Given that Dr. Kuhnlein’s impairment 
rating is not controverted in this record, I accept his opinion and find that claimant 
proved a four percent permanent functional impairment as a result of the June 25, 2019 
left arm fracture.  Dr. Kuhnlein did not specify any permanent restrictions specifically for 
the left wrist fracture.  He specifically noted claimant “can grip or grasp without 
restrictions.”  (Joint Ex. 27, p. 437)  Dr. Kuhnlein further opined that claimant is capable 
of using hand and power tools.  (Joint Ex. 27, p. 437)  I accept Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions 
and find that claimant requires no permanent work restrictions for the June 25, 2019 left 
arm fracture. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issues are whether claimant sustained a head injury and 
whether her subsequent epilepsy and seizures are a result of the admitted January 7, 
2021 work injury.    The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Given my findings of fact pertaining to claimant’s head injury, I conclude Ms. 
Maas proved she sustained both a left leg as well as a head injury resulting in a 
diagnosis of epilepsy and seizures as a result of her work injury on January 7, 2021. 
Next, the parties submit a dispute about claimant’s entitlement to temporary total 
disability, or healing period, benefits.    Healing period compensation describes 
temporary workers’ compensation weekly benefits that precede an allowance of 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 
(Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) 
(2015).  These are:  (1) the worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is 
capable of returning to substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved 
maximum medical recovery.  Id.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing 
is complete, and the extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire 
& Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance 
medical care nor an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily 
prolongs the healing period.  Id. 
In this instance, claimant returned to work for the employer.  However, the 
relevant time period for which claimant seeks healing period benefits is from May 1, 
2023 through the date of the arbitration hearing, or alternatively, through October 2, 
2024, if claimant is not entitled to a running healing period.  Defendants dispute 
entitlement to healing period during either pertinent period of time. 
As noted in the findings of fact, claimant was given a full duty release on June 
18, 2021 and did not carry medical restrictions until evaluated by Dr. Kuhnlein for an 
independent medical evaluation on April 3, 2025 and issuance of his formal report on 
April 8, 2025.  Given the full duty release, claimant did not prove she was incapable of 
performing substantially similar employment during the claimed healing period from May 
1, 2023 through April 2, 2025.  See Iowa Code section 85.34(1) (noting entitlement to 
healing period benefits “until the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury”). 
Perhaps more importantly, healing period benefits are not payable if an employer 
offers suitable work and an injured worker voluntarily terminates her employment.  Iowa 
Code section 85.33(3) (“If the employer offers the employee suitable work and the 
employee refuses to accept the suitable work offered by the employer, the employee 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
shall not be compensated with temporary partial, temporary total, or healing period 
benefits during the period of the refusal.”);  Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Center, 780 
N.W.2d 549, 559 (Iowa 2010).  “[T]he correct test is (1) whether the employee was 
offered suitable work, (2) which the employee refused.  If so, benefits cannot be 
awarded, as provided in section 85.33(3).”  Id.  Moreover, the employer’s acceptance of 
a claimant’s voluntary resignation is “a rejection of suitable work on that date and any 
future date.”  Id. 
In her brief, claimant contends that her employment at CTI did not end voluntarily 
and asserts that she left her employment because they “consistently failed to follow her 
restrictions.”  (Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 14) Claimant cites to her testimony on 
pages 100-101 of the hearing transcript in which she testified as follows: 
Q:  And, again, in this report when you met with him, you told him when it 
comes to Liguria, that you’ve loved working there, had good relationships 
with co-workers and your supervisor, but didn’t believe they treated you 
fairly.  Do you mean that they didn’t treat you fairly in terms of your 
restrictions? 
A:  Yes. 
This testimony was offered via a leading question and is neither specific about 
the employer’s failure to offer suitable work nor convincing that the employer failed to 
offer suitable work.  As noted in the findings of fact, claimant conceded on cross-
examination at hearing that the employer was offering modified work and that she 
voluntarily resigned her employment with CTI Foods.  (Tr., pp. 147-150)  I accepted 
claimant’s cross-examination testimony as most accurate and found that the employer 
offered her suitable work consistent with the medical restrictions.  I also found that Ms. 
Maas voluntarily terminated her employment with CTI.  That voluntary resignation was a 
refusal of suitable work on that date and any future date.  Schutjer v. Algona Manor 
Care Center, 780 N.W.2d 549, 559 (Iowa 2010).  As such, I conclude that CTI offered 
claimant suitable work and that claimant refused that work after her voluntary 
termination in 2021.  I conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to any healing 
period benefits after her resignation in 2021 and conclude that claimant is not entitled to 
any healing period benefit award in this case.  Id. 
The next question is whether claimant has achieved maximum medical 
improvement such that permanent disability is ripe for determination or whether she 
remains in a healing period, even if that healing period is not compensable with weekly 
benefits.  See Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (“Compensation for permanent partial 
disability shall begin when it is medically indicated that maximum medical improvement 
from the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined by use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment.”).  Claimant contends that additional treatment has been recommended 
and that she is not yet at maximum medical improvement.  With respect to the leg 
injury, the treatment recommendations claimant points to are those from Dr. Kuhnlein.  
Dr. Kuhnlein evaluated and made recommendations pertaining to claimant’s left leg and 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
 
knee.  He recommended referral to Mayo Clinic for evaluation and pain psychology 
consultation.   
The referral to Mayo Clinic has been attempted and the Mayo Clinic declined to 
evaluate claimant.  Claimant conceded at trial that Mayo Clinic has no additional, or 
alternative, treatment to offer at this time.  Therefore, I conclude there is no additional 
treatment for the left leg being recommended at this time and claimant failed to prove 
she remains in a healing period to pursue further medical treatment for physical issues 
related to the left leg. 
The pain psychology counseling recommended by Dr. Kuhnlein appears to be a 
means of managing and dealing with the effects of chronic pain, rather than something 
that will improve or resolve the physical injuries to claimant’s left leg.  Maintenance 
medical care for ongoing pain complaints is not sufficient to prolong a healing period.  
Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981). I 
conclude the pain psychology treatment, while reasonable and appropriate, is 
maintenance medical care to assist claimant in dealing with and functioning in spite of 
ongoing chronic pain. Therefore, I conclude that Ms. Maas has achieved maximum 
medical improvement for her left knee and left leg, though I also conclude she is entitled 
to future medical care in the form of pain psychology counseling. 
With respect to the issue of claimant’s epilepsy and seizures, I concluded those 
are causally related to the work injury.  Unfortunately, claimant continues to actively 
treat for her epilepsy and seizures.  She has experienced some improvement in her 
seizures but the last medical record in October 2024 noted the need to titrate claimant’s 
seizure medications and necessarily implied further follow-up would be necessary to 
stabilize claimant’s medical condition.  Accordingly, I conclude that claimant continues 
to be in a healing period with respect to her epilepsy and seizures and is likely to 
continue to experience improvement with additional treatment, including medication 
titration and follow-up with neurology.   
No physician has indicated claimant achieved maximum medical improvement 
for her seizures and epilepsy.  She continues to experience improvement and her 
medications continue to be titrated.  Therefore, claimant has not achieved maximum 
medical improvement and the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
cannot yet be determined under the AMA Guides.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  I 
conclude that this claim is not ripe for an award of permanent disability at least with 
respect to the work injury against the employer. 
Ms. Maas also seeks an award of past medical expenses against the employer.  
Specifically, claimant introduced Joint Exhibit 21 as demonstration of the medical bills 
being sought.  Some of those medical charges appear to have been paid by 
defendants.  Regardless, all of the submitted medical bills appear to be related to 
treatment of claimant’s left leg injuries, epilepsy, and/or seizures.  Having concluded 
that each of these injuries arose out of and in the course of claimant’s employment on 
January 7, 2021, I address the claim for award of these past medical expenses.   

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: “For purposes of this 
section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to treat an 
injured employee.”  The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' 
compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 
injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second 
Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
I conclude claimant has proven all of the medical bills contained at Joint Exhibit 
21 are causally related to her work injury on January 7, 2021.  Therefore, I conclude 
claimant is entitled to an award of those medical expenses and defendants are entitled 
to a credit for any benefits already paid.  Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Ms. Maas also asserts a claim for alternate medical care against the employer 
and insurance carrier.  Specifically, Ms. Maas seeks award of additional treatment 
related to her left leg as well as ongoing medical care for her epilepsy and seizures. 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner, 78 
(Review-Reopening 1975).  “Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact.”  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). 
In this case, defendants admitted liability for the left leg injury.  The employer and 
insurance carrier have authorized medical care.  However, it appears that authorized 
medical care was exhausted when Mayo Clinic refused to evaluate claimant. 
On the other hand, claimant has introduced the opinion of Dr. Kuhnlein 
suggesting that evaluation and treatment with a pain psychologist may be helpful to 
claimant in dealing with her chronic left leg pain.  Defendants are not currently offering 
any alternate treatment options.  The recommendation of a pain psychologist is 
reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances of this case and represents 
treatment that is more extensive than the lack of treatment being offered currently by 
defendants. 
In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997), the 
supreme court held that “when evidence is presented to the commissioner that the 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
 
employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is ‘inferior 
or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the employee, . . . the 
commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate care.”  In this 
circumstance, claimant has introduced evidence that additional medical care that is 
more extensive than the lack of care currently being offered is reasonable and available.  
Specifically, claimant has introduced pain psychology as a reasonable option to assist in 
dealing with her left leg chronic pain.  Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to an 
order directing defendants to select and authorize a pain psychologist to evaluate and, if 
necessary, treat claimant. 
In addition, claimant seeks authorization of ongoing medical care for her epilepsy 
and seizures.  Defendants have authorized reasonable medical care for those 
conditions so alternate medical care is not really necessary or sought.  However, 
claimant retains future medical rights for treatment of her epilepsy and seizures related 
to the January 7, 2021 work injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  She is found to not yet 
have achieved maximum medical improvement.  Therefore, by definition, claimant 
requires ongoing and future medical care for these conditions. 
The final claim asserted by claimant against the employer is a request for 
reimbursement of her independent medical evaluation.  Iowa Code section 85.39 
permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the 
employee attending the subsequent examination.  Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
Dr. Kuhnlein performed that evaluation on April 3, 2025 and rendered an 
impairment rating for claimant’s left leg.  However, no other physician rendered a 
permanent impairment rating in this evidentiary record.  Put another way, claimant fails 
to establish that an employer-retained physician evaluated claimant’s permanent 
disability prior to Dr. Kuhnlein’s evaluation.  I conclude that claimant cannot prove 
entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s independent medical evaluation 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  
In addition to the claims asserted against the employer and insurance carrier, 
Ms. Maas raised claims against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  Iowa Code section 
85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  The Second Injury Fund Act exists to 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
 
encourage the hiring of handicapped persons by making a current employer responsible 
only for the amount of disability related to an injury occurring while that employer 
employed the handicapped individual as if the individual had had no preexisting 
disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789, 792 (Iowa 1978); 15 
Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, Section 17:1, p. 205 (2014-2015). 
Before liability of the Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, 
the employee must have lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, 
the employee must sustain a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ 
through a work-related compensable injury.  Third, permanent disability must exist as to 
both the initial injury and the second injury.  Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 
N.W.3d 714, 717-718 (Iowa 2024).  “‘It is the cumulative effect’ of the injuries that result 
in industrial disability—‘rather than the injuries considered in isolation—that triggers the 
Fund’s proportional liability.’” Id. (quoting Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 
N.W.2d 467, 470 (Iowa 1990). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 471 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355, 358 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300, 304 (Iowa 1979). 
Claimant satisfies the first qualifying injury requirements in this case.  She 
sustained a fracture of her left arm in 2019.  Only one physician, Dr. Kuhnlein, 
addressed permanent impairment relative to that 2019 left arm injury.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
four percent permanent functional impairment of the left arm was accepted as accurate.  
Therefore, I conclude claimant satisfied the requirement of a first qualifying injury.  Iowa 
Code section 85.64. 
For a second qualifying injury, Ms. Maas asserts the work injury in this case.  
Specifically, she alleges she sustained an injury to her left leg as well as a head injury 
resulting in epilepsy and seizures.  The alleged left leg injury is a qualifying injury 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.64, while the alleged head injury and resulting 
epilepsy and seizures are unscheduled injuries that would not otherwise qualify for 
Second Injury Fund benefits. 
In Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 N.W.3d 714 (Iowa 2024), the Iowa 
Supreme Court held that an injured worker is entitled to assert a Second Injury Fund 
claim even if the second qualifying injury involves both a scheduled and an unscheduled 
injury component.  In other words, the question is whether the injured worker sustained 
an injury to an enumerated member under the terms of the statute, not whether she 
may have sustained other injuries that extend beyond that scheduled or enumerated 
member.   
This case involves such a claim.  As noted, Ms. Maas has proven a permanent 
injury to her left leg as a result of the January 7, 2021 work injury at CTI Foods.  

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
 
 
Therefore, I conclude Ms. Maas has proven that she sustained a second qualifying 
injury.   Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 N.W.3d 714 (Iowa 2024). 
The third requirement to qualify for an award under the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa is to prove that permanent disability exists as to both the first and second injury.  
As noted, claimant proved permanent functional impairment related to the 2019 left arm 
injury.  With respect to the second qualifying injury at issue in this case, I found Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s unrefuted impairment rating equivalent to eight percent of the whole person, 
or 20 percent of the left leg.  Therefore, I conclude claimant has proven all three 
qualifying factors for an award of benefits against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.   
Calculating the extent of the Second Injury Fund liability is an interesting task 
when the second qualifying injury involves both a scheduled and unscheduled injury.  
The Iowa Supreme Court recently provided guidance on this issue.  In Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Strable, 14 N.W.3d 742, 750 (Iowa 2024), the Court explained the 
formula to determine Second Injury Fund benefits as follows: 
[T]he Fund is liable for the incremental increase in [the claimant’s] 
disability associated with the combined effect of both enumerated injuries 
as compared to the disability associated only with the second qualifying 
injury, for which the employer is liable.  When, as here, the second 
qualifying injury extends beyond the enumerated member, the Fund 
should get a credit for the full amount of the employer’s liability for the 
second qualifying injury…. 
To calculate the Fund’s liability, the Commissioner must first assess [the 
claimant’s] industrial disability considering both qualifying injuries … 
including its sequela injuries … The Commissioner should then subtract 
[the number of weeks attributable to the functional impairment] associated 
with the [first qualifying injury].  Finally, the Commissioner should also 
subtract the discrete industrial disability associated with the [second 
qualifying injury] and sequela without considering the effect of [claimant’s 
first qualifying injury]. 
This formula is somewhat difficult to understand and apply.  However, I conclude 
that the claimant’s entitlement to Second Injury Fund benefits cannot be determined at 
this time. 
“Unlike ordinary workers’ compensation benefits … the Second Injury Fund’s 
obligation cannot be assessed until the employer’s liability is fixed.”  Second Injury Fund 
of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 473 (Iowa 1990).  Only “after the expiration of the 
full period provided by law for the payments thereof by the employer” do Second Injury 
Fund benefits commence or become payable to claimant.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa 
v. Strable, 14 N.W.2d 3d 742, 750 (Iowa 2024). 
In this case, I have determined that claimant’s second qualifying injury has not 
yet reached maximum medical improvement.  Specifically, I determined that permanent 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 17 
 
 
disability cannot yet be determined for the January 7, 2021 work injury because 
claimant requires ongoing and future treatment of her epilepsy and seizure and that 
there is an expectation that her condition will improve with additional time.   
I can determine the permanent functional disability attributable to the first 
qualifying injury.  I can also determine the permanent functional disability attributable to 
the scheduled member component of the second qualifying injury.  However, the 
remainder of the second qualifying injury is not yet at maximum medical improvement 
and the second injury is not yet ripe for determination of permanent disability.  In this 
circumstance, it is not yet possible to determine the industrial disability considering both 
qualifying injuries.  As such, I cannot complete the first step of the formula established 
by the Iowa Supreme Court in Strable until claimant achieves maximum medical 
improvement.  Moreover, the permanent disability attributable to that second qualifying 
injury is not yet established and the Fund’s credit is not yet known.  Finally, it is not 
possible to determine the full extent of the period for which benefits will be owed by the 
employer and insurance carrier to determine the date upon which Second Injury Fund 
benefits should commence.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Strable, 14 N.W.2d 3d 742, 
750 (Iowa 2024). 
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant is likely entitled to an award of benefits in 
some amount against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  However, I conclude that 
amount and the date for commencement of benefits cannot yet be determined and 
cannot be determined until claimant achieves maximum medical improvement for her 
epilepsy and seizures.  Therefore, any award of Second Injury Fund benefits is deferred 
and must be determined upon review-reopening after claimant achieves maximum 
medical improvement. 
The final issue submitted for determination is whether costs should be assessed 
against either party.  Assessment of costs is within the discretion of the agency.  Iowa 
Code section 10A.328.  In this instance, claimant prevailed on the principle disputed 
issue of causation necessary to establish a work injury claim.  Therefore, I conclude that 
it is appropriate to assess costs against the employer and insurance carrier in some 
amount. 
Claimant seeks assessment of her filing fee ($103.00).  The employer and 
insurance carrier will be ordered to reimburse claimant’s filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 
4.33(7).  Claimant also seeks assessment of her costs ($23.55) related to service of her 
petition.  Service fees are permissible costs and assessed against the employer and 
insurance carrier pursuant to 876 IAC 33(3). 
Ms. Maas asserts the cost of three physician’s charges necessary to secure 
reports.  Specifically, claimant seeks $375.00 for charges incurred to secure a report 
from Dr. Recinos, $200.00 in charges to secure a report from Dr. Spencer, and 
$7,640.00 to secure the independent medical evaluation report from Dr. Kuhnlein. 
Pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6), “the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than 
two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports” can be assessed as litigation costs.  I find the 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 18 
 
 
charges incurred ($375.00) to secure a report from Dr. Recinos is reasonable and 
assess that cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
In Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015), the Supreme Court noted that in cases where Iowa Code section 85.39 IME 
reimbursement is not triggered, a claimant can still be reimbursed expenses associated 
with the preparation of a written report as a cost under administrative rule 876 IAC 4.33 
because the report is being used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony.  Id. at 
846-47.  However, only the cost of the report can be assessed, not the underlying exam 
or treatment. Id. 
Review of the cost request at Joint Exhibit 22, the billing statement from Dr. 
Kuhnlein is not included for review.  In their brief, defendants note that some of the 
charges noted on Dr. Kuhnlein’s billing statement reflect charges for a rush fee and fees 
related to claimant’s Second Injury Fund claim.  However, the undersigned cannot 
decipher the amount of charges pertaining to preparation of solely the report related to 
claimant’s claims against the employer and insurance carrier.  Nor would the 
undersigned consider charges totaling $7,640.00 to be reasonable for preparing an 18-
page report without performing other work that is not reimbursable as an expense.  
Therefore, I decline to award Dr. Kuhnlein’s charges as a cost.  Instead, I exercise my 
discretion and assess the additional $200.00 physician charge from Dr. Spencer as the 
second physician report cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant is entitled to future causally related medical care, including but not 
necessarily limited to pain psychology for her left leg injuries and for ongoing medical 
and pharmacological care of her epilepsy and seizures, as detailed in the body of this 
decision. 
 
Claimant’s claim for permanent disability is not yet ripe and cannot be 
determined until she achieves maximum medical improvement for her injuries and 
permanent disability or permanent impairment can be determined for her epilepsy and 
seizures pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition. 
Claimant is likely entitled to an award of Second Injury Fund benefits in some 
amount.  However, the extent of claimant’s entitlement and the date of commencement 
of Second Injury Fund benefits cannot currently be determined. 
Claimant will necessarily have to file a review-reopening proceeding after 
achieving maximum medical improvement from her epilepsy and seizures to obtain an 
award of permanent disability against the employer and insurance carrier, as well as a 
finalized award of Second Injury Fund benefits. 

MAAS V. CTI FOODS HOLDING CO., LLC/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 19 
 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay all medical providers for the 
medical expenses documented in Joint Exhibit 21 and shall be entitled to a credit for 
any medical benefits previously paid, but shall ultimately hold claimant harmless for all 
such charges contained in Joint Exhibit 21. 
Defendants shall identify and authorize a pain psychologist to provide reasonable 
and necessary care to assist claimant in coping with her chronic pain following her left 
leg injuries. 
Defendants shall authorize and provide ongoing medical care for claimant’s 
epilepsy and seizures through Dr. Seldon Spencer or other providers under Dr. 
Spencer’s direction through the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics epilepsy clinic. 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the 
amount of seven hundred one and 55/100 dollars ($701.55).  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.  
Signed and filed this ____23rd ____ day of October, 2025. 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Janece Valentine   
(via WCES) 
Kelsey Paumer  
 
(via WCES) 
Andrew Duffelmeyer  
(via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
