Case Number: 19700279.01
Case Title:  STEWART, JACKIE V. KPI CONCEPTS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stewart Jackie-19700279.01d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JACKIE STEWART, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                      File No. 19700279.01 
KPI CONCEPTS, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACUITY INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :               Headnotes:  1402.40, 1402.60, 
 
Defendants. 
  :                                    1800, 1803, 2500    
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Jackie Stewart, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from KPI Concepts, LLC (“KPI”), and its insurer Acuity 
Insurance.  Eric Loney appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Coreen Sweeney appeared 
on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on September 28, 2020, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  An order issued on March 13, 2020, 
and updated June 1, 2020, and August 14, 2020, by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, In the Matter of Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings (Available 
online at: https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/order-coronavirus-covid-19 (last viewed 
August 14, 2020)) amended the hearing assignment order in each case before the 
Commissioner scheduled for an in-person regular proceeding hearing between March 
18, 2020, and November 20, 2020.  The amendment makes it so that such hearings will 
be held by Internet-based video, using CourtCall.  The parties appeared electronically, 
and the hearing proceeded without significant difficulties.  The matter was fully 
submitted on November 2, 2020, after briefing by the parties.     
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-I.  Testimony under oath was also taken from the claimant, 
Jackie Stewart, and KPI employee Derek Elmore.  Maria Taylor was appointed the 
official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.   
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-30  09:19:28     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. The claimant sustained an injury arising out of, and in the course of, employment, 
on February 20, 2019. 
 
3. The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of recovery. 
 
4. The claimant was single, and entitled to one exemption. 
 
5. The costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 8 have been paid, including Sunil Bansal, 
M.D.’s independent medical examination (“IME”) expense. 
Additionally, entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits is no 
longer in dispute, nor are credits against any award.  The defendants waived their 
affirmative defenses. 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
  
2. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded. 
 
3. Whether the disability is an industrial disability or considered under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v).   
 
4. Whether the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded, is July 11, 2019, or August 7, 2020. 
 
5. Whether the claimant’s gross earnings were $633.42 per week or $655.95 per 
week.   
 
6. Whether the weekly rate is $402.85 per week or $416.53 per week. 
 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27 
 
8. Whether the claimant is entitled to an assessment of costs.   
 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 3 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Jackie Stewart, the claimant, was 52 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He lives in Burlington, Iowa.  (Testimony).  He graduated from Burlington 
High School in 1987.  (Testimony).  Mr. Stewart was an average to below average 
student based upon his grades.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 4:1).  He attended a few semesters 
at Kirkwood Community College, but did not obtain a degree.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Stewart worked a variety of odd jobs, including: a cook at Spirit Hollow Golf 
Club, as a house painter, and various positions at Wal-Mart.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A:3).  
Mr. Stewart worked for Design and Engineering in New London making golf clubs for a 
period of time.  (DE A:3).  From 2001 to 2004, Mr. Stewart worked at Mississippi Bakery 
in Burlington, Iowa, where he baked pound cakes.  (DE A:3).  He left that position to 
move to Cedar Rapids.  From about 2005 to 2007, Mr. Stewart detailed cars for Deery 
Brothers in Burlington, Iowa.  (DE A:2).  He left Deery Brothers for Shottenkirk 
Chevrolet, where he became a detail manager.  (DE A:2).  He moved to another 
Shottenkirk location in Mount Pleasant, Iowa, where he worked from 2010 to 2015.  (DE 
A:2).  Mr. Stewart had some disagreements with management at Shottenkirk and was 
laid off.  (DE A:2).  Prior to joining KPI, Mr. Stewart had a brief period of unemployment.  
(DE H).   
 
Mr. Stewart began working for KPI in 2015.  (Testimony).  When he first started 
at KPI, he worked in an area known as scrimming and packing wherein he put windmill 
parts together.  (Defendants’ Exhibit H).  KPI then assigned him to cut planks with a 
saw.  (DE H).  Mr. Stewart moved to a CNC machine referred to as a “Pamela” after 
about one or two years with KPI.  (DE H).  After moving to the CNC machine, Mr. 
Stewart remained on the CNC.  (DE H).  At the time of the alleged work injury, Mr. 
Stewart worked as a CNC Operator.  (Testimony).  As a CNC Operator, his job 
description included working with machines, feeding stock into machines, adjusting 
machine tables, monitoring machine operation, working with blades, and loading or 
unloading material from the machinery.  (CE 3:1-2).  Mr. Stewart testified that he would 
get wood together, put wood on the CNC machine, cut parts, and pack the parts into 
boxes.  (Testimony).  Mr. Stewart now works in an area known as check claims, 
wherein he loads wood and other lumber onto a pallet.  (Testimony).  He indicated at 
the arbitration hearing that his position is more physical now than his previous position.  
(Testimony).   
 
On February 20, 2019, Mr. Stewart claims that he was struck in the rear by a 
moving forklift.  (Testimony).  He reported that he worked with another CNC operator 
named Danni Maxwell.  (DE H; Testimony).  He and Ms. Maxwell looked into a box 
containing parts to determine what additional parts needed to be cut.  (DE H).  As he 
talked to his coworker, he reported being struck in the center of the back by something 
on a pallet on a forklift.  (DE H).  This caused him to fall towards Ms. Maxwell.  (DE H).  
Mr. Stewart described the impact as directly on his spinal column, but noted that he 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 4 
never fell down since a combination of Ms. Maxwell and a box caught him.  (DE H).  Mr. 
Stewart noted that Ms. Maxwell was pregnant at the time, and about his same size.  
(DE H).   
 
Mr. Stewart provided a number of medical records predating the date of injury at 
issue in this matter.  On November 13, 2003, Mr. Stewart visited Patrick Hitchon, M.D. 
at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1).  Dr. Hitchon’s record 
noted a February of 2002 work injury, wherein Mr. Stewart lifted a 230-pound steel 
beam, causing persistent low back pain.  (JE 1:1).  At that time, Mr. Stewart remained 
unemployed.  (JE 1:1).  An MRI from April of 2003 showed no evidence of stenosis, disc 
herniation or neoplastic processes.  (JE 1:1).  Dr. Hitchon diagnosed Mr. Stewart with 
chronic low back pain without radiographic abnormality that was most likely muscular 
ligamentous in nature and should resolve with the passage of time.  (JE 1:1).  Dr. 
Hitchon recommended a physical therapy evaluation, and placed Mr. Stewart on a 30-
pound lifting restriction “out of consideration for him” to be lifted on December 1, 2003.  
(JE 1:1).  Dr. Hitchon placed Mr. Stewart at maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) on 
January 1, 2004.  (JE 1:1).   
 
Mr. Stewart reported to Great River Medical Center Emergency Room with low 
back pain on March 26, 2010.  (JE 2:1-3).  He had back pain for two days after working 
out.  (JE 2:2).  He indicated that he had symptoms for several years prior.  (JE 2:2).   
 
On April 16, 2010, Mr. Stewart returned to the emergency room at Great River 
Medical Center.  (JE 2:4-6).  His pain in his lower back began three days prior at work.  
(JE 2:5).  The examining physician diagnosed him with thoracic strain.  (JE 2:6).   
 
Mr. Stewart had x-rays of his cervical spine on May 14, 2012, at Great River 
Medical Center.  (JE 2:7).  The x-rays showed an anterior fusion at C5-7.  (JE 2:7).   
 
On June 14, 2016, Mr. Stewart returned to Great River Medical Center with a 
complaint of left collarbone pain since bench pressing, and a friend had to help get 
weight off of him.  (JE 2:8).  Chest x-rays and a chest CT were completed, which 
showed no acute issues.  (JE 2:12).   
 
On April 4, 2017, Mr. Stewart reported to Community Health Centers of SE Iowa 
with complaints of left lower back pain, which he believed was due to kidney problems.  
(JE 3:1-5).  He requested FMLA paperwork.  (JE 3:1).  The next day, Mr. Stewart was 
evaluated by a behavioral health team regarding the need to cease marijuana use and 
remain “clean and sober.”  (JE 3:8).   
 
Mr. Stewart returned to Community Health Centers of SE Iowa with complaints of 
nausea, anxiety, and what he felt were chronic kidney issues on October 5, 2017.  (JE 
3:11-16).  The record indicated that nephrologists felt Mr. Stewart had no active kidney 
issues.  (JE 3:11).   
 
On October 10, 2017, Mr. Stewart again followed up with Community Health 
Centers of SE Iowa with complaints of pain in his left chest.  (JE 3:17-21).  He felt a 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 5 
great pressure in his left chest.  (JE 3:17).  Community Health Centers of SE Iowa sent 
him to Great River Medical center due to a possible heart attack.  (JE 3:21).   
 
Mr. Stewart followed up with Community Health Centers of SE Iowa for 
complaints of chronic nausea, shortness of breath and GERD on October 16, 2017.  (JE 
3:22-26).   
 
On August 20, 2018, Mr. Stewart reported to Community Health Centers of SE 
Iowa for chest pain and left flank pain.  (JE 3:27).  He also complained of diarrhea.  (JE 
3:27).  The provider assessed him with viral gastritis.  (JE 3:30).   
 
Mr. Stewart visited Steven Tekell, N.P. at Great River Health Systems for an 
evaluation of low back pain.  (JE 4:1).  He complained of pain in his back only for the 
past week since starting to feel ill.  (JE 4:1).  He further complained of dysuria, flank 
pain, body aches, fever, and chills.  (JE 4:1).  Nurse Practitioner Tekell felt that this was 
not an orthopedic issue, and recommended Mr. Stewart proceed to the emergency 
department for evaluation.  (JE 4:1).   
 
Mr. Stewart returned to Great River Medical Center on August 26, 2018, with 
complaints of abdominal pain that began two days prior.  (JE 2:14-18).  Mr. Stewart was 
diagnosed with acute lumbar back pain and acute abdominal pain.  (JE 2:17).   
 
Mr. Stewart noted several emergent visits for abdominal pain and back pain 
during his August 28, 2018, follow up visit at Community Health Centers of SE Iowa.  
(JE 3:32-36).  He also reported a gradual onset of back pain with no injury.  (JE 3:32).  
The lower back pain improved.  (JE 3:32).  His pain radiated to his right buttock.  (JE 
3:32).  He was assessed with acute gastritis and chronic low back pain.  (JE 3:36).  The 
notes indicated that Mr. Stewart went to an orthopedic appointment where he was told 
he had no back issues.  (JE 3:36).   
 
Nurse Practitioner Tekell examined Mr. Stewart on December 10, 2018, for an 
evaluation of neck pain.  (JE 4:2).  Mr. Stewart complained that the neck pain began 
about four months prior.  (JE 4:2).  Nothing helped relieve the pain.  (JE 4:2).  Mr. 
Stewart also associated numbness and headaches with the pain.  (JE 4:2).  Mr. Stewart 
told the provider that he experienced neck pain for “a couple years” but that it worsened 
over the last few months.  (JE 4:2).  He reported seeing a neurologist for his numbness 
and tingling.  (JE 4:2).  Nurse Practitioner Tekell reviewed an x-ray, which showed 
advanced multilevel degenerative disc disease, most pronounced at C2-3 and C3-4.  
(JE 4:3).  The spontaneous fusion of C5-7 was also noted.  (JE 4:3).  Nurse Practitioner 
Tekell assessed Mr. Stewart with cervicalgia, and noted an unremarkable neurologic 
examination.  (JE 4:3-4).  Nurse Practitioner Tekell also noted that Mr. Stewart had 
advanced degenerative disc disease throughout his cervical spine.  (JE 4:4).  Nurse 
Practitioner Tekell recommended physical therapy for six weeks.  (JE 4:4).   
 
Mr. Stewart visited Neurology & Sleep Clinic, PLC, on December 18, 2018, 
where Rebecca Zwanziger, A.R.N.P. examined him for complaints of “body numbness.”  
(JE 5:1-3).  Mr. Stewart reported a headache and neck pain, and that the numbness 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 6 
went in and out of his feet, neck, chest, and “everywhere.”  (JE 5:1).  Nurse Practitioner 
Zwanziger found no neck stiffness or pain.  (JE 5:2).  Nurse Practitioner Zwanziger 
recommended a bilateral lower extremity EMG, and an MRI of the brain.  (JE 5:3).   
 
On December 26, 2018, Mr. Stewart returned to Community Health Centers of 
SE Iowa with chronic complaints including a blister on his finger, neck pain, chest wall 
pain, and nausea.  (JE 3:37-41).  He also indicated a concern with anxiety.  (JE 3:37).  
The provider noted that Mr. Stewart had an MRI for his back and neck issues.  (JE 
3:41).  The record noted that Mr. Stewart experienced a spontaneous fusion of C5-C7 
based upon history.  (JE 3:41).   
 
On January 24, 2019, Mr. Stewart returned to University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics due to chest pain determined to be consistent with musculoskeletal pain.  (JE 
1:2).   
 
During a February 25, 2019, visit to Community Health Centers of SE Iowa, Mr. 
Stewart reported being struck by a forklift, which caused neck and back pain.  (JE 3:42).  
The record noted Mr. Stewart’s history of degenerative disc disease.  (JE 3:42).   
 
Mr. Stewart visited Great River Business Health on February 26, 2019, due to a 
work incident wherein he reported standing by a part box when a forklift struck him.  (JE 
6:1-4).  He reported pain in his lower back and cervical area.  (JE 6:1).  He considered 
the pain severe, and described it as deep, sharp, throbbing, burning, and stiffness.  (JE 
6:1).  Sarah Wingate, A.R.N.P. diagnosed Mr. Stewart with low back pain, and 
unspecified injury of part of the neck.  (JE 6:2).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate placed Mr. 
Stewart on restricted duty, and asked him to follow up in 10 days.  (JE 6:2).  Nurse 
Practitioner Wingate restricted Mr. Stewart to limit lifting, pushing, and pulling to 10 
pounds with both arms.  (JE 6:4).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate also provided a referral 
for physical therapy.  (JE 6:4).  Mr. Stewart made no mention of his prior back injuries or 
issues.  (Testimony).  He claimed that this was because they were caused by his kidney 
problems.  (Testimony).  Mr. Stewart claimed that he could tell the difference between 
his kidney pain and his alleged work injury issues.  (Testimony).   
 
On March 7, 2019, Mr. Stewart returned to Great River Business Health for a 
follow up examination.  (JE 6:5-6).  Mr. Stewart complained of neck and back pain of 9 
out of 10.  (JE 6:5).  The pain was constant.  (JE 6:5).  Ice improved some of the pain.  
(JE 6:5).  Mr. Stewart noted that he felt more pain up his back to his neck during 
movement at work.  (JE 6:5).  Examination of Mr. Stewart’s neck and back showed 
muscle spasm, muscle pain, and joint pain.  (JE 6:5).  The diagnoses continued to be 
low back pain and unspecified superficial injury of the neck.  (JE 6:5).  His work 
restrictions remained in force, and the provider requested he follow up after 4 to 5 
sessions of physical therapy.  (JE 6:6).  The provider also prescribed cyclobenzaprine.  
(JE 6:6).   
 
Mr. Stewart commenced care with Rock Valley Physical Therapy on March 13, 
2019, with complaints of muscle tightness and pain extending from his low back to his 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 7 
neck.  (JE 7:1-4).  Mr. Stewart indicated that the pain was immediate and worsened 
over the next few days.  (JE 7:1).  Bending caused some increase in pain.  (JE 7:1).   
 
A March 29, 2019, note from Community Health Centers of SE Iowa indicated 
that Mr. Stewart was discharged from Great River Medical Center on March 25, 2019, 
for a dog bite.  (JE 3:43).  He took antibiotics and pain medications as ordered.  (JE 
3:43).  Mr. Stewart testified that the dog bite kept him off of work for four months, and 
included a three to four day hospitalization.  (Testimony).   
 
On April 1, 2019, Mr. Stewart returned to Community Health Centers of SE Iowa 
with a history of a dog bite and fever.  (JE 3:44-49).  The record indicated that Mr. 
Stewart was separating his dogs from fighting, and ended up with a fractured and 
lacerated hand.  (JE 3:44).  Mr. Stewart had surgery, and pain.  (JE 3:44).  He reported 
running a fever for three days, as well as vomiting.  (JE 3:44).  The provider sent Mr. 
Stewart to the emergency room.  (JE 3:49).   
 
Mr. Stewart returned to Orthopaedic Specialists at Great River Health Systems 
on April 9, 2019, where Craig A. Bottke, M.D., examined him.  (JE 4:6).  Dr. Bottke 
noted that Mr. Stewart complained of right middle and ring finger injuries secondary to a 
severe dog bite.  (JE 4:6).  Dr. Bottke made no mention of any neck or back pain in this 
record.  (JE 4:6).   
 
On April 16, 2019, Mr. Stewart followed up with Great River Business Health 
where he complained of constant sharp, aching, burning, and stiffness in his neck and 
lower back.  (JE 6:7).  He rated his pain 7 out of 10.  (JE 6:7).  Physical therapy 
improved his pain.  (JE 6:8).  He indicated soreness when he sat for long periods of 
time.  (JE 6:8).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate’s diagnoses remained low back pain and 
unspecified superficial injury of the neck.  (JE 6:9).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate 
continued restricted duty and recommended a completion of physical therapy.  (JE 6:9). 
 
Mr. Stewart returned to Great River Business Health on May 29, 2019, with 
continued complaints of lower back and neck pain.  (JE 6:11-12).  He rated his pain 6 
out of 10, and found a little improvement since his last visit.  (JE 6:11).  Mr. Stewart 
completed 10 sessions of physical therapy, which he noted improved his symptoms 
slightly.  (JE 6:11).  He reported that his pain radiated up his back into his neck.  (JE 
6:11).  Upon examination, Nurse Practitioner Wingate found muscle and joint pain, but 
could not find muscle spasms.  (JE 6:11).  Mr. Stewart’s diagnoses remained the same.  
(JE 6:12).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate continued Mr. Stewart’s work restrictions, but 
also noted that Mr. Stewart remained off work until July 1, 2019, due to an unrelated 
work incident.  (JE 6:12).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate also ordered an MRI.  (JE 6:12).   
 
On July 14, 2019, Mr. Stewart reported to Great River Medical Center for an MRI 
of the lumbar spine and cervical spine, as ordered by Nurse Practitioner Wingate.  (JE 
6:14-17).  Pil Kang, M.D. interpreted the MRIs.  (JE 6:14-15).  Dr. Kang found disc 
desiccation and mild to moderate disc height loss with a broad-based circumferential 
disc bulge and very minimal effacement of the thecal sac at L3-4.  (JE 6:14).  Dr. Kang 
also noted mild left sided neural foraminal compromise by a disc osteophyte complex.  

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 8 
(JE 6:14).  Dr. Kang found interval progression of degenerative disc disease and 
underlying spinal stenosis at C2-3 and C3-4, and a congenital partial fusion of the C5-
C6 levels “suggestive of Klippel-Feil syndrome.” 
 
Mr. Stewart returned to Great River Business Health on June 20, 2019, after his 
MRI with continued complaints of lower back pain and neck pain. (JE 6:18-19).  Mr. 
Stewart reported worsening constant pain with difficulty with his range of motion.  (JE 
6:18).  Mr. Stewart missed his previous appointment due to moving, but told Nurse 
Practitioner Wingate that he did not lift anything heavy.  (JE 6:18).  Nurse Practitioner 
Wingate continued to diagnose Mr. Stewart with low back pain and unspecified 
superficial injury of the neck.  (JE 6:19).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate did not change his 
restrictions, and noted that he continued to be off of work through July 1, 2019, due to a 
non-work related injury.  (JE 6:20).  She also referred him to an orthopedic doctor due to 
the MRI results.  (JE 6:20).  Subsequent notes indicated that the insurer denied the 
relatedness of the lower back issues due to the MRI results.  (JE 6:21).  Derek Elmore, 
the human resources and safety manager from KPI, testified that Mr. Stewart did not 
return to his job until August 7, 2019.  (Testimony).    
 
In a check box letter dated July 11, 2019, Nurse Practitioner Wingate indicated 
that Mr. Stewart reached maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) related to the 
February 20, 2019, work injury.  (JE 6:22).  Nurse Practitioner Wingate checked “no” 
with regard to whether Mr. Stewart sustained any impairment from the February 20, 
2019, work injury.  (JE 6:22).   
 
Mr. Stewart called Community Health Centers of SE Iowa on August 22, 2019, 
for a workers’ compensation injury visit.  (JE 3:51).  Mr. Stewart indicated that the claim 
was denied.  (JE  3:51).  The nurses recommended he go to the emergency room or 
Great River Quick Care due to it being a “legal issue.”   
 
On August 22, 2019, Mr. Stewart reported to the emergency department at Great 
River Medical Center with back and neck pain.  (JE 6:23-30).  Mr. Stewart claimed that 
he went back to work that week, and his pain increased.  (JE 6:23).  The emergency 
department provider limited lifting, pushing, and pulling to 10 pounds, indicated that 
there should be no repeated bending, twisting, stooping, or reaching, and Mr. Stewart 
should alternate standing and walking as tolerated.  (JE 6:31).  Mr. Stewart claimed that 
KPI told him they had no work for him based upon these restrictions.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Stewart reported to Community Health Centers of SE Iowa on August 26, 
2019, for moderate-severe lower back, and neck pain.  (JE 3:53-59).  Mr. Stewart 
desired a return to work and requested the same despite being in pain.  (JE 3:53).  Mr. 
Stewart also noted his hand injury from the dog bite and that he was off work for almost 
five months.  (JE 3:53).  The provider allowed Mr. Stewart to return to work without 
restrictions.  (JE 3:58).  The provider also instructed Mr. Stewart to make his own 
appointment with the orthopedic doctor.  (JE 3:58).  Mr. Stewart was diagnosed with 
lumbar degenerative disc disease, and cervical pain.  (JE 3:60).  Mr. Stewart testified 
that he needed to return to work and earn money, which is why he requested a release 
to work.  (DE H).   

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 9 
 
On June 3, 2020, Mr. Stewart had a telehealth visit with Community Health 
Centers of SE Iowa for continued neck and back pain over the previous several days.  
(JE 3:61).  No injury, fall, lifting or pushing was noted.  (JE 3:61).  Mr. Stewart claimed 
that he had a disc problem in his back.  (JE 3:61).     
 
Mr. Stewart presented for an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D., M.P.H. on August 7, 
2020.  (CE 1:1-9).  Dr. Bansal is board certified in occupational medicine.  (CE 1:11).  
Dr. Bansal reviewed the pertinent medical records, but of note, failed to review any 
medical records predating the date of injury in this matter.  (CE 1:1-4).  Mr. Stewart 
reported to Dr. Bansal that on February 20, 2019, a forklift approached him from the 
rear, and struck him in the center of the back.  (CE 1:5).  Mr. Stewart further noted that 
he began to fall, but was caught by a co-worker before he hit the ground.  (CE 1:5).  On 
examination, Dr. Bansal found tenderness to Mr. Stewart’s neck over the paraspinal 
musculature.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Bansal also found tenderness to palpation over the lumbar 
area.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Bansal diagnosed Mr. Stewart with a neck strain, an L3-4 disc 
bulge, and an aggravation of lumbar spondylosis.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Bansal opined that Mr. 
Stewart continued to have aching pain in his neck and back for which he took muscle 
relaxers.  (CE 1:7).  Mr. Stewart told Dr. Bansal that bending forward aggravated the 
pain.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Bansal opined that the mechanism of injury was consistent with 
causing Mr. Stewart’s back pain, and aggravating Mr. Stewart’s spondylosis.  (CE 1:7-
8).  Dr. Bansal indicated that Mr. Stewart sustained no ratable impairment to his neck.  
(CE 1:8).  Based upon his examination, Dr. Bansal opined that Mr. Stewart sustained a 
5 percent whole person impairment rating based upon his radicular complaints, loss of 
range of motion and guarding in his lower back.  (CE 1:8).  Dr. Bansal provided 
permanent restrictions of no lifting greater than 40 pounds, and no frequent bending or 
twisting.  (CE 1:9).  Dr. Bansal concluded that Mr. Stewart reached MMI on August 7, 
2020, and required no additional medical care “aside from maintenance.”  (CE 1:9).   
 
On August 21, 2020, Mr. Stewart reported to Great River Business Health for an 
IME with James Milani, D.O., C.I.M.E.  (DE C:8-15).  Dr. Milani is a certified 
independent medical examiner, and board certified in family practice.  (DE D:16-17).  
Mr. Stewart reported his version of events, and included an allegation that his 
supervisor “laughed” about the event.  (DE C:8).  About an hour after the incident, Mr. 
Stewart felt the muscles in his back and neck tighten.  (DE C:8).  He reported leaving 
work on the Wednesday of the incident, and did not return until the next Monday.  (DE 
C:8).  At the time of the examination, Mr. Stewart reported to Dr. Milani that he ached 
from his neck to his beltline down the center of his back.  (DE C:8-9).  Mr. Stewart told 
Dr. Milani that if he does not perform stretching exercises, his symptoms worsen.  (DE 
C:9).  Mr. Stewart claimed that the neck and back symptoms interfered with everything 
he did, although they did not prevent him from performing any of his daily or work 
activities.  (DE C:9).  Mr. Stewart reported that he loved his job at KPI.  (DE C:9).  Dr. 
Milani reviewed the applicable medical records including those predating the work 
incident.  (DE C:9-13).  Dr. Milani found tenderness to palpation along Mr. Stewart’s 
spinous process.  (DE C:13).  Mr. Stewart claimed some stiffness after sitting for a short 
time, but after moving and stretching, the stiffness resolved.  (DE C:13).  Dr. Milani also 
found tenderness in the lumbar spinous processes.  (DE C:13).  Dr. Milani performed 
range of motion testing to the cervical spine, thoracic spine, and lumbar spine.  (DE 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 10 
C:14).  Dr. Milani’s diagnoses for Mr. Stewart included an acute cervical sprain/strain, 
an acute lumbar sprain/strain, a history of chronic cervical pain, a history of chronic 
lumbar pain, chronic cervical degenerative disc disease, cervical congenital fusion at C5 
through C7, and lumbar degenerative disc disease.  (DE C:14).  Dr. Milani opined that 
the acute cervical sprain/strain and acute lumbar sprain/strain were associated with the 
February 20, 2019, work event.  (DE C:14).  Dr. Milani placed Mr. Stewart at MMI for the 
February 20, 2019, work event, indicating that Mr. Stewart required no further treatment 
besides routine stretching exercises.  (DE C:15).  Dr. Milani found zero percent whole 
person impairment based upon his examination of the lumbar spine, thoracic spine, and 
cervical spine.  (DE C:15).  Dr. Milani noted that range of motion is not a category 
considered in impairment for this injury, and further indicated that no structural changes 
to the back or neck were caused by this event.  (DE C:15).  Dr. Milani also noted that 
the decreased range of motion found upon examination was due to an underlying issue 
and not the February 20, 2019, work incident.  (DE C:15).  Dr. Milani assigned no 
restrictions due to the February 20, 2019, work event.  (DE C:15).   
 
In his deposition, Mr. Stewart noted that his spinal cord remained continuously 
sore.  (DE H).  He also claimed that pain ran up and down his neck.  (DE H; Testimony).  
He noted that his pain did not radiate, but localized itself to the spinal cord itself.  (DE 
H).  Despite his history of back pain, which Mr. Stewart attributed to his kidney issues, 
he indicated that the nature of the pain changed.  (DE H).  Despite his pain, Mr. Stewart 
continued to do push-ups and sit-ups in addition to a recommended stretching routine 
from his physical therapist.  (DE H).  Mr. Stewart claimed that he could not stand or 
bend down for long periods of time because of his injury.  (DE H; Testimony).  He 
indicated that he continued to work because he needs the money, but that it was 
stressful for him.  (DE H).  He also indicated that he continues to experience pain every 
day.  (DE H; Testimony).  Mr. Stewart noted that when he finishes a workday at KPI, he 
aches, which causes him to sleep a great deal.  (Testimony).  He testified that he takes 
muscle relaxers and ibuprofen for his back pain in order to work.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Elmore testified that, at the time of Mr. Stewart’s work injury, he earned 
$15.13 per hour.  (Testimony).  In May of 2019, Mr. Stewart’s pay increased to $15.43 
per hour.  (Testimony).  In June of 2020, Mr. Stewart’s pay increased to $16.43 per 
hour.  (Testimony).  Mr. Elmore testified that Mr. Stewart is a versatile employee who 
can perform a number of different functions.  (Testimony).  Mr. Elmore also testified that 
Mr. Stewart is a hard worker, who does whatever it takes to get the job done.  
(Testimony).    
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Permanent Disability 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 11 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. V. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part of all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code 85A.8; Iowa Code 85A.14.   
 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, the claimant is entitled 
to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Cp., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
 
In this case, Mr. Stewart has a lengthy history of complaints of lower back pain.  
In 2003, Mr. Stewart lifted a steel beam, causing chronic low back pain.  In 2010, he 
again complained of low back pain and visited the emergency room on at least two 
occasions with complaints of lower back pain.  In 2016, he complained of issues with his 
collarbone.  In 2017, he reported left lower back pain, which he related to his kidney 
problems.  However, medical records indicate that nephrologists found no further kidney 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 12 
issues.  Again in 2018, Mr. Stewart complained of lower back pain and had multiple 
visits to providers complaining of lower back and neck pain.   
 
On February 20, 2019, cargo on a forklift struck Mr. Stewart.  There are varying 
descriptions of the incident, but the most plausible is that Mr. Stewart lost his balance to 
some extent, and caught himself on a box and also with assistance from his pregnant 
coworker, did not fall to the ground.  This indicates a mild impact from whatever cargo 
struck Mr. Stewart.  Nevertheless, an impact occurred, and Mr. Stewart reported pain 
shortly thereafter.  Mr. Stewart’s pain complaints were relatively consistent and were 
followed with physical therapy.  In March of 2019, a dog bit Mr. Stewart’s hand.  This 
caused broken bones and an infection.  Mr. Stewart required hospitalization for a short 
period, and remained off work until August 7, 2019, when he returned to his job at KPI.  
During the time that he remained off work, Mr. Stewart treated with Nurse Practitioner 
Wingate for his ongoing neck and lower back complaints.  Eventually, she 
recommended a referral to a spine doctor, but this was denied by Acuity after an MRI 
report.  On July 11, 2019, Nurse Practitioner Wingate placed Mr. Stewart at MMI and 
indicated later that he sustained no permanent impairment.  In late August of 2019, Mr. 
Stewart returned to the emergency room with complaints of lower back and neck pain.  
The emergency room physician provided him with restrictions.  Mr. Stewart claims that 
KPI told him they could not accommodate those restrictions, so he went back to a 
provider and had the restrictions removed because he needed to work.  After this time, 
Mr. Stewart did not seek care for some time, based on the records in evidence.  His 
next follow up was in June of 2020.   
 
There are two IMEs in this case.  The claimant saw Dr. Bansal first.  Dr. Bansal 
reviewed all of the pertinent records subsequent to the February 20, 2019, work 
incident.  Dr. Bansal was either not provided, or did not review, any records from Mr. 
Stewart’s prior lower back complaints.  Dr. Bansal opined that the work incident 
aggravated Mr. Stewart’s lumbar spondylosis and caused a neck strain.  He provided a 
5 percent body as a whole rating due to Mr. Stewart’s lower back complaints, but found 
no ratable impairment to Mr. Stewart’s neck.  Dr. Bansal considered issues with range 
of motion in his impairment rating.  Dr. Bansal also provided restrictions to include no 
lifting more than 40 pounds, and no frequent bending or twisting.  Dr. Bansal made no 
specific recommendations for further treatment beyond “maintenance” and indicated 
that Mr. Stewart should continue his stretching regimen.   
 
The claimant then visited Dr. Milani.  Mr. Stewart told Dr. Milani that if he does 
not complete his stretching regimen, his back aches.  Dr. Milani examined Mr. Stewart, 
and reviewed medical records including those from Mr. Stewart’s prior back injuries.  Dr. 
Milani recommended no further care and provided a zero percent impairment rating to 
the neck and back, including specifically the low back.  Dr. Milani, in a veiled criticism of 
Dr. Bansal’s rating indicated that range of motion was not an appropriate consideration 
in an impairment rating calculation, as there was no evidence of structural changes to 
the back or neck caused by the work incident.   
 
In this matter, I find Dr. Milani’s report more convincing than Dr. Bansal’s report.  
First, Dr. Milani reviewed the totality of the medical records.  Mr. Stewart has a history of 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 13 
lower back pain dating back to 2003.  While he attempts to explain away some of the 
prior back pain complaints as related to his kidney issues, the records simply do not 
bear out that explanation.  Therefore, Dr. Milani had the full, relevant history, on which 
to make his report, whereas Dr. Bansal had a snapshot of only post-injury treatment.  
Second, Dr. Milani’s rating included more detail as to his reasoning than Dr. Bansal’s.  
Dr. Milani took the time to explain why he did not consider certain factors, such as range 
of motion, in his report.  Finally, Dr. Milani’s report is buttressed by the rating provided 
by a treating provider, Nurse Practitioner Wingate.  She treated Mr. Stewart for his 
complaints, and chose to provide no impairment rating.  While I agree with the 
claimant’s arguments that Nurse Practitioner Wingate did not perform a full rating 
examination prior to issuing her rating, she treated and examined Mr. Stewart for some 
time.  Therefore, her opinion is credible even if it is not the main opinion relied upon for 
this finding.   
 
Dr. Milani concluded that Mr. Stewart suffered no permanent impairment.  
Therefore, I find that the claimant failed to carry their burden proving that Mr. Stewart’s 
injury on February 20, 2019, caused a permanent disability.   
 
Iowa Code 85.34(2)(v) states: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity.   
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  The healing period runs until one of three occurrences: (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or, (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Iowa 
Code section 84.34(1), See also Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); 
Evenson v. Winnebago Industries, Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2012); Crabtree v. Tri-
City Elec. Co., File No. 5059572 (App., March 20, 2020).  Compensation shall be paid in 
relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to the body as a whole.  Iowa Code section 
85.34. 
If the claimant carried their burden, I find that commencement for any permanent 
disability benefits would appropriately be July 11, 2019.  July 11, 2019, is the date on 
which Nurse Practitioner Wingate declared Mr. Stewart to reach MMI.  This occurred 
prior to the claimant’s return to work only due to the fact that Mr. Stewart remained off 
work at the time due to an unrelated injury to his hand.  If permanent disability benefits 
were awarded, the commencement date would thus be July 11, 2019.   
Upon returning to work, the evidence indicates that Mr. Stewart made the same 
hourly rate of pay, and then received pay increases.  Therefore, if permanent disability 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 14 
benefits were awarded, they would be awarded pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v).   
Rate of Compensation 
 
The parties have a dispute regarding the claimant’s weekly workers’ 
compensation rate.  Iowa Code 85.36 states “[t]he basis of compensation shall be the 
weekly earnings of the injured employee at the time of the injury.”  Weekly earnings are 
defined as the gross salary, wages, or earnings of an employee had the employee 
worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured 
as the employer regularly required for work of employment.  Id.  The subsections of 
Iowa Code 85.36 set forth methods for computing weekly earnings depending upon the 
type of earnings and employment.   
 
If an employee is paid on a daily, or hourly basis, or based upon output, weekly 
earnings are computed by dividing by thirteen (13) the earnings over the thirteen (13) 
week period immediately preceding the injury.  However, any week that does not fairly 
reflect the employee’s customary earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous 
week that is a fair representation of the employee’s customary earnings.  Iowa Code 
85.36(6).  The calculation shall include shift differential pay, but not overtime or 
premium pay in the calendar weeks immediately preceding the injury.  Id.  If the 
employee was absent during the time period subject to calculation for personal reasons, 
the weekly earnings are the amount the employee would have earned had the 
employee worked when work was available to other employees in a similar occupation 
for the employer.  Id.  For the reasons set forth above, I conclude that the claimant’s 
gross weekly wages are $586.29.  This is based upon the information provided in 
Defendants’ Exhibit F:20.  The rate calculated is lower than the gross weekly wage 
alleged by the parties because it appears that the parties included overtime pay in their 
calculation, which pursuant to the plain language of the statute, should not be included.  
The claimant is single and entitled to one exemption.  Thus, the claimant’s weekly 
workers’ compensation rate is three hundred seventy four and 88/100 dollars ($374.88).   
Alternate Care Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.   

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 15 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer 
has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 19, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening Decision, June 
17, 1986).   
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Id.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” and injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable.  Id.  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the 
condition, and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgement of its 
own treating physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening 
Decision, June 17, 1986). 
 
The claimant contends that he wishes to have care ordered pursuant to the 
recommendation of Nurse Practitioner Wingate at the time of the denial issued by Acuity 
in this case.  Nurse Practitioner Wingate’s recommendation occurred on June 20, 2019, 
over one year prior to the evaluation by Dr. Bansal.  Dr. Bansal recommended 
“maintenance” for Mr. Stewart’s condition, but did not define what that included.  
Without defining further what “maintenance” means, it is not clear what further care Dr. 
Bansal recommends.  Therefore, I find that the claimant failed to meet their burden of 
proof, and decline to order provision of alternate care pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.27.   
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 16 
Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) 
provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
The administrative rule expressly allows for the taxation of costs for a filing fee.  In 
this matter, the filing fee is $100.00.  I decline, in my discretion, to award costs in 
this matter.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The claimant shall take nothing regarding permanent disability. 
The claimant’s request for alternate care is denied. 
The claimant’s gross earnings are five hundred eighty six and 29/100 dollars 
($586.29), which translates to a weekly compensation rate of three hundred seventy 
four and 88/100 dollars ($374.88).   
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
That defendants shall be given credit for benefits previously paid, as stipulated 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this 30th day of November, 2020. 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

STEWART V. KPI CONCEPTS, LLC 
Page 17 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Coreen Sweeney (via WCES) 
Eric Loney (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
