Case Number: 23004651.01
Case Title:  METTLER, PETER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Mettler Peter-23004651.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PETER METTLER   
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No. 23004651.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
CONTECH ENGINEERED 
  : 
          ARBITRATION DECISION 
SOLUTIONS, 
  :   
                          
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LM INSURANCE CORPORATION,    
  : 
 
 
  : 
              Headnote No:   1804  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
The claimant, Peter Mettler, by and through his guardian and conservator, Leslie 
Mettler, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ compensation benefits from 
employer Contech Engineered Solutions (“Contech”) and its insurer, LM Insurance 
Corporation.  Nathan Staudt appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Peter Thill appeared 
on behalf of the defendants.  Also present was Contech’s representative, Marguerite 
Thomas. 
 
 
The matter came on for hearing on May 20, 2025, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without difficulty. 
  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5, and 
Defendants’ Exhibit A-E.  The defendants objected to Claimant’s Exhibit 4, pages 22 
and 23.  Arguments were heard on the record.  The objection pertained to a report from 
a treating physician of the claimant.  The undersigned determined that, pursuant to 
Schoenfeld v. FDL Foods, Inc., the late produced reports of a treating physician differ 
from those of an expert insofar as the prejudice that they present for purposes of 
exclusion pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.19.  Schoenfeld v. FDL Foods, 
Inc., 560 N.W.2d 595 (Iowa 1997).  Since the report was from a treating physician, the 
undersigned determined that the objecting party, in this case, the defendants, failed to 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jul-16  15:24:29     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 2 
prove unfair prejudice in admitting the report.  The objection was overruled.  All of the 
exhibits were received and admitted into the record. 
   
 
The defendants urged a reconsideration of the aforementioned decision in their 
post-hearing brief.  I considered the objection before the hearing, at the hearing, and 
again based upon the request of the defendants in their post-hearing brief.  As noted 
above, the defendants did not prove that there was unfair prejudice in the admission of 
the report of a treating physician pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.19(3), and 
Schoenfeld.  The defendants’ objection remains overruled. 
 
 
Leslie Mettler testified on behalf of the claimant.  Marguerite Thomas testified on 
behalf of the defendants.  SueAnn Jones was appointed the official reporter and 
custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The matter was considered fully submitted 
following briefing by the parties on June 30, 2025. 
     
STIPULATIONS 
 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, and in the course of, 
her employment on April 14, 2023. 
 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
4. That the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
5. That the claimant is entitled to permanent disability benefits for 200 weeks for 
a loss of 40 percent of the loss of use of the body as a whole. 
 
6. That the permanent disability is an industrial disability. 
 
7. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is 
October 11, 2024. 
  
8. That the claimant’s gross earnings were seven hundred twenty-one and 
55/100 dollars ($721.55) per week, that the claimant was single and entitled to 
one exemption, providing a weekly rate of compensation of four hundred sixty-
two and 38/100 dollars ($462.38).   
 
9. That, prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid thirty-one and five-sevenths 
weeks of compensation at the rate of four hundred sixty-two and 38/100 
dollars per week from October 12, 2024, through the date of hearing and 
ongoing, and that the defendants were entitled to credit for these payments. 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 3 
 
10. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 have been paid. 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.  The parties indicated that 
entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits was not in dispute.  
Medical benefits were also no longer in dispute.  The parties are now bound by their 
stipulations. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant is permanently and totally disabled. 
  
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to a taxation of costs as itemized in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 5. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Leslie Mettler is the sister of Peter Mettler, the claimant.  (Testimony).  Mr. 
Mettler was 48 years old at the time of the hearing.  (Testimony).  He was born in 
Newton, Iowa, but grew up in Des Moines, Iowa.  (Testimony).  He graduated from Des 
Moines North High School in 1996.  (Testimony).  Following high school, he attended a 
school in Phoenix, Arizona, where he obtained a certificate in AutoCAD and drafting.  
(Testimony).  He was not married, and had no children.  (Testimony). 
   
Prior to working at Contech, Mr. Mettler worked a variety of jobs.  (Testimony).  
He worked at Krispy Kreme as a baker.  (Testimony).  He advanced to a management 
position.  (Testimony).  He worked at Krispy Kreme for about 10 years.  (Testimony).  
He then worked at Monarch Materials building windows.  (Testimony).  He enjoyed this 
job.  (Testimony).  His last job before working at Contech was at Barnes & Noble 
wherein he accepted shipments and stocked books.  (Testimony).  He worked at this 
position for about three months. 
 
Mr. Mettler was hired by Contech in May of 2022.  (Testimony).  He started as a 
seasonal employee who was laid off during the winter.  (Testimony).  He was eventually 
brought back as a regular employee.  (Testimony).  He worked as a rivet operator.  
(Testimony).  As a rivet operator, he operated machinery, positioned pipe and parts, 
and placed rivets in punched holes for setting, along with other tasks.  (Defendants’ 
Exhibit B:4).  Based upon a review of the job description, this job was relatively 
physically demanding, and required an employee to be able to follow directions and 
schedules from plant leadership.  (DE B:4-5).   
 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 4 
Marguerite Thomas testified on behalf of Contech.  (Testimony).  She is the 
corporate human resources director for Contech.  (Testimony).  She worked there for 12 
years, as of the time of the hearing.  (Testimony).  She noted that Mr. Mettler worked at 
a location that manufactured corrugated metal pipes, in Ankeny, Iowa.  (Testimony).  At 
the time of the hearing, Contech employed 14 employees in Ankeny, Iowa.  
(Testimony).  At the time Mr. Mettler worked for Contech in Ankeny, Iowa, there were 12 
total employees.  (Testimony). 
   
At the time of Mr. Mettler’s injury, he lived and worked independently.  
(Testimony).  He had a drivers’ license.  (Testimony). 
   
On April 14, 2023, Mr. Mettler worked for Contech in Ankeny, Iowa.  (Testimony).  
Contech’s injury report indicated that Mr. Mettler was eating lunch next to a six-foot 
riveted pipe pit.  (DE C:6).  When he arose following his lunch, he inadvertently fell into 
the six-foot deep pit.  (DE C:6).  He suffered injuries from a fall on that date, including 
broken ribs, spinal fractures, a bruised liver, and head trauma.  (Testimony).  Mr. Mettler 
was unconscious following the fall and was taken to the hospital via ambulance 
operated by the Ankeny Fire Department.  (Testimony; Joint Exhibit 1:1-3).  Mr. Mettler 
was found at the bottom of a six-foot pit on a concrete floor.  (JE 1:1).  Mr. Mettler was 
ventilated and removed from the pit to an ambulance.  (JE 1:1).  He was given 
medication to sedate him and transported to Iowa Methodist Medical Center.  (JE 1:1). 
   
Hospital staff told Ms. Mettler that he either fell on his head or his feet, as he had 
compression fractures in his spine.  (Testimony).  After about three-and-a-half to four 
days, Mr. Mettler regained consciousness.  (Testimony).  He was admitted to the 
hospital on April 14, 2023, and remained hospitalized through May 10, 2023.  
(Testimony; JE 2:4-10).  A large number of imaging studies were done on Mr. Mettler 
while he was hospitalized.  (JE 2:6-8).  Mr. Mettler’s diagnoses included a diffuse axonal 
brain injury, a scalp hematoma, multiple closed fractures of the thoracic spine, a 
traumatic subdural hematoma, a traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, a grade 2 liver 
injury, a sternal fracture, fractures of right sided ribs, and respiratory failure following 
trauma.  (JE 2:5).  
  
After regaining consciousness, Mr. Mettler was very agitated and confused.  
(Testimony).  He could not move his right side in coordination with his left side.  
(Testimony).  He could not speak.  (Testimony).  He could not eat independently, so he 
had to have a feeding tube.  (Testimony).  By the time he was discharged, he could say 
simple words and phrases, and could nod to answer periodic questions.  (JE 2:5).   
  
 
Mr. Mettler was discharged in a wheelchair with a neck and chest brace.  
(Testimony).  By the time of his discharge, he could speak again, though it was 
unintelligible according to Ms. Mettler.  (Testimony).  He still needed to be tube fed.  (JE 
2:10).  Mr. Mettler was transported to On With Life in Ankeny, Iowa, for inpatient 
rehabilitation.  (Testimony).  While at On With Life, Mr. Mettler received speech therapy, 
occupational therapy, and physical therapy pursuant to the order of his hospital 
physicians.  (Testimony; JE 2:9-10).  Ms. Mettler noted that Mr. Mettler responded to 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 5 
these treatments.  (Testimony). Eventually, he was able to feed himself, walk, and 
perform certain physical activities.  (Testimony).  After he became more mobile, he 
attempted to leave the building or not stay in bed.  (Testimony).  He was discharged 
from On With Life on October 9, 2023.  (Testimony; JE 3:12). 
   
As a result of Mr. Mettler’s injuries, his sister was named his guardian and 
conservator in July of 2023.  (Testimony).  In order to be named guardian and 
conservator, Ms. Mettler proceeded through a court hearing, at which no one objected 
to her being named Mr. Mettler’s guardian and conservator.  (Testimony). 
   
 
Mr. Mettler then transitioned to Residential Neuro Rehabilitation (“RNR”) in Des 
Moines, Iowa, which was a sister site to On With Life.  (Testimony). RNR was a home-
type setting.  (Testimony).  At RNR, Mr. Mettler had his own bedroom with a shared 
bathroom and shared living spaces.  (Testimony).  Mr. Mettler and the other residents 
cooked their own breakfasts and lunches, and then had family-style dinners.  
(Testimony).  While at RNR, Mr. Mettler continued to have physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, and speech therapy on an outpatient basis with On With Life in 
Ankeny.  (Testimony).  Mr. Mettler had more freedom at RNR, but could not leave the 
facility independently.  (Testimony). 
   
 
While a resident at RNR, Mr. Mettler was evaluated by David Demarest, Ph.D. 
for a neuropsychological evaluation in December of 2023.  (Testimony).  Dr. Demarest 
issued a report outlining his findings on December 22, 2023.  (JE 5:27-37).  Dr. 
Demarest listed a number of diagnoses for Mr. Mettler, including: traumatic subdural 
hemorrhage with loss of consciousness, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage with loss 
of consciousness, diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of consciousness, acute 
postprocedural respiratory failure, amnesia, attention and concentration deficit, cognitive 
communication deficit, visuospatial deficit, psychomotor deficit, and frontal lobe and 
executive function deficit.  (JE 5:27).  In preparing his report, Dr. Demarest interviewed 
Mr. Mettler, Ms. Mettler, and staff from On With Life, as well as reviewing a number of 
medical records.  (JE 5:27-30).  Dr. Demarest observed that Mr. Mettler was tangential 
in conversation and that he reported a history of amnesia.  (JE 5:30).  Dr. Demarest 
found Mr. Mettler to be pleasant and cooperative, but noted that he may have hygiene 
issues due to significant body odor issues on the second day of the examination.  (JE  
5:31).  Dr. Demarest documented Mr. Mettler to have significant residual aphasia, 
difficulty expressing himself, and with comprehension.  (JE 5:31).  Dr. Demarest found 
no evidence of malingering.  (JE 5:31). 
   
The results of the testing showed Mr. Mettler to have minimal depression.  (JE 
5:32).  He also showed minimal anxiety.  (JE 5:32).  He displayed varying memory 
issues.  (JE 5:34).  Dr. Demarest documented Mr. Mettler to have significant difficulty in 
executive cognition.  (JE 5:34). 
   
Dr. Demarest concluded that Mr. Mettler’s prognosis was guarded at the time of 
the examination due to the severity of his deficits.  (JE 5:35).  Dr. Demarest opined that 
Mr. Mettler’s “…severity of deficits is sobering at this point and, in my professional 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 6 
opinion and experience, his significant and often severe deficits would interfere 
significantly with gainful employment in the community, with operating a motor vehicle, 
and with living independently.”  (JE 5:35).  Dr. Demarest could not opine as to whether 
Mr. Mettler achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”).  (JE 5:35).  Since Mr. 
Mettler had yet to reach MMI, Dr. Demarest could not opine as to the extent of his 
permanent impairment.  (JE 5:36).  Dr. Demarest had some concerns about Mr. 
Mettler’s ability to live independently.  (Testimony; JE 5:35).  Dr. Demarest 
recommended a group home setting for Mr. Mettler.  (Testimony). 
   
 
In March of 2024, Mr. Mettler’s various outpatient therapies with On With Life 
ended.  (Testimony). 
   
 
On March 25, 2024, Dr. Demarest signed off on a check-box-type letter drafted 
by claimant’s counsel.  (JE 6:38-39).  Dr. Demarest’s signature indicated his assent to a 
number of opinions, a number of which are restatements of the opinions in his 
December report.  (JE 6:38-39).  Dr. Demarest indicated that Mr. Mettler was “in a 
critical recovery window…” and that Mr. Mettler continued to require ongoing live-in 
support and therapy.  (JE 6:38).  Dr. Demarest recommended Mr. Mettler see Kurt 
Smith, D.O.  (JE 6:38). 
   
 
On May 24, 2024, Mr. Mettler visited with Kurt Smith, D.O.  (Testimony; JE 4:13-
16).  Mr. Mettler noted aching in his head.  (JE 4:13).  Dr. Smith noted there were safety 
concerns with Mr. Mettler, including leaving the stove on, having poor insight, and 
forgetting to put out cigarettes.  (JE 4:13).  Dr. Smith also documented that Mr. Mettler 
displayed compulsive behavior.  (JE 4:16).  Dr. Smith’s record noted imaging studies 
performed on April 15, 2024, including MRIs of the thoracic spine and brain, and a CT 
scan of the brain.  (JE 4:16).  The MRI of the thoracic spine showed endplate 
compression fractures at multiple levels in the thoracic spine and degenerative changes 
of the thoracic spine.  (JE 4:16).  The MRI of the claimant’s brain showed findings 
consistent with diffuse axonal injury along with several hematomas.  (JE 4:16).  Dr. 
Smith listed diagnoses of: closed traumatic brain injury with loss of consciousness, 
memory impairment, impaired executive functioning, attention and concentration deficit, 
psychomotor deficit, diffuse axonal brain injury with loss of consciousness, and 
compression fractures of the body of thoracic vertebra.  (JE 4:16).  Dr. Smith noted that 
Mr. Mettler continued to have deficits with his memory, attention, concentration, 
cognitive communication, visuospatial, psychomotor, and executive function.  (JE 4:17).  
As a result of these deficits, Dr. Smith recommended against Mr. Mettler living 
independently or working.  (Testimony; JE 4:17).  Dr. Smith also recommended that Mr. 
Mettler remain in a supervised environment.  (JE 4:17).  Dr. Smith noted, “[w]ith this 
type of injury, it is generally about two years from time of injury.  Would recommend 
repeat neuropsychotic testing prior to the two-year mark.”  (JE 4:17).  Dr. Smith 
indicated a plan of no driving and transitioning of care to a host home.  (JE 4:17). 
   
 
Dr. Smith visited with Mr. Mettler again on June 21, 2024.  (JE 4:18-20).  Mr. 
Mettler continued to have problems with irritability, difficulty with memory, personality 
changes, and unusual behavior.  (JE 4:18).  Dr. Smith noted that Mr. Mettler continued 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 7 
to have significant deficits, and that he was unable to live independently.  (JE 4:20).  Mr. 
Mettler could also not return to work.  (JE 4:20).  According to Dr. Smith, Mr. Mettler 
needed to live in a supervised environment.  (JE 4:20).  As a plan, Dr. Smith opined that 
Mr. Mettler was pending a transition to the next level of care, that he was unable to live 
independently, and that he was unable to work.  (JE 4:20). 
   
 
On August 9, 2024, Mr. Mettler returned to see Dr. Smith for follow-up care.  (JE 
4:21-23).  Mr. Mettler was recently hospitalized for pneumonia.  (JE 4:21).  His 
caregivers were working on placement in supervised homes.  (JE 4:21).  Dr. Smith 
opined that Mr. Mettler continued to have deficits in memory, attention, concentration, 
psychomotor, and executive functioning.  (JE 4:23).  Dr. Smith noted, “[t]hese deficits 
make it impossible for him to live independently at this time.”  (JE 4:23).  Dr. Smith 
opined further that Mr. Mettler could not work without supervision.  (JE 4:23). 
   
 
In September of 2024, Mr. Mettler was discharged from RNR to a group home in 
Greenfield, Iowa, which is run by Support Services of South Central Iowa (“Support 
Services”).  (Testimony).  The defendants authorized this treatment and transition.  
(Testimony).  The transition to Support Services from RNR went well for Mr. Mettler, 
despite some early nerves.  (Testimony).  At the Support Services group home, Mr. 
Mettler lives with two other residents and a rotating staff member who is on-site 24 
hours per day.  (Testimony).  The staff members are present in order to keep residents 
safe and assist them in any of their tasks as needed.  (Testimony).  They also provide 
gentle reminders to Mr. Mettler to perform tasks like laundry or grocery shopping.  
(Testimony).  Finally, they take residents to appointments and on social outings.  
(Testimony). 
   
 
On October 11, 2024, Mr. Mettler saw Dr. Smith again for a follow-up.  (JE 4:24-
26).  Mr. Mettler continued to have issues with impairments to attention, concentration, 
psychomotor function, memory, and executive function.  (JE 4:26).  Dr. Smith placed the 
claimant at maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) as of this visit.  (JE 4:26).  He again 
required Mr. Mettler to live in a group setting.  (JE 4:26).  Dr. Smith requested that Mr. 
Mettler return in six months.  (JE 4:26). 
   
 
Dr. Smith set out a number of opinions in a letter dated October 30, 2024.  (JE 
7:40).  Dr. Smith opined that Mr. Mettler achieved MMI for his diagnoses of traumatic 
subdural hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and diffuse axonal injury.  (JE 7:40).  
He continued to have deficits in his memory, attention, concentration, psychomotor 
skills, visual spatial skills, cognitive communication skills, and executive function skills.  
(JE 7:40).  According to Dr. Smith, Mr. Mettler could not live independently due to these 
issues and he also required supervision for certain functions.  (JE 7:40).  He also could 
not drive.  (JE 7:40).  Dr. Smith used the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition in order to provide an impairment rating for Mr. Mettler.  (JE 
7:40).  Dr. Smith referenced Table 13-6 on page 320 of the Guides to place Mr. Mettler 
in a class 3 and provide him with a 40 percent impairment of the whole person.  (JE 
7:40).  He also noted that Mr. Mettler required supervision for “most activities of daily 
living.”  (JE 7:40).   

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 8 
 
 
In a check-box type letter, drafted by claimant’s counsel, dated November 7, 
2024, signed by Dr. Smith on November 8, 2024, Dr. Smith indicated his assent to 
certain opinions.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 4:22-23).  Dr. Smith outlined Mr. Mettler’s care and 
reiterated his previous diagnoses.  (CE 4:22).  He also noted that, “[g]iven the severity 
of his injuries…safety was a significant concern for Mr. Mettler, and that Mr. Mettler was 
unable to live independently or return to work.”  (CE 4:22).  Dr. Smith confirmed that Mr. 
Mettler’s head injury was consistent with the symptoms which he experienced since 
April 14, 2023, meaning that Mr. Mettler’s head injury was a “substantial causal factor in 
Mr. Mettler’s symptoms, limitations, subsequent need for treatment, and subsequent 
need to remain off work from [April 14, 2023,] to the present.”  (CE 4:22).  He confirmed 
placing Mr. Mettler at MMI on October 11, 2024, with the understanding that he required 
a “host home setting.”  (CE 4:22).  During that appointment, he requested that Mr. 
Mettler return in six months, at which time he would be released to return to care on an 
as needed basis.  (CE 4:22).  Dr. Smith agreed that it was medically probable that Mr. 
Mettler would remain unable to drive, unable to live alone, and unable to work outside of 
a supervised environment “for the remainder of his life.”  (CE 4:23).  Finally, Dr. Smith 
confirmed his previous 40 percent whole body impairment rating.  (CE 4:23).  
  
 
On May 15, 2025, Dr. Smith met with Mr. Mettler again.  (JE 8:41-43).  The 
record notes that Mr. Mettler’s symptoms had not changed since his previous visit.  (JE 
8:41).  Mr. Mettler continued to be irritable, have difficulty with his memory, have 
restlessness and displayed unusual behavior.  (JE 8:41).  Dr. Smith recommended no 
changes and told Mr. Mettler to follow-up as needed.  (JE 8:43). 
   
 
At the time of the hearing, Ms. Mettler testified that Mr. Mettler was happy to no 
longer be in a hospital setting.  (Testimony).  However, he did not “feel emotions the 
way he thinks he should be…” according to Ms. Mettler.  (Testimony).  Ms. Mettler 
indicated that she would not trust her brother to live independently, as he forgets to turn 
stoves off, leaves candles burning, leaves doors open, and leaves the house without a 
coat on during the winter.  (Testimony).  He also experienced issues with judgment 
including during interactions with his roommates.  (Testimony).  He struggled with 
emotional regulation, as Ms. Mettler noted he could “easily go from zero to 100 on being 
upset.  If he’s asked to do something he doesn’t want to do or if he sees somebody 
doing something he doesn’t feel is right, he can be very argumentative.”  (Testimony).  
He also continued to experience memory issues, including forgetting key life events like 
certain relatives dying or combining key elements of two different stories.  (Testimony).  
At times, he also had issues following instructions.  (Testimony). 
   
As Mr. Mettler’s guardian, Ms. Mettler makes sure that Mr. Mettler goes to 
appointments, has clothing he needs, and provides activities for him such as books and 
games.  (Testimony).  She also made medical decisions on behalf of Mr. Mettler.  
(Testimony).  As Mr. Mettler’s conservator, she makes sure his bills are paid and makes 
Mr. Mettler’s financial decisions on his behalf.  (Testimony). 
   

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 9 
Mr. Mettler has not worked any job since his injury.  (Testimony).  This was 
confirmed by Ms. Thomas.  (Testimony).  At the time of the hearing, Mr. Mettler 
remained in leave of absence status with no plan by Contech to change this status.  
(Testimony).  In order to return to work at Contech, Mr. Mettler would need to be able to 
return without restrictions or with restrictions that would qualify for reasonable 
accommodation under the Americans with Disabilities Act.  (Testimony).  Contech had 
not offered Mr. Mettler any work since his work injury.  (Testimony).  Contech admitted 
in their discovery responses that Mr. Mettler required “supervision for higher level 
functioning,” and thus they had no adequate work available for him.   (CE 3:14). 
   
According to Ms. Mettler, no doctor has cleared Mr. Mettler to work in any 
capacity.  (Testimony).  Ms. Mettler understood Mr. Mettler to have restrictions from Dr. 
Smith including that he could not have a fulfilling job, that he could not drive, and that he 
could not live alone.  (Testimony).  She confirmed that he has not lived independently 
since his injury.  (Testimony).  She also thought that he could not work any of his prior 
jobs since his injury based upon his restrictions and limitations.  (Testimony).  He 
attempts to work-out at the group home.  (Testimony).  He also played video games.  
(Testimony).  He worked on gardening at the group home.  (Testimony). 
   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Permanent Disability 
 
 
The claimant asserts that he is permanently and totally disabled as a result of his 
April 14, 2023, injury.  The defendants assert that the claimant is not permanently and 
totally disabled, and instead is entitled to a relatively significant industrial disability 
award.  The first consideration is whether Mr. Mettler is permanently and totally 
disabled. 
 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 
258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
   

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 10 
Mr. Mettler is a 48-year-old single man.  He is a native Iowan, who graduated 
from high school in 1996.  He later obtained a certificate in AutoCAD and drafting from a 
school in Phoenix, Arizona.  He obtained no further education. 
 
While working for Contech on April 14, 2023, Mr. Mettler fell into an open pit.  It is 
unclear in which direction he fell, and/or how he fell.  In falling, he suffered a number of 
acute injuries, the most serious of which was a brain injury.  He was hospitalized for just 
under one month.  Initially following his fall, he was unconscious.  After regaining 
consciousness, he had issues with coordination, feeding himself, and speaking.  By the 
time Mr. Mettler was discharged from the hospital in May of 2023, he could use simple 
words and phrases and nod to answer certain questions. 
   
After his discharge from the hospital, Mr. Mettler was taken to On With Life for 
inpatient rehabilitation.  He received speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical 
therapy.  He responded well to these services and eventually regained his ability to feed 
himself, walk, and perform certain physical activities.  Once he became more mobile, he 
attempted to leave On With Life on several occasions.  While Mr. Mettler was a patient 
at On With Life, his sister was named his guardian and conservator.  He was 
discharged to RNR in October of 2023.   
 
At RNR, Mr. Mettler lived in a shared home with several other residents.  He 
prepared his own meals for breakfast and lunch, but then had family-style dinners with 
other residents.  He also continued to have physical therapy, occupational therapy, and 
speech therapy on an outpatient basis at On With Life.  He could not leave RNR 
independently, but attempted to do so on several occasions. 
 
 
Mr. Mettler was evaluated by Dr. Demarest while a resident at RNR.  Dr. 
Demarest performed a neuropsychological evaluation on Mr. Mettler, which included 
interviews with Ms. Mettler and Mr. Mettler, along with a review of the claimant’s 
medical records.  Dr. Demarest concluded that Mr. Mettler suffered from traumatic 
subdural hemorrhage with loss of consciousness, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage 
with loss of consciousness, diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of consciousness, 
acute postprocedural respiratory failure, amnesia, attention and concentration deficit, 
cognitive communication deficit, visuospatial deficit, psychomotor deficit, and frontal 
lobe and executive function deficit.  He noted that Mr. Mettler continued to have 
significant residual aphasia, difficulties expressing himself, difficulty with executive 
cognition, and difficulty comprehending things.  Dr. Demarest opined that Mr. Mettler’s 
issues were “sobering” and that “…his significant and often severe deficits would 
interfere significantly with gainful employment in the community, with operating a motor 
vehicle, and with living independently.”  Dr. Demarest recommended that Mr. Mettler 
continue to live in a group home setting. 
   
 
Dr. Demarest signed off on a check-box letter in which he agreed with a number 
of opinions presented in his neuropsychological evaluation.  He also recommended that 
Mr. Mettler see Dr. Smith.  During his first visit with Dr. Smith, Dr. Smith noted the 
number of issues sustained by Mr. Mettler.  He also opined that Mr. Mettler would need 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 11 
repeated neuropsychotic testing in the future, but that in the interim, he should continue 
to avoid driving and transition his residency to a “host home.”  During a June 21, 2024, 
visit, Dr. Smith again documented Mr. Mettler to have significant deficits which limited 
his ability to live independently or return to work.  Dr. Smith opined again in August of 
2024, that Mr. Mettler could not live independently, nor could he work without 
supervision.  
  
 
By September of 2024, Mr. Mettler transitioned from RNR to a group home in 
Greenfield, Iowa.  At this group home, he was given more independence.  He continued 
to have support from a 24-hour per day staff member, but he generally performed tasks 
like laundry or shopping for himself.  He also gardens and goes on social outings with 
other members of the house. 
   
 
Dr. Smith saw Mr. Mettler again in October of 2024.  During this visit, he placed 
Mr. Mettler at MMI and noted his continued issues with impairments to attention, 
concentration, psychomotor function, memory, and executive function.  Dr. Smith again 
recommended that Mr. Mettler live in a group setting.  In a letter dated October 30, 
2024, Dr. Smith outlined his opinions on Mr. Mettler’s condition.  He noted that Mr. 
Mettler continued to have deficits in his memory, attention, concentration, psychomotor 
skills, visual spatial skills, cognitive communication skills, and executive function skills.  
Dr. Smith opined that Mr. Mettler could not drive and required supervision for certain 
executive functions.  He also recommended that Mr. Mettler not drive.  He issued an 
impairment rating based upon Table 13-6 on page 320 of the Guides to give Mr. Mettler 
a 40 percent impairment of the whole person. 
   
 
On November 7, 2024, Dr. Smith agreed to opinions in a check-box letter drafted 
by claimant’s counsel.  Among these opinions, Dr. Smith agreed that Mr. Mettler’s head 
injury was a substantial causal factor in his symptoms, limitations, subsequent need for 
treatment, and subsequent need to remain off of work from April 14, 2023, to the time of 
the letter.  Dr. Smith also agreed that it was medically improbable that Mr. Mettler would 
be able to drive, live alone, or work outside of a supervised environment for the 
remainder of his life.  
  
 
During a May 15, 2025, visit, Dr. Smith recommended no changes to his 
recommendations to Mr. Mettler’s plans and his recommendations. 
   
 
Ms. Mettler testified that Mr. Mettler continued to experience issues with 
judgment, emotional reactions, his memory, and with following instructions.  She noted 
that Mr. Mettler had not sought employment since his April 14, 2023, injury.  She also 
noted that Mr. Mettler had not been cleared by any doctor to return to work.  She opined 
that, based on her understanding of Mr. Mettler’s previous employment, he could not 
return to any of his previous jobs. 
   
 
The defendants argue that the claimant has not proven entitlement to permanent 
total disability benefits, but that instead he should be awarded a significant industrial 
disability award between 60 percent and 80 percent.  The defendants argue that the 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 12 
claimant could engage in tasks and activities that are “reminiscent of work,” such as 
volunteering with the Animal Rescue League and gardening.  See Defendants’ 
Posthearing Brief, pg. 9. 
   
 
The claimant argues that he is permanently and totally disabled. 
   
 
Since his work injury, Mr. Mettler sustained well-documented, significant, and 
ongoing issues with deficits in his memory, attention, concentration, psychomotor skills, 
visual spatial skills, cognitive communication skills, and executive function skills.  Dr. 
Demarest opined that Mr. Mettler could not work gainful employment due to his issues, 
and could not operate a motor vehicle or live independently.  He then passed care on to 
Dr. Smith.  Dr. Smith continually opined that Mr. Mettler could not live alone, nor could 
he drive.  He eventually opined that Mr. Mettler could not return to work without 
supervision for the remainder of his life.  These are the only opinions in this case as 
they pertain to Mr. Mettler’s employment status.  
  
 
Mr. Mettler’s employment history encompasses physically demanding fields, 
such as working in the service industry at Kum and Go and Krispy Kreme.  He also 
worked building windows at Monarch Materials and accepted and stocked shipments at 
Barnes & Noble.  Finally, he worked at Contech where he operated machinery as a rivet 
operator.  This is a physically demanding position, which required employees to follow 
directions and abide by schedules handed down from plant leadership.  While Mr. 
Mettler had experience with AutoCAD and drafting, there is little evidence that he ever 
had meaningful employment in that field.  
  
 
Based upon the medical evidence and the testimony of Ms. Mettler, it seems 
unlikely that Mr. Mettler could perform work within his experience, training, education, 
intelligence or physical capabilities.  The defendants argue that Mr. Mettler performed 
activities that are “reminiscent of work.”  As caselaw supports, a simple finding that Mr. 
Mettler could perform some work does not preclude a finding of permanent total 
disability.  The defendants also point to the claimant’s failure to look for new jobs as a 
factor to consider in my analysis.  I disagree.  Even if I were to consider Mr. Mettler’s 
failure to look for a new job in this case, it would be outweighed by the 
recommendations or opinions of the treating physicians that Mr. Mettler cannot be 
employed outside of a supervised setting.  The defendants imply that Mr. Mettler should 
have sought supervised employment.  It is unclear what this might comprise.  
Additionally, Mr. Mettler’s experience is not such that he could work in a position in 
which he is constantly supervised or reminded to perform tasks. 
   
The defendants argue that the claimant did not present vocational evidence such 
as a labor market survey, employability analysis, or an unsuccessful return to work in 
order to prove his case.  In this case, Dr. Smith’s opinion that Mr. Mettler could not work 
in an unsupervised fashion when taken in conjunction with Mr. Mettler’s employment 
history, educational background, and limitations, proves that Mr. Mettler is permanently 
and totally disabled.  The lack of a labor market survey or employability analysis are not 
necessary in and of themselves to prove permanent and total disability in this case.  Mr. 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 13 
Mettler was also not offered an opportunity to return to work at Contech, nor would he 
be expected to return to work with Contech considering the opinions of Dr. Smith. 
 
 
I conclude that the opinions of Dr. Demarest and Dr. Smith are the most 
persuasive.  Taken into conjunction with Mr. Mettler’s well documented and ongoing 
issues, I find that Mr. Mettler is permanently and totally disabled, as he cannot perform 
work within his experience, training, education, intelligence, or physical capabilities. 
   
Costs 
 
The claimant seeks an award of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 10A.328.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) 
provides: 
  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. 
   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 
(Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination itself, can be 
taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court reasoned, “a 
physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used as evidence 
in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses associated 
with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, just as they 
do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting additionally that “[i]n 
the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the underlying medical 
treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or deposition”).  The 
commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses incurred by vocational 
experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 5055494 (App. Dec., 
December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 5056857 (App. 
Dec., September 27, 2019). 
   
 
The claimant seeks an award of the following costs: 
 
 
Filing Fee 
 
 
 
 
 
$128.75 
 
Medical Records – Iowa Methodist  
 
$77.45 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 14 
 
Medical Record – Iowa Ortho 
 
 
$20.00 
 
Total  
 
 
 
 
 
$226.20 
 
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33 does not allow for awarding costs for ordering 
medical records by a claimant (or defendant).  Moreover, the records are simply medical 
records and are not doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, nor are they persons reviewing 
health service disputes, as seemingly argued by the claimant in Claimant’s Exhibit 5.  
Therefore, I decline to award those costs.  However, in my discretion, I award the 
claimant the filing fee of one hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($128.75). 
   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
That the claimant is permanently and totally disabled. 
 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred twenty-eight and 
75/100 dollars ($128.75) in costs incurred. 
 
That the defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).  
  
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.  
 
Signed and filed this __16th __ day of July, 2025. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nathaniel Staudt  
(via WCES) 
 
Peter Thill 
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

METTLER V. CONTECH ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS 
Page 15 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of 
appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
