Case Number: 5067685
Case Title:  THOMPSON, CURTIS V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Thompson Curtis-5067685D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CURTIS THOMPSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                         File No. 5067685 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :     Head Note Nos.:  1803, 1804, 2907, 4100 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Claimant Curtis Thompson filed a petition in arbitration on April 15, 2019, alleging 
he sustained an injury to his abdomen while working for the defendant, Winnebago 
Industries (“Winnebago”) on November 14, 2017.  On May 22, 2019, Winnebago filed 
an answer admitting Thompson sustained a work injury.   
An arbitration hearing was held at Iowa Workforce Development in Fort Dodge 
on March 6, 2020.  Attorney James Ballard represented Thompson.  Thompson 
appeared and testified.  Attorney Lindsey Mills represented Winnebago.  Brenda Vigil 
and Colleen Bagley appeared on behalf of Winnebago, but did not testify.  Joint Exhibits 
(“JE”) 1 through 6, Exhibits 1 through 7, and A through H were admitted into the record.  
The record was held open through April 17, 2020, for the receipt of Exhibits I and 8, and 
post-hearing briefs.  Exhibits I and 8 were received and admitted into the record and the 
post-hearing briefs were received and the record was closed.   
At the start of the hearing the parties submitted a hearing report, listing 
stipulations and issues to be decided.  Winnebago waived all affirmative defenses.   
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Winnebago and 
Thompson at the time of the alleged injury. 
2. 
Thompson sustained an injury on November 14, 2017, which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment with Winnebago. 
3. 
The alleged injury is a cause of a temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
4. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-May-22  08:05:02     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 2 
 
5. 
The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
6. 
The disability is an industrial disability. 
7. 
The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is 
February 4, 2019. 
8. 
At the time of the alleged injury Thompson’s gross earnings were $738.00 
per week, he was married and entitled to two exemptions, and the parties believe his 
weekly rate is $485.09. 
9. 
Following the hearing Winnebago agreed to pay Thompson’s medical bills 
set forth in Exhibit 6 and medical benefits are no longer in dispute. 
10. Prior to the hearing Winnebago paid Thompson fifty-five weeks of 
compensation at the weekly rate of $485.09. 
11. Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
1. 
What is the extent of Thompson’s disability? 
2. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Thompson lives in Leland, Iowa with his wife.  (Transcript, page 10)  At the time 
of the hearing he was sixty-one.  (Tr., p. 10)   
Thompson attended high school through the eleventh grade and later completed 
a GED in 1977.  (Exhibit G, p. 26; Tr., p. 11)  In 2007, Thompson earned an Associate 
of Applied Science degree in business administration with a concentration in business 
management from Hamilton College.  (Ex. G, p. 26; Tr., pp. 11-12)  In 2008 Thompson 
earned a Bachelor of Science degree in management with a concentration in business 
administration from Kaplan University.  (Ex. G, p. 26; Tr., p. 12)   
After leaving high school Thompson worked as a dishwasher for Clear Lake High 
School part-time for a year.  (Tr., p. 13)  Thompson left the position when Winnebago 
hired him.  (Tr., p. 13)  Thompson was responsible for banding and installing windshield 
wipers, performing body work and grinding, and assisting with in putting in windshields.  
(Tr., p. 13)  Thompson reported the windshields weighed over thirty pounds.  (Tr., p. 14)   
From 1979 through 1987, Thompson worked as the manager of Lake Truck 
Oasis in Clear Lake until the business was sold.  (Tr., pp. 14, 16-17)  Thompson hired 
and supervised employees, ordered inventory, stocked shelves, obtained fuel from the 
pipeline, and unloaded semi-tractor trailers.  (Tr., p. 14)  Thompson reported the 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 3 
 
position required him to lift over fifty pounds and involved frequent bending and twisting.  
(Tr., pp. 15-16)   
Thompson next worked for K-Way, a gas station in Forest City, as an attendant 
or cashier.  (Tr., p. 17)  Thompson was responsible for unloading the inventory and 
stocking shelves.  (Tr., p. 17)  Thompson agreed the inventory sometimes exceeded 
fifty or thirty pounds.  (Tr., p. 18)   
Thompson was not receiving enough hours with K-Way, and North Central 
Human Services in Forest City hired him to assist persons with disabilities with activities 
of daily living in a group home.  (Tr., pp. 18-19)  The business changed hands, but 
Thompson continued to do the same duties when the business was acquired by Mosaic.  
(Tr., pp. 18-19)  The position required Thompson to be able to lift at least fifty pounds.  
(Tr., pp. 19-20)  Thompson worked in the group home from 1989 through 2019.  (Tr., p. 
20)  At times Thompson worked full-time, and at other times he worked as a substitute 
caregiver.  (Tr., p. 20)   
In 1997 Thompson opened Blue Moon Bar and Grill.  (Tr., p. 21)  Thompson 
lifted cases of beer and kegs, ordered inventory, cooked food, served food, and cleaned 
the establishment.  (Tr., p. 21)  In 2003 Thompson sold the business and accepted a 
position as a route driver for Hermel, a vending company.  (Tr., pp. 21-22)  The position 
with Hermel required Thompson to be able to lift fifty to eighty pounds, and involved 
frequent bending and twisting.  (Tr., pp. 22-23)  All of the positions Thompson held 
through Hermel required him to be on his feet and were not sedentary.  (Tr., p. 23)   
Thompson injured his shoulders and his position with Hermel ended in 2005.  
(Tr., pp. 23-24)  Thompson returned to full-time work with North Central Human 
Services.  (Tr., p. 24)  Thompson continued to work full-time for North Central Human 
Services until he returned to Winnebago as a full-time machine operator in 2015.  (Tr., 
p. 24)  After he commenced his employment with Winnebago Thompson continued to 
work for Mosaic as a substitute.  (Tr., p. 20)   
Thompson testified when he returned to work for Winnebago in 2015, his general 
health was good and he did not have any restrictions or limitations on his activities 
because of his prior injuries.  (Tr., p. 26)  Thompson underwent a pre-employment 
physical with Winnebago, which he passed.  (Tr., p. 26)  The machine operator position 
description provides, the position involves medium work, requiring the ability to exert up 
to fifty pounds of force occasionally, up to twenty pounds of force frequently, and up to 
ten pounds of force constantly.  (Ex. 4, p. 24)  Thompson agreed the position required 
him to stoop, bend, stand, and walk.  (Tr., p. 25)   
The evening of November 14, 2017, Thompson was emptying an industrial-sized 
garbage can into a dumpster at Winnebago when he felt something pull on the left side 
of his abdomen.  (Tr., p. 27)  Thompson reported his work injury to Winnebago.  (Tr., p. 
27)  Thompson continued his shift and when he went home he noticed a bulge on the 
left-hand side of his abdomen when he was taking a shower.  (Tr., p. 28) 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 4 
 
On November 15, 2017, Thompson attended an appointment with his personal 
physician, Byron Carlson, M.D., complaining of random abdominal pain located in the 
midline he described as ripping.  (JE 1, p. 1)  Thompson reported the pain had an onset 
on November 14, 2017 when he was lifting at work and he noticed a bulge.  (JE 1, p. 1)  
Dr. Carlson noted Thompson had a history of diabetes mellitus, type two, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, and peripheral neuropathy.  (JE 1, p. 1)  Thompson had been 
prescribed hydrocodone for pain, as needed, in January 2017.  (JE 1, p. 2)  Dr. Carlson 
assessed Thompson with abdominal pain, recommended an abdominal ultrasound, and 
imposed a ten pound lifting restriction.  (JE 1, p. 4)   
Thompson prepared an incident report for the injury on November 16, 2017.  (Ex. 
3, p. 22)  Thompson relayed he had a similar problem in the past, noting he had a 
hernia six years ago that was not work-related.  (Ex. 3, p. 22)  Thompson provided 
Winnebago with his restrictions and Winnebago arranged for medical care for 
Thompson a few weeks later.  (Tr., pp. 28-30)  Thompson continued to work for 
Winnebago doing his normal job without restrictions.  (Tr., p. 30)   
Thompson received an abdominal ultrasound on November 24, 2017.  (JE 2, p. 
30)  The reviewing radiologist found there appeared to be a new left lower quadrant 
ventral hernia containing both fat and bowel, and recommended a noncontrast 
computerized tomography scan.  (JE 2, p. 30)   
On December 14, 2017, Thompson attended a surgical consultation with Jeffrey 
Rowe, M.D.  (JE 3, p. 36)  Dr. Rowe noted Thompson had a history of undergoing a 
perforated diverticulitis surgery, colostomy takedown, incarcerated right inguinal hernia 
surgery, and an incarcerated hernia in the right groin that needed a midline incision in 
2015 that had a hard time healing.  (JE 3, p. 36)  Dr. Rowe also noted Thompson had 
undergone left carpal tunnel surgery, back surgery, a right rotator cuff repair, and right 
carpal tunnel surgery.  (JE 3, p. 36)  Dr. Rowe listed an impression of a new hernia in 
need of a large hernia repair.  (JE 3, p. 37)  On December 14, 2017, Dr. Carlson 
continued Thompson’s ten pound lifting restriction for six months.  (JE 1, p. 5)  
Thompson testified that following hernia surgery in 2015 he was released without 
restrictions.  (Tr., p. 32)   
Thompson returned to Dr. Rowe on January 10, 2018.  (JE 3, p. 39)  During the 
appointment the workers’ compensation nurse inquired whether Thompson’s condition 
was caused by or made worse by his work and Dr. Rowe declined to give an opinion.  
(JE 3, p. 39)  Dr. Rowe listed an impression of a left-sided abdominal hernia and 
recommended a referral to a tertiary care center for a complex ventral hernia repair.  
(JE 3, p. 41)   
On January 28, 2018, Thompson went to the Mercy Medical Center Emergency 
Department, complaining of worsening abdominal and bilateral inner thigh pain radiating 
from his left upper buttocks to his left thigh.  (JE 2, p. 31)  Hospital staff noted 
Thompson had a history of diverticulitis.  (JE 2, p. 31)  Thompson reported he was 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 5 
 
concerned he may have developed a third abdominal hernia.  (JE 2, p. 31)  Thompson 
underwent an abdominal and pelvic computerized tomography scan,  
On February 5, 2018, Paul Conte, M.D., a surgeon, conducted an independent 
medical examination of Thompson for Winnebago.  (JE 4)  Dr. Conte reviewed 
Thompson’s medical records and examined him.  (JE 4)  Dr. Conte noted Thompson 
has a complicated past medical history, including  
abdominal exploration for perforated diverticulitis and did undergo a 
colostomy.  Following that he had to have re-operation for takedown of his 
colostomy and re-anastomosis of his colon.  After this he did develop a 
ventral hernia which was repaired with mesh.  Years later, he had a right 
inguinal hernia that presented with incarceration and he had repair and an 
exploratory laparotomy through his midline abdomen to assess that the 
bowel was not injured, making a total of four midline abdominal surgeries.   
(JE 4, p. 42)  Dr. Conte noted in 2015, Thompson received imaging that showed a 
chronic right-sided abdominal ventral hernia, but he did not really have any symptoms 
from that.  (JE 4, p. 42)  Dr. Conte documented on November 14, 2017, Thompson was 
lifting an industrial size trashcan at work and he felt a bulging pop in his left side and he 
was seen by Dr. Carlson, his family physician, and then referred to Dr. Rowe.  (JE 4, p. 
42)   
Dr. Conte opined Thompson’s injury was consistent with his description of his 
injury at work and the mechanism is reasonable and likely the cause of the new 
herniation and worsening of the pre-existing herniated area.  (JE 4, p. 43)  Dr. Conte 
noted the condition was a material aggravation, which would not improve without 
surgical correction, and he recommended surgery.  (JE 4, p. 43)  Dr. Conte found 
Thompson could continue his current work level and restrictions with no overtime, and 
recommended the surgery be performed at a tertiary care center.  (JE 4, pp. 43-45)   
On February 28, 2018, Thompson attended an appointment with Kent Choi, 
M.D., a surgeon with the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (“UIHC”).  (JE 5, p. 46)  
Dr. Choi noted the following history: 
[o]riginally, he underwent Hartman’s procedure for perforated diverticulitis 
about 25 or 30 years ago at an OSH followed by reversal.  He then 
underwent an incisional hernia repair with mesh in 1992 done in Mason 
City, Iowa.  He has also had open right inguinal hernia repair with mesh in 
2015.  He then noticed a bulge in his abdomen in November 2017.  The 
bulge causes him constant pain that is sometimes sharp and sometimes 
pressure quality.  The pain is worst in his LLQ and sometimes radiates 
down into his left leg.  Overeating makes the pain worse.  The pain times 
keeps him up at night.  He also notes a chronic nonhealing wound next to 
his umbilicus for the past 3 years.  The wound occasionally drains.   

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 6 
 
(JE 5, p. 46)  Dr. Choi assessed Thompson with a recurrent ventral hernia and ordered 
Thompson to quit smoking before he would perform surgery.  (JE 5, p. 49)   
Thompson quit smoking and Dr. Choi agreed to perform the surgery.  (JE 5, pp. 
50, 54)  On May 25, 2018, Thompson underwent a large hernia repair at the UIHC.  (JE 
5, p. 54)  Dr. Choi documented he found an “[e]xtensive intra-abdominal adhesion 
throughout the entire abdomen.  Very poor quality of fascia along the midline.  The left 
rectus muscle was nearly completely destroyed.”  (JE 5, pp. 54-55)   
Thompson complained of pain in his wound and bloating in his abdomen.  (JE 
(JE 5, p. 61)  Thompson underwent an abdomen and pelvic computerized tomography 
scan on August 1, 2018.  (JE 5, p. 57)  The reviewing radiologist noted Thompson had a 
large subcutaneous fluid collection immediately anterior to the hernia repair.  (JE 5, p. 
58)  On August 7, 2018, Dr. Choi diagnosed Thompson with an abdominal wall seroma, 
and supervised the draining of the seroma.  (JE 5, pp. 60-62)   
On August 17, 2018, Thompson returned to the UIHC reporting the bloating had 
returned, but was not as severe as it was before his seroma had been drained.  (JE 5, 
p. 63)  Thompson received an abdominal ultrasound, which revealed additional fluid 
collection.  (JE 5, p. 64)  Cheryl Byrnes, ARNP, discussed the case with Dr. Choi and 
Thompson underwent an ultrasound-guided seroma drainage.  (JE 5, p. 65)   
Thompson attended a follow-up appointment the UIHC on August 31, 2018.  (JE 
5, p. 66)  Thompson relayed he was doing well with light-duty work, denied having 
abdominal pain, but reported some bloating had returned.  (JE 5, p. 66)  Byrnes ordered 
Thompson to pack his wound twice per day and continued his ten pound lifting 
restriction.  (JE 5, p. 67)   
On October 2, 2018, Thompson returned to Dr. Carlson complaining of 
moderate, achy abdominal pain for the past three weeks, which caused nausea and a 
change in appetite.  (JE 1, p. 6)  Thompson advised he had undergone triple hernia 
surgery in May 2018, he had been on light duty, and fluid had built up in his abdomen, 
which had been removed.  (JE 1, p. 6)   
On October 10, 2018, Thompson returned to Dr. Choi reporting he was having 
abdominal pain, but his bloating had improved.  (JE 5, p. 68)  Thompson expressed he 
was discouraged and uncertain if he would be able to return to full duty.  (JE 5, p. 68)  
Thompson underwent an abdominal ultrasound, which showed fluid collection in his 
abdomen, and Dr. Choi supervised an ultrasound guided drainage of the seroma.  (JE 
5, pp. 69-74)   
Thompson attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Carlson on November 7, 
2018, complaining of moderate abdominal pain, which was recurring and had worsened, 
bloating, blood in his stool, constipation, diarrhea, fever, and nausea.  (JE 1, p. 10)  Dr. 
Carlson assessed Thompson with periumbilical abdominal pain, diarrhea, and chronic 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 7 
 
pain of both shoulders, and recommended Thompson undergo an abdominal 
ultrasound.  (JE 1, p. 14) 
Thompson underwent an abdominal ultrasound on November 8, 2018, which was 
compared to a computerized tomography scan from January 28, 2018.  (JE 2, p. 33)  
The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of a suspected fat necrosis and 
postoperative seroma within the anterior abdominal wall at the site of the ventral hernia 
repair, no evidence of a recurrent hernia, and no significant abnormality of the intra-
abdominal contents.  (JE 2, p. 33)   
In 2019, Mosaic terminated Thompson’s employment because it could not 
accommodate his work restrictions.  (Tr., pp. 20, 51)   
Sunil Bansal, M.D., an occupational medicine physician, conducted an 
independent medical examination for Thompson on November 8, 2019, and issued his 
report on December 13, 2019.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Bansal reviewed Thompson’s medical 
records and examined him.  (Ex. 1)  In his report, Dr. Bansal summarized medical 
records from Dr. Choi that document Thompson’s full history of multiple abdominal 
surgeries.  (Ex. 1)  In the “Prior Injuries” section of his report, Dr. Bansal noted “Mr. 
Thompson underwent an inguinal hernia repair in 1992, on the opposite side.  He 
recovered following this hernia surgery without any difficulties.  He had no problems 
digesting food prior to his recent hernia surgery.”  (Ex. 1, p. 11)  Dr. Bansal did not 
discuss or analyze Thompson’s full surgical history. 
Dr. Bansal assessed Thompson with a recurrent ventral hernia with infected 
mesh and recurrent incisional seroma accumulations requiring subcutaneous drainage, 
and agreed with Dr. Choi that Thompson reached maximum medical improvement on 
February 4, 2019.  (Ex. 1, p. 13)  Using the AMA Guides, Dr. Bansal opined: 
hernias can be rated according to Table 6-9 on page 136.  He meets the 
criteria from a class 2, with some overlap into class 3.  He has frequent 
discomfort, seroma formation with intermittent oozing, he is precluded 
from heavy lifting, and he has limitations in activities of daily living.  For his 
complex hernia case, he is assigned a 19% whole person impairment. 
(Ex. 1, p. 13)  Dr. Bansal assigned Thompson a sedentary level restriction with 
occasional lifting of ten pounds with rare bending or twisting and noted Thompson will 
require periodic ultrasound-guided aspirations of his seroma and if his hernia recurs he 
will require reconstructive surgery.  (Ex. 1, p. 14)   
On November 9, 2018, Thompson returned to Dr. Carlson, complaining of 
moderate and recurring right upper quadrant abdominal pain with diarrhea.  (JE 1, p. 
16)  Dr. Carlson reviewed the ultrasound results and provided a return to work note with 
the restrictions recommended by the UIHC.  (JE 1, p. 20)   

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 8 
 
Thompson contacted Byrnes on November 11, 2018, complaining of pain and 
reporting he had undergone an ultrasound that showed fluid had collected in his 
abdomen.  (JE 5, p. 75)  Thompson expressed he was worried Winnebago would 
terminate his employment and reported he was not getting much sleep.  (JE 5, p. 75)  
Byrnes documented she advised Thompson she did not believe the fluid collection 
would be causing pain and offered to make a referral to a local pain clinic.  (JE 5, p. 75)   
On November 15, 2018, Thompson called Dr. Carlson’s office, complaining of 
fluid in his abdomen and that he was experiencing a lot of pain since he returned to 
work and requesting an increase in his medication.  (JE 1, p. 22)  Dr. Carlson noted 
Thompson was already on a lot of pain medication and he would not increase his 
medication.  (JE 1, p. 22)   
Thompson returned to Dr. Choi on November 20, 2018, reporting he was 
experiencing intermittent lower abdominal pain and that he worried about the fluid 
collection and about being on his feet too much.  (JE 5, p. 76)  Dr. Choi ordered an 
abdominal ultrasound, which revealed some fluid collection.  (JE 5, pp. 78-79)  Dr. Choi 
assessed Thompson with an abdominal wall seroma, status-post repair of ventral 
hernia, and chronic abdominal pain.  (JE 5, p. 79)  Dr. Choi noted Thompson’s recurrent 
abdominal wall seroma was slowly improving, referred him to a local pain clinic for 
evaluation and treatment, ordered Thompson to wear an abdominal binder at all times, 
advised Thompson the seroma was not likely to be causing the pain and his body 
should slowly reabsorb the fluid, and advised Thompson he may never return to his pre-
injury status, but he needed to be as active as possible.  (JE 5, pp. 79-80)   
On November 28, 2018, Thompson attended an appointment with Dr. Carlson, 
complaining of moderate, constant, right upper and left lower quadrant abdominal wall 
pain.  (JE 1, p. 23)   
On February 4, 2019, Thompson returned to Dr. Choi, reporting he was 
experiencing abdominal pain, which had improved since surgery, and that he had 
reduced his use of hydrocodone and Tramadol.  (JE 5, p. 81)  Thompson noted he had 
been doing well with light-duty work, but he could “feel it” at the end of the day.  (JE 5, 
p. 81)  Dr. Choi ordered an abdominal and pelvic computerized tomography scan, noted 
the seroma was slowly improving and that it was best to leave it alone, determined 
Thompson had reached maximum medical improvement from a surgical standpoint, and 
discussed Thompson’s job requirements and lifting restrictions.  (JE 5, pp. 81-84)  
Byrnes issued a medical excuse noting Thompson had reached maximum medical 
improvement, documented the UIHC staff believed Thompson may not be able to return 
to full duty, and recommended he be evaluated by physical medicine and rehabilitation.  
(JE 5, p. 85)  Byrnes noted until he was evaluated by physical medicine and 
rehabilitation Thompson should continue to perform light-duty work with no lifting over 
ten pounds.  (JE 5, p. 85)   
After Thompson’s work injury Winnebago offered Thompson light-duty work.  
(Tr., p. 45)  After Dr. Choi found Thompson had reached maximum medical 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 9 
 
improvement, Winnebago discontinued his light-duty work and he was subject to layoff.  
(Tr., p. 46)  Thompson has not worked since his light-duty work with Winnebago ended.  
(Tr., p. 46)   
On May 8, 2019, Charles Mooney, M.D., an occupational medicine physician, 
conducted an independent medical examination of Thompson for Winnebago.  (Ex. B)  
Dr. Mooney reviewed Thompson’s medical records and examined him.  (Ex. B)  Dr. 
Mooney assessed Thompson with status-post extensive ventral hernia with mesh 
placement with recurrent seroma and chronic abdominal pain.  (Ex. B, p. 4)  Using the 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001) (“AMA 
Guides 5th Edition”), Dr. Mooney assigned Thompson a permanent partial impairment 
rating of thirteen percent of the whole person because he has frequent discomfort 
precluding heavy lifting, but not hampering most activities of daily living.  (Ex. B, p. 5)  
Dr. Mooney noted it would be difficult to test Thompson based on his current level of 
complaints, noting a functional capacity evaluation could be conducted, and he found a 
ten pound lifting restriction appropriate, noting the abdominal surgery would not 
preclude standing, walking, or light bench work.  (Ex. B, p. 5)  On June 4, 2019, 
Thompson underwent a functional capacity evaluation, which the evaluator determined 
was invalid.  (Ex. D, p. 9) 
Thompson received an abdominal ultrasound on July 23, 2019.  (JE 2, p. 34)  
The reviewing radiologist noted there was anterior abdominal wall fluid collection.  (JE 
2, p. 33a)  On August 23, 2019, Thompson underwent an ultrasound guided anterior 
abdominal wall seroma aspiration with Bryan Navarette, M.D.  (JE 2, pp. 33b-35)   
On November 6, 2019, Thompson attended an appointment at the Hancock 
County Health Systems Pain Clinic with Dean Heideman, CRNA, for pain treatment.  
(JE 6, p. 86)  Heideman documented Thompson had undergone three left shoulder 
surgeries and one right shoulder surgery that “causes him sharp, stabbing, dull, aching 
pain that he is rating a 7/10.  He says that weather and movement of his shoulders 
makes his arm worse.”  (JE 6, p. 86)  Thompson also reported he was experiencing 
abdominal pain he described as sharp, stabbing, dull, aching, and burning.  (JE 6, p. 86)  
Thompson also reported problems with sleeping.  (JE 6, p. 86)  Heideman found that 
hydrocodone for pain and nortriptyline for sleep would be appropriate.  (JE 6, p. 86)   
On November 11, 2019, Thompson called Dr. Carlson’s office reporting he had 
fluid buildup in his stomach that needed to be drained and requesting an ultrasound.  
(JE 1, p. 26)  Dr. Carlson scheduled an ultrasound guided aspiration of Thompson’s 
abdominal wall seroma.  (JE 1, p. 26)   
Thompson attended an appointment with Megan Brewer, a physician’s assistant 
working with Dr. Carlson on November 12, 2019.  (JE 1, p. 27)  Brewer assessed 
Thompson with bilateral lower abdominal discomfort and an abdominal wall seroma and 
recommended an ultrasound guided paracentesis.  (JE 1, p. 27)   

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 10 
 
At the request of Winnebago, Dr. Mooney issued a supplemental opinion on 
November 18, 2019, after reviewing the results of a functional capacity evaluation 
performed on June 4, 2019.  (Ex. B, p. 6)  Dr. Mooney opined his opinion on the 
permanent partial impairment rating remained unchanged, noting: 
I have had the opportunity to review the findings of the functional capacity 
evaluation performed on 6/4/2019.  It demonstrates an inconsistent and 
invalid performance.  It is my opinion that Mr. Thompson should be able to 
function within the light duty capacity.  It is my opinion that the use of an 
abdominal support device, would allow him to perform active lifting of at 
least 20 pounds.  It is my opinion that no other specific restrictions would 
be indicated. 
It is my opinion that Mr. Thompson’s pre-existing diabetes and prior 
right shoulder injury may limit some activities of normal work.  His diabetic 
condition may interfere with prolonged standing and walking, and his right 
shoulder condition may interfere with overhead or above shoulder tasks.  
The findings of the functional capacity evaluation do not specifically 
evaluate for these issues. 
(Ex. B, p. 6)   
Lana Sellner, M.S., C.R.C., conducted a vocational analysis for Winnebago in 
December 2019 and issued her report on January 21, 2020.  (Ex. E)  Sellner noted Dr. 
Bansal assigned Thompson a sedentary level restriction with occasional lifting up to ten 
pounds with rare bending and twisting, and Dr. Mooney assigned Thompson a twenty 
pound lifting restriction using an abdominal support device and finding he could perform 
light-duty work, with no other restrictions, noting his pre-existing diabetes and prior right 
shoulder injury may limit some activities of normal work.  (Ex. E, p. 19)  At the time of 
her analysis, Thompson was still employed by Winnebago, on leave, given Winnebago 
could not accommodate his restrictions.  (Ex. E, p. 21)   
Sellner noted Thompson is able to perform work in the light to medium demand 
level.  (Ex. E, p. 21)  Sellner inquired whether Thompson would be willing to accept 
vocational services from her and he indicated he would work with her to explore 
opportunities, but he remained employed by Winnebago and he hoped Winnebago 
would have something for him and he did not want to terminate his employment 
because he enjoyed his job and light-duty work.  (Ex. E, p. 21)  Sellner noted Thompson 
has acquired skills that are within the sedentary to light work field along with education, 
noting viable jobs he could pursue include light production work, residential supervisor, 
retail manager, customer service, front desk, night auditor, routing clerk, transporter 
(driver), security receptionist, gate guard, and entry-level sales that are positions 
available in his geographic area.  (Ex. E, p. 21)   
Phil Davis, M.S., conducted a vocational analysis for Thompson on January 28, 
2020.  (Ex. 2)  Davis noted Dr. Choi imposed a lifting restriction of ten pounds with a 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 11 
 
recommendation of further evaluation by a physiatrist, Dr. Mooney assigned a twenty 
pound lifting restriction, and Dr. Bansal assigned Thompson a sedentary level restriction 
with occasional lifting up to ten pounds with rare bending and twisting.  (Ex. 2, p. 18)  
Davis documented Winnebago had stopped accommodating Thompson’s restrictions 
and that Winnebago would contact him if they had a position available within his 
restrictions.  (Ex. 2, pp. 18-19)  Davis noted Thompson had been terminated by Mosaic 
because Mosaic could not accommodate his restrictions.  (Ex. 2, p. 19)   
Davis noted the majority of Thompson’s past work was within the medium 
classification and taking into consideration the restrictions set forth by Drs. Choi, 
Mooney, and Bansal, Thompson is limited to work in the sedentary physical demand 
level.  (Ex. 2, pp. 19-20)  Davis opined Thompson was 100 percent physically unable to 
perform the essential functions required of his past work, as supported by his 
termination from Mosaic and Winnebago’s inability to accommodate his restrictions.  
(Ex. 2, p. 20)  Davis did not identify any transferable skills Thompson currently 
possesses, opined Thompson has sustained a ninety percent loss of access to the labor 
market and he would require further education or training to obtain full-time 
employment, and supported Thompson’s application for Social Security Disability 
Insurance.  (Ex. 2, p. 20)   
Thompson applied for Social Security Disability Insurance benefits.  (Tr., p. 47)  
The week of the hearing the Social Security Administration approved his application.  
(Tr., p. 48)   
Thompson testified that as of the date of the hearing his seroma has been 
drained five or six times since his surgery.  (Tr., p. 35)  Thompson relayed the seroma is 
being drained every three months.  (Tr., p. 35)  Thompson reported he has constant 
pain in his abdomen and eventually he has to have his seroma drained.  (Tr., p. 42)  
Thompson testified he has difficulty sleeping and is lucky to sleep two hours per night.  
(Tr., p. 42)  Thompson reported sitting or walking too long affects his abdominal pain.  
(Tr., p. 49)   
Thompson has not looked for work since his light-duty work with Winnebago 
ended in February 2019.  (Tr., pp. 45-46, 61)  Thompson testified he has not looked for 
work because Colleen with Winnebago told him there was nothing available for 
someone who can only lift ten pounds.  (Tr., p. 62)   
Dr. Conte conducted an independent medical examination of Thompson for 
Winnebago on February 26, 2020, and issued his report on March 6, 2020.  (Ex. I)  Dr. 
Conte opined the mechanism of injury Thompson described occurred at work is 
reasonable and likely the cause of herniation and worsening of his pre-existing 
condition, which had improved since surgery.  (Ex. I, p. 38)  Dr. Conte observed no 
evidence of a recurrent abdominal herniation on examination, but noted a small effusion 
about the lower left midline on examination with some tenderness in the area.  (Ex. 1, p. 
38)  Dr. Conte opined Thompson was smoking heavily, which was decreasing the ability 
of his seroma to heal, but also noted the seroma had been decreasing in size with the 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 12 
 
most recent interventions.  (Ex. 1, pp. 38-39)  Dr. Conte recommended Thompson be 
weaned off of narcotics as the seroma resolves.  (Ex. I, p. 39)  Dr. Conte deferred 
providing a rating to Thompson under the AMA Guides until his seromas are resolved, 
and recommended a twenty-five pound weight restriction given Thompson did not have 
any structural loss of integrity of his abdominal wall.  (Ex. I, p. 39)   
Heideman, CRNA, issued a letter stating he believed a ten pound lifting 
restriction was appropriate and in line with previous recommendations due to 
Thompson’s abdominal hernia condition.  (Ex. 8, p. 66)  Heideman noted Thompson 
had been receiving pain treatment for his chronic pain conditions and “[t]he withdrawal 
of his seroma in his abdomen is performed by a different provider but his medication 
and other injections” were performed at Heideman’s clinic.  (Ex. 8, p. 66)   
On March 30, 2020, Dr. Choi issued an opinion for Thompson.  (Ex. 8, p. 67)  Dr. 
Choi opined: 
Mr. Thompson had the index surgery done on May 25, 2018 using pro-grip 
mesh, which is a permanent mesh material.  The mesh is positioned at the 
extra-peritoneum space and then followed by myofascia flap elevation and 
advancement to cover the mesh material.  The seroma appeared to be 
developed it in the subcutaneous space which may or may not have any 
communication with the mesh material.  As long as the seroma is not 
infected, it should not have functional impact on his GI function or overall 
health.  It certainly may result in ongoing discomfort or even limited activity 
level. 
Regarding the permanency of this seroma, it is more likely to resolve it 
during the early course of its development.  At this point, almost 2 years 
out, it is likely that the seroma will develop a capsule with cells lining the 
seroma wall, which will continue to secrete serous fluid.  This means the 
seroma will likely remain permanent.   
(Ex. 8, p. 67)  Dr. Choi documented two options for managing the condition, which he 
noted he had discussed with Thompson, and he offered to see Thompson again.  (Ex. 
8, p. 67)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Applicable Law 
This case involves the issue of extent of disability and the recovery of costs and 
interest interest under Iowa Code sections 85.34, 86.40, and 535.3.  In March 2017, the 
legislature enacted changes (hereinafter “Act”) relating to workers’ compensation in 
Iowa.  2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 (amending Iowa Code sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 
85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 85.70, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, 86.42, and 535.3).  Under 
2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 section 24, the changes to Iowa Code section 85.34 apply to 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 13 
 
injuries occurring on or after the effective date of the Act.  This case involves a work 
injury occurring after July 1, 2017, therefore the new provisions of the law involving 
extent of disability apply to this case. 
The calculation of interest is governed by Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 5052008 
(Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re: 
Interest Rate Issue), which holds interest for all weekly benefits payable and not paid 
when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, is payable at the rate of ten percent; all 
interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, is 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.   
II. 
Extent of Disability 
Winnebago found it could not accommodate Thompson’s work restrictions when 
he reached maximum medical improvement in February 2019.  At the time of the 
hearing Thompson was not working.  Thompson contends he is permanently and totally 
disabled.  Winnebago rejects his assertion. 
This is not a case of functional loss given Winnebago subjected Thompson to 
layoff when it determined it could not accommodate his restrictions when Dr. Choi found 
he reached maximum medical improvement and he has not returned to employment.  
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).  Therefore, compensation “shall be paid” in relation to 500 
weeks as the disability bears to the body as a whole.  Id. § 85.34(2)(v).  Compensation 
for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2).   
“Industrial disability is determined by an evaluation of the employee’s earning 
capacity.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 852 (Iowa 2011).  
In considering the employee’s earning capacity, the deputy commissioner evaluates 
several factors, including “consideration of not only the claimant’s functional disability, 
but also [his] age, education, qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in similar 
employment.”  Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Deutmeyer, 789 N.W.2d 129, 137-38 (Iowa 2010).  
The inquiry focuses on the injured employee’s “ability to be gainfully employed.”  Id. at 
138.  The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner is also to consider the number 
of years in the future it is reasonably anticipated the claimant would work at the time of 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).   
The determination of the extent of disability is a mixed issue of law and fact.  
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  When considering the 
extent of disability, the deputy commissioner considers all evidence, both medical and 
nonmedical.  Evenson v. Winnebago Indus., Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 370 (Iowa 2016). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held, “it is a fundamental requirement that the 
commissioner consider all evidence, both medical and nonmedical.  Lay witness 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 14 
 
testimony is both relevant and material upon the cause and extent of injury.”  Id. at 369 
(quoting Gits Mfg. Co. v. Frank, 855 N.W.2d 195, 199 (Iowa 2014)). 
In Iowa, a claimant may establish permanent total disability under the statute, or 
through the common law odd-lot doctrine.  Michael Eberhart Constr. v. Curtin, 674 
N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004) (discussing both theories of permanent total disability 
under Idaho law and concluding the deputy’s ruling was not based on both theories, 
rather, it was only based on the odd-lot doctrine).  Under the statute, the claimant may 
establish the claimant is totally and permanently disabled if the claimant’s medical 
impairment together with nonmedical factors totals 100 percent.  Id.  The odd-lot 
doctrine applies when the claimant has established the claimant has sustained 
something less than 100 percent disability, but is so injured that the claimant is “unable 
to perform services other than ‘those which are so limited in quality, dependability or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.’”  Id. (quoting Boley v. 
Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 130 Idaho 278, 281, 939 P.2d 854, 857 (1997)).   
“Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.”  Walmart 
Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 501 (Iowa 2003) (quoting IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 2000)).  Total disability “occurs when the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee’s experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform.”  IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 633. 
Two occupational medicine physicians have provided permanent impairment 
ratings pursuant to independent medical examinations in this case, Dr. Mooney, who 
Winnebago retained and Dr. Bansal, who Thompson retained.  Dr. Mooney assigned 
Thompson a permanent partial impairment rating of thirteen percent of the whole person 
because he has frequent discomfort precluding heavy lifting, but not hampering most 
activities of daily living, and assigned restrictions of no lifting above twenty pounds with 
use of an abdominal device, noting Thompson’s pre-existing diabetes may interfere with 
prolonged standing and walking and his prior right shoulder injury may interfere with 
overhead or above shoulder tasks.  (Ex. B, pp. 5-6)  Dr. Bansal assigned a nineteen 
percent whole person impairment and assigned Thompson a sedentary level restriction 
with occasional lifting of ten pounds with rare bending or twisting.  (Ex. 1, pp. 13-14)   
The deputy commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and 
measure the credibility of witnesses.”  Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 844-45.  The trier of fact 
may accept or reject expert testimony, even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye 
v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When 
considering the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the 
examination occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation 
arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, 
experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and 
value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 
1985).  In weighing the expert opinions, I find Dr. Mooney’s opinion more persuasive 
than Dr. Bansal’s opinion.   

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 15 
 
Dr. Bansal reviewed medical records from Drs. Rowe and Choi, which detail 
Thompson’s complicated surgical history.  However, in the “Prior Injuries” analysis 
section of his report, Dr. Bansal notes “Mr. Thompson underwent an inguinal hernia 
repair in 1992, on the opposite side.  He recovered following this hernia surgery without 
any difficulties.  He had no problems digesting food prior to his recent hernia surgery.”  
(Ex. 1, p. 11)  In his analysis, Dr. Bansal does not discuss all of the prior surgeries and 
Thompson’s complicated medical history, also noted by Dr. Conte in his report.  (Ex. 1, 
p. 11)  Dr. Rowe noted Thompson had a history of undergoing a perforated diverticulitis 
surgery, colostomy takedown, incarcerated right inguinal hernia surgery, and an 
incarcerated hernia in the right groin that needed a midline incision in 2015 that had a 
hard time healing.  (JE 3, p. 36)  Dr. Choi noted the following history: 
[o]riginally, he underwent Hartman’s procedure for perforated diverticulitis 
about 25 or 30 years ago at an OSH followed by reversal.  He then 
underwent an incisional hernia repair with mesh in 1992 done in Mason 
City, Iowa.  He has also had open right inguinal hernia repair with mesh in 
2015.  He then noticed a bulge in his abdomen in November 2017.  The 
bulge causes him constant pain that is sometimes sharp and sometimes 
pressure quality.  The pain is worst in his LLQ and sometimes radiates 
down into his left leg.  Overeating makes the pain worse.  The pain times 
keeps him up at night.  He also notes a chronic nonhealing wound next to 
his umbilicus for the past 3 years.  The wound occasionally drains.   
(JE 5, p. 46)   
The only physician to recommend bending and twisting restrictions is Dr. Bansal.  
When he determined Thompson had reached maximum medical improvement Dr. Choi 
imposed a ten pound lifting restriction on Thompson, but deferred Thompson’s 
permanency rating and restrictions to physical medicine and rehabilitation.  Dr. Choi did 
not recommend any bending or twisting restrictions.  Dr. Conte most recently examined 
Thompson and recommended a twenty-five pound weight restriction given Thompson 
did not have any structural loss of integrity of his abdominal wall, which is consistent 
with Dr. Mooney’s opinion.  (Ex. I, p. 39)  For these reasons I find Dr. Mooney’s 
impairment rating most persuasive and adopt his restrictions as Thompson’s permanent 
restrictions. 
At the time of the hearing Thompson was sixty-one.  (Tr., p. 10)  Thompson did 
not graduate from high school and later earned a G.E.D.  (Ex. G, p. 26; Tr., p. 11)  
Thompson pursued additional education, earning an Associate of Applied Science 
Degree in business administration, and a Bachelor of Science degree in management.  
(Ex. G, p. 26; Tr., pp. 11-12)  While Thompson has not used his degrees for 
employment, his ability to obtain a Bachelor of Science degree twelve years ago, as a 
nontraditional student, shows he has the ability for retraining.   
Thompson’s past work exceeds his permanent twenty pound lifting restriction.  
When Dr. Choi found Thompson had reached maximum medical improvement 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 16 
 
Winnebago informed Thompson it could not accommodate his need for light-duty work.  
Mosaic also terminated Thompson because it could not accommodate him.  Thompson 
has sustained a significant disability, but I do not find he has proven he is permanently 
and totally disabled.   
Thompson had not applied for any employment from February 2019 through the 
date of the hearing in March 2020.  He has not shown he is motivated to work.   
The parties provided competing vocational opinions.  Davis opined Thompson 
had sustained a ninety percent loss of access to the labor market and that he would 
require further education or training to obtain full-time employment, noting Thompson is 
only capable of engaging in sedentary work.  (Ex. 2, p. 20)  The medical evidence 
supports Thompson is capable of engaging in sedentary to light work.  In rendering his 
opinion Davis did not identify any transferable skills Thompson currently possesses.  
(Ex. 2, p. 20)  Sellner noted Thompson has acquired skills that are within the sedentary 
to light work field along with his education, noting viable jobs he could pursue include 
light production work, residential supervisor, retail manager, customer service, front 
desk, night auditor, routing clerk, transporter (driver), security receptionist, gate guard, 
and entry-level sales, which are positions available in his geographic area.  (Ex. E, p. 
21)  I agree with Sellner Thompson has transferable skills from his past relevant work 
as a manager for Lake Oasis and as the owner of a bar and grill.  Thompson has 
experience with hiring and supervising employees, customer service, maintaining 
inventory, and maintaining financial records that could transfer to other sedentary and 
light positions consistent with his restrictions, which is further supported by his 
educational achievement.  
I do not find Thompson is permanently and totally disabled under the statute.  I 
also find Thompson has not established he is permanently and totally disabled under 
the odd-lot doctrine.  Thompson has not applied for any employment and he did not 
present any evidence of the labor market where he lives.  According to Sellner’s report, 
there are positions in Thompson’s geographic area he is capable of engaging in that are 
within his restrictions.  Based on all of the factors of industrial disability, I find Thompson 
has sustained an eighty percent industrial disability.   
III. 
Costs 
Thompson seeks to recover the $100.00 filing fee, $6.80 for service, and 
$1,000.00 cost of Davis’s vocational report.  (Ex. 7)  Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, 
“[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 876 IAC 4.33(6), provides 
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 17 
 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons reviewing 
health service disputes.  
I find under the rule, Thompson is entitled to recover the $100.00 filing fee and the 
$6.80 service fee.  Davis prepared a rebuttal opinion for Thompson after Sellner 
provided her vocational opinion.  Davis’s bill is itemized.  He charged $1,000.00 for the 
report.  I find Thompson should be able to recover the cost of the report. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Defendant shall pay the claimant four hundred (400) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated rate of four hundred eighty-five and 09/100 dollars 
($485.09) per week, commencing on the stipulated commencement date of February 4, 
2019.   
Defendant is entitled to a credit for benefits paid to date.   
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due which 
accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation benefits 
accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the 
one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent 
H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 
5052008 (Apr. 23, 2018 Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or 
Amend Appeal Decision Re:  Interest Rate Issue). 
Defendant shall reimburse the claimant one hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($100.00) for the filing fee, six and 80/100 dollars ($6.80) for service, and one thousand 
and 00/100 dollars ($1,000.00) for Davis’s report.   
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this     22nd      day of May, 2020. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

THOMPSON V. WINNEBAGO 
Page 18 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James M. Ballard (via WCES) 
Lindsey E. Mills (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
