Case Number: 23700292.04
Case Title:  YANDA, GARY V. KIRKWOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Yanda Gary-23700292.04amcdJRD.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
GARY YANDA, 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
File No. 23700292.04 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  :  
 
KIRKWOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE,   : 
       ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
Employer, 
  :             
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
DECISION 
 
 
  :   
WEST BEND MUTUAL INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
                           
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  :  
                Headnote: 2701 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Gary Yanda.  
 
The hearing for this alternate medical care claim was held on June 8, 2023. 
Claimant appeared through his attorney Matthew Dake. Defendants appeared through 
their attorney Edward Rose. The proceedings were digitally recorded. That recording 
constitutes the official record of this proceeding.  
 
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s February 16, 2015, Order, the undersigned has 
been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of the 
decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
 
The hearing record consists of Claimant’s exhibits 1-4, and Defendants’ exhibit A.  
 
Counsel for both parties provided argument. The record closed at the end of the 
alternate medical care telephonic hearing.  
 
ISSUE 
 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care in the form of: 
 
 Authorization to treat with physiatrist, Stanley Mathew, M.D. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jun-09  13:34:54     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

YANDA V. KIRKWOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
 
This is the fourth alternate medical care petition filed by the claimant for the 
accepted April 19, 2022 date of injury. The first petition went to hearing on April 13, 2023. 
Claimant’s second alternate care petition was dismissed on May 8, 2023. Claimant’s third 
alternate care petition went to hearing on May 18, 2023.  Those decisions contain detailed 
explanations of claimant’s injury and his prior medical treatment. The bulk of those facts 
will not be repeated in this decision. 
 
In this petition, claimant is once again requesting that defendants authorize 
treatment with physiatrist, Stanley Mathew, M.D. This is the third time that claimant has 
made this same request. His last request was denied on May 19, 2023. In that decision, 
the agency determined claimant had not shown that the care being offered by defendants 
was unreasonable. At the time of that hearing, defendants had already agreed to 
authorize treatment with a physiatrist at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
(UIHC), even though it had not been recommended by any of claimant’s authorized 
providers.   
 
On or about May 17, 2023, defendants contacted the UIHC Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation Clinic to see if a physiatrist there would treat claimant. (See AMC Decision 
in File No. 23700292.03). The referral request form from UIHC indicated the clinic 
generally takes 5-7 business days to address requests for treatment. (Id.). At the time of 
the hearing for this claim, defendants still had not heard back from UIHC. (Hearing 
Testimony; Ex. A).   
 
According to the exhibits, on May 23, 2023, claimant’s counsel sent defendants’ 
attorney an email stating that it had been more than seven days since defendants 
contacted UIHC requesting an appointment for claimant. (Ex. 4). The email went on to 
state that claimant would be filing another alternate care petition if he did not hear back 
from defendants with an appointment by Friday, May 26, 2023. (Id.). On the morning of 
May 26, 2023, claimant filed this alternate medical care action. (See Petition).  
 
With the exception of the May 23, 2023 email to defendants, claimant’s hearing 
exhibits are an exact replica of those submitted in File No. 23700292.03—they consist of 
claimant’s counsel’s March 7, 2023 letter to Dr. Mathew asking if he treated injuries like 
the claimant’s; claimant’s April 21, 2023 letter to Dr. Bingham asking for a referral to Dr. 
Mathew; and Dr. Vincent’s treatment note from claimant’s surgical evaluation on April 25, 
2023.   
 
Defendants’ hearing exhibit contains a series of follow-up emails sent by Kelley 
Texeira, the claims adjuster, to UIHC, asking for an update on the request and an 
appointment date for claimant. (Ex. A).  According to this exhibit, Ms. Texeira contacted 
UIHC requesting updates on May 24, May 26, June 1, June 6, and June 7, 2023. (Id.).  
Each time, Jory Goerdt, a representative at UIHC, replied indicating she had requested 

YANDA V. KIRKWOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 3 
 
an update from the doctors, but had not heard back. (Id.). At the hearing, defendants’ 
counsel stated Ms. Texeira called UIHC on the morning of the hearing and was told that 
Dr. Chen had not yet gotten back to the representative with an appointment.  (Hearing 
Testimony). Defendants counsel argued that their actions and the care offered to claimant 
were not unreasonable. (Id.). Defendants requested a little more time to hear back from 
UIHC. (Id.).  
 
Claimant’s counsel argued that Iowa Code section 85.27 requires care be offered 
promptly. (Hearing Testimony). He stated that claimant requested defendants authorize 
Dr. Mathew as a provider back in March 2023, and “access delayed is access denied.” 
(Id.).  Defendants argued that claimant has received ongoing treatment from Dr. Bingham 
since March 2023, including injections. (Id.). He has also had a surgical evaluation with 
Dr. Vincent. (Id.). Claimant has not attempted to return to Dr. Bingham, his authorized 
physician, since the last alternate care hearing. (Id.). Nor has there been any attempt to 
follow-up on his April 21, 2023 letter to Dr. Bingham. (Id.). Claimant does not have an 
actual appointment date with Dr. Mathew, or any further information about what treatment 
Dr. Mathew would offer him. (Id.).   
 
No authorized providers have referred claimant to a physiatrist. (Hearing 
Testimony).  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted compensability for a workplace 
injury has a right to control the care provided to the injured employee.  Ramirez-Trujillo v. 
Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016). The relevant statute provides as 
follows: 
 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the 
right to choose the care. . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).   
 
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation under the 
statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.” Id. An application 

YANDA V. KIRKWOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 4 
 
for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant is dissatisfied 
with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical care is not 
ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather, the claimant 
must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the 
injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. See Iowa Code  
§ 85.27(4). By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment and seeking alternate care, 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa 
R. App. P 14(f)(5); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. Ultimately, determining whether care is 
reasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. 
 
No authorized providers have referred claimant to a physiatrist. Despite this, 
defendants have voluntarily referred claimant to UIHC for care with a physiatrist. 
However, they have not yet heard back from UIHC. Defendants argue this is not their fault 
and their actions have been reasonable. Claimant argues that defendants are effectively 
offering him no care at all. That allegation is not supported by the evidence. Looking at 
the agency’s prior decisions in this file, it appears defendants have offered claimant a 
plethora of care since the work incident, including MRIs, physical therapy, pain 
medication, anti-inflammatories, injections, and surgical evaluations. Defendants 
continue to offer claimant ongoing treatment with Dr. Bingham, an occupational medicine 
specialist at Mercy Care.  Claimant, however, has never requested a return appointment 
with Dr. Bingham. Claimant is correct, under the statutory language he is entitled to 
prompt and reasonable care. He, however, is not entitled to direct that care and/or choose 
his own providers. The care provided by defendants up to this point has been reasonable. 
The question now is how much of a scheduling delay is reasonable under the facts of this 
case. UIHC’s referral form indicates that the clinic generally takes between 5-7 business 
days to address requests for treatment. At this point, it has been 17 business days and 
UIHC still has not responded. The agency recognizes that claimant’s case is quite 
complicated, and it may take Dr. Chen a while to review his past treatment records. (See 
AMC Decisions in File Nos. 23700292.01 and 23700292.03). Unfortunately, neither party 
introduced any evidence that would shed light on what is a reasonable timeline under 
these circumstances.  
 
The commissioner is justified in ordering alternate care when employer-authorized 
care has not been effective, and evidence shows that such care is “inferior or less 
extensive” than other available care requested by the employee. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 
124; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997).  Claimant 
still has not met this burden as it pertains to Dr. Mathew. Claimant has not submitted any 
information about the treatments Dr. Mathew would provide or his actual timeline for 
providing them. Given this lack of evidence, the claimant has not shown that the care 
being offered by defendants is inferior or less extensive than the care offered by Dr. 
Mathew. His request for alternate medical care with Dr. Mathew is denied.  However, 
claimant continues have pain complaints, and extensive delays in scheduling treatments 
are not reasonable. Therefore, the undersigned is giving defendants a deadline in which 
to provide claimant with treatment for his pain complaints.  Within the next fourteen days, 
defendants must provide claimant with an appointment date at the UIHC Physical 

YANDA V. KIRKWOOD COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
Page 5 
 
Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinic, or contact another physiatrist of their choosing to treat 
claimant’s pain complaints.  
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant's petition for alternate medical care is denied in part and granted in part.   
 
Claimant’s request for authorization to treat with Dr. Stanley Mathew is denied. 
However, within the next fourteen (14) days defendants must provide claimant with an 
actual appointment date for treatment at UIHC or have contacted another physiatrist of 
their choosing to treat claimant’s pain complaints.   
 
Signed and filed this    9th     day of June, 2023. 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Matthew Dake (via WCES) 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
