Case Number: 5021601
Case Title:  HEAFEY, NINA V. PELLA CORP
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Heafey Nina-5021601C.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
: 
NINA HEAFEY, 
: 
 
 
: 
 
Claimant, 
: 
 
 
:                        File No. 5021601 
vs. 
 
: 
 
 
:                  PARTIAL COMMUTATION 
PELLA CORPORATION, 
: 
 
 
:                              DECISION 
 
Employer, 
: 
 
Self-Insured, 
: 
 
Defendant. 
:                  HEAD NOTE NO:  3303.20 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
On February 18, 2008, a deputy workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
arbitration decision awarding the claimant, Nina Heafey, permanent total disability 
benefits from the defendant Pella Corporation, as a result of a work injury on October 
30, 2003.  The defendant appealed the decision.  The commissioner affirmed the 
decision.  The defendant appealed the commissioner’s decision to the District Court on 
November 21, 2008.  The District Court affirmed the decision of the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner and the commissioner on August 3, 2009.   
On June 29, 2017, the claimant, Nina Heafey, filed a petition for partial 
commutation seeking workers’ compensation benefits from Pella Corporation, as the 
self-insured employer.  Laura Pattermann appeared on behalf of the claimant.  David 
Jenkins appeared on behalf of the defendant.   
The matter came on for hearing on October 7, 2020, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips in Des Moines, Iowa.  An order issued 
on March 13, 2020, and updated June 1, 2020, by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, In the Matter of Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings (Available 
online at: https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/order-coronavirus-covid-19 (last viewed July 
29, 2020)) amended the hearing assignment order in each case before the 
Commissioner scheduled for an in-person regular proceeding hearing between March 
18, 2020, and November 20, 2020.  The amendment makes it so that such hearings will 
be held by Internet-based video, using CourtCall.  The parties appeared electronically, 
and the hearing proceeded without significant difficulties.  The matter was fully 
submitted on November 6, 2020, after briefing by the parties.     
The record in this case consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5, and Defendant’s 
Exhibits A-D.  Testimony under oath was also taken from the claimant, Nina Heafey, 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Dec-18  16:17:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 2 
 
and Theresa Marie Clark.  Debra Hoadley was appointed the official reporter and 
custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The exhibits were accepted without objection, 
and the claimant filed supplemental information relating to Claimant’s Exhibit 2 
subsequent to the hearing.  The claimant also amended their complaint on October 14, 
2020, pursuant to an agreement among the parties during the hearing.   
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury. 
2. The claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the scope of 
employment, on October 30, 2003.     
3. The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
4. The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5. The claimant is single and entitled to one exemption, translating to a weekly 
rate of $344.10 pursuant to a prior agency decision. 
Additionally, there is no dispute as to the entitlement to temporary total disability 
and/or healing period benefits, nor is there a dispute as to the entitlement to permanent 
partial disability benefits.  Defendant waived its affirmative defenses.  Entitlement to 
medical expenses are no longer in dispute.  Credits against any award are no longer in 
dispute.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Should Heafey’s request for a partial commutation be granted? 
2. Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Nina Heafey was 42 years old at the time of the hearing.  (Testimony).  She 
resides in Coin, Iowa, a town of about 250 people.  (Testimony).  Her mother also lives 

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 3 
 
in Coin.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey currently lives in a mobile trailer, which she owns.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Heafey purchased the trailer in April of 2005 for $3,000.00.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Heafey owns the mobile trailer and land on which the trailer sits with 
no mortgage.  (Testimony).  She resides in the trailer with her cat and her dog.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Heafey’s mother, Theresa Clark, lives several blocks from Ms. 
Heafey.  (Testimony).  They have a close relationship, despite a brief period of tension 
in 2018.  (Testimony).  This tense period is noted in both testimony and medical records 
included in Defendant’s Exhibit A.  I did not find the records particularly illustrative of 
anything relevant to this proceeding, so I will not summarize them.  Ms. Clark testified 
that Ms. Heafey is careful with her money, and that she looks to the future.  
(Testimony).   
At the time she left Pella, Ms. Heafey attended Iowa Western Community College 
to become an engineer.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey left Pella in approximately April of 
2007 due to her injuries.  (Testimony).  As a result of her injuries at Pella, Ms. Heafey 
was diagnosed with anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder.  
(Testimony).  She believed that these issues did not affect her ability to manage her 
finances.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey has handled her finances on her own since she 
turned 18 years old.  (Testimony).  In order to manage her finances, she utilizes 
QuickBooks.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey has maintained a checking account for 15 years 
at her current bank, and a savings account for 6 to 7 years.  (Testimony).     
Ms. Heafey overdrew her checking account on one occasion, over 13 to 15 years 
ago.  (Testimony).  Since that time, she utilized QuickBooks , as noted above, to avoid 
this situation reoccurring.  (Testimony).  She was late on an electric bill on one occasion 
because of a late workers’ compensation payment.  (Testimony).  However, since then 
she has not been late on any bill payment.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Heafey contradicted this to some extent later in her testimony, as she 
disclosed that she carries about $18,000.00 in credit card debt.  (Testimony).  She is not 
late on this, but has taken out additional loans in order to pay down certain debts.  
(Testimony).  She indicated that this debt accrued because of unexpected expenses.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Heafey testified that over the previous three to four years, her trailer 
required extensive repairs.  (Testimony).  Additionally, her vehicle required repairs 
beyond normal wear and tear.  (Testimony).  Her credit card debt accrued during the 
time between filing her petition, and the hearing.  (Testimony).  An additional component 
of Ms. Heafey’s credit card debt is payment for her insulin.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey is 
diabetic and on Medicare.  (Testimony).  Her Medicare plan does not begin to cover 
insulin until she reaches a certain out-of-pocket payment amount.  (Testimony).  The 
claimant expressed a sincere desire to pay down this credit card debt as soon as 
possible, as paying it caused her to defray saving for retirement or other long term 
expenses.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Heafey receives $1,427.70 per month in Social Security Disability payments.  
(Testimony).  She also receives $229.40 per week in workers’ compensation benefits, 
after attorney fees were accounted for.  (Testimony).  This amounts to about $2,421.76 

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 4 
 
per month, but Ms. Heafey testified that she believed her income to be about $2,345.00 
per month.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey also receives a dividend from her rural telephone 
provider that varied between $150.00 and $250.00 per year.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Heafey testified that her monthly budget includes the following items and 
amounts: 
- 
Electric bill - $110.00 
- 
Water bill - $84.00 
- 
Propane - $25.00 
- 
Telephone/Internet - $76.00 
- 
Cell phone - $56.00 
- 
Satellite TV - $99.00 
- 
Groceries and Personal Items - $100.00 
(Testimony).  In reviewing the documentation presented into evidence, these amounts 
appear accurate.  Claimant’s exhibits show bills for her cell phone and 
telephone/internet are higher and/or lower by a few dollars.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1).  The 
amounts are close enough to those noted by Ms. Heafey’s testimony to be negligible 
differences, even over the course of a year.  She testified that her average monthly 
budget for expenses is between $400.00 and $600.00.  (Testimony).  Beyond this, Ms. 
Heafey pays about $1,200.00 per month towards the credit card debt noted above.  
(Testimony).   
Ms. Heafey also has yearly items for which she budgets.  (Testimony).  These 
include oil changes of $45.00 per change.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey has her oil 
changed four times per year.  (Testimony).  Her property taxes are $76.00 per year.  
(Testimony; Cl. Ex. 1).  Her auto insurance is about $550.00 per year.  (Testimony; Cl. 
Ex. 1).  The insurance on her trailer is approximately $430.00 per year.  (Testimony).  
Her car registration renewal is $50.00 per year.  (Testimony).  She also allots $150.00 
per year for an eye doctor’s visit; however, this could be higher, as Ms. Heafey wears 
glasses.  (Testimony).  Some years, she requires new glasses.  (Testimony).  Ms. 
Heafey also has a lawn service, as mowing the lawn causes issues with her 
fibromyalgia.  (Testimony).  This costs between $300.00 and $400.00 per year, 
depending on how many visits must be made.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey also makes 
several trips to Wal-Mart through the course of the year to re-stock her cleaning 
supplies.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey also has a Sam’s Club membership that she splits 
with several other people, resulting in a yearly cost of $20.00 for her share of the 
membership.  (Testimony).  She spends about $15.00 once per year on a haircut at a 
local salon.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Heafey testified that she utilizes coupons and coupon apps on her 
smartphone, such as Ibotta and Innovision in order to save money on purchases.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Heafey drives a 2005 Chevrolet Aveo, which she bought used in 
2006.  (Testimony).  The vehicle is teal in color, which allows her to obtain a reduced 

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 5 
 
rate on her auto insurance.  (Testimony).  At the time of the hearing, the vehicle had 
138,000 miles on it.  (Testimony).   
If Ms. Heafey received the funds requested via a partial, back-end commutation, 
she intends to immediately pay down her credit card debt, purchase a home located in 
Coin, Iowa, sell her trailer and the land on which it sits, and invest the remainder for her 
retirement.  (Testimony).  She is interested in a particular home in Coin, which she 
learned is going to come on the market soon at a cost of $47,500.00.  (Testimony).  She 
indicated that she intends to sell her trailer and land for about $10,000.00.  (Testimony).  
She further noted that the home in which she is interested had extra land, which she 
would attempt to sell.  (Testimony).  This is a change from the initial petition in which 
Ms. Heafey indicated that she wished to spend $80,000.00 to $100,000.00 on a new 
trailer.  (Testimony).  As noted several times, the initial petition was filed in 2017, over 
three years ago.  Since then, Ms. Heafey’s priorities changed, and she learned of the 
noted property soon to come on the market.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey noted that she 
recently learned of a program that could provide her with reduced or eliminated property 
taxes due to her disabled status.  (Testimony).  She also indicated that she priced 
insurance for the potential new home at about $150.00 per year.  (Testimony).   
The additional money beyond that spent on the home, and to pay down her credit 
card debt would be invested using a plan in evidence to include stocks and bonds, 
along with a Roth IRA, put together by Certified Financial Planner Dustin Christiansen of 
Edward Jones Advisory Solutions.  (Cl. Ex. 3).  Mr. Christiansen discussed this plan on 
two occasions with Ms. Heafey.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey would use the savings to 
purchase a used vehicle to replace her Chevrolet.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey plans on 
purchasing a used SUV in the next three to five years.  (Testimony).  She estimated that 
the cost of the SUV would be about $25,000.00.  (Testimony).   
If Ms. Heafey receives $184,500.00 for her back end partial commutation, or 
$123,000.00 after attorney’s fees for her back end partial commutation, she plans on 
spending $18,000.00 to pay down her credit card debt.  (Testimony).  She then would 
spend about $47,500.00 on the currently available home.  (Testimony).  Finally, she 
would invest the remaining $57,500.00 as proposed by Mr. Christiansen.  (Testimony).  
If Ms. Heafey had any excess funds, she would invest those.  (Testimony).   
The claimant supplemented one exhibit after the hearing.  Ms. Heafey testified 
that she has had her credit card numbers stolen in the past.  (Testimony).  Because of 
this, she is sensitive to disclosure of her financial information, especially to those she 
does not know personally.  (Testimony).  Some of these exhibits showed purchases on 
Google Play.  (Testimony).  Ms. Heafey acknowledged these purchases, and noted that 
she regretted these one-time purchases as a waste of money.  (Testimony).  Overall, I 
found Ms. Heafey to be a very truthful and credible witness.   
If Ms. Heafey receives the back end of her pension, she believes that she would 
continue to receive a weekly payment for about another 18 years until the age of 61.  

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 6 
 
(Testimony).  She estimated that her investments would carry her for another 20 years.  
(Testimony). 
Certified Financial Planner Dennis Markway, President of Iron Horse Wealth 
Management, LLC, performed a review of Ms. Heafey’s financial position on behalf of 
the defendant.  (Def. Ex. D:36-37).  Mr. Markway initially opined that he could not make 
a full opinion on whether a partial commutation is in Ms. Heafey’s best interest.  (Def. 
Ex. D:36).  However, in the next sentence, he changed his opinion stating, “it is 
increasingly likely the partial commutation is not in Ms. Heafey’s best interest.”  (Def. 
Ex. D:36).  Mr. Markway felt that Mr. Christiansen’s plan, and analysis were incomplete.  
(Def. Ex. D:36).  Mr. Markway opined that Mr. Christiansen’s plan lacked appropriate 
analysis and conclusions based upon the standards of the Certified Financial Planning 
Board of Standards.  (Def. Ex. D:36).  Mr. Markway further opined that Ms. Heafey 
would rely on Social Security only for the final ten years of her life.  (Def. Ex. D:37).  Mr. 
Markway noted that Ms. Heafey already had issues managing her cash flow and 
expenses based upon her credit card debt, and low amount of savings.  (Def. Ex. D:37).  
Ms. Heafey contradicted this based upon her testimony that her credit card debt and low 
savings were due to unexpected expenses related to her trailer and pets.  (Testimony).  
Should Ms. Heafey acquire a home with the proceeds of a partial commutation, these 
unforeseen expenses may be reduced.  (Testimony).  Mr. Markway concludes that Mr. 
Christiansen’s plan would lead Ms. Heafey to financial ruin.  (Def. Ex. D:37).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Partial Commutation 
This case involves a petition for partial commutation filed before July 1, 2017.  
While the claimant filed an amended petition, the intent of that petition was to have the 
claimant enumerate her claimed damages.  At the time of the filing of the petition for 
partial commutation, Iowa Code section 85.45(1) (2016) provided: 
[f]uture payments of compensation may be commuted to a present worth 
lump sum payment on the following conditions: 
a. When the period during which compensation is payable can be 
definitely determined. 
b. When it shall be shown to the satisfaction of the workers’ compensation 
commissioner that such commutation will be for the best interest of the 
person or persons entitled to the compensation, or that periodical 
payments as compared with a lump sum payment will entail undue 
expense, hardship, or inconvenience upon the employer liable therefor.   
Ms. Heafey requested a partial commutation of the back end of her benefits 
owed pursuant to a life expectancy table adopted by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation in 876 Iowa Administrative Code 6.3.  Iowa Code section 85.48 provides: 

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 7 
 
When partial commutation is ordered, the workers’ compensation 
commissioner shall fix the lump sum to be paid at an amount which will 
equal the future payments for the period commuted, capitalized at their 
present value upon the basis of interest at the rate provided in section 
535.3 for court judgments and decrees.  Provisions shall be made for the 
payment of weekly compensation not included in the commutation with all 
remaining payments to be paid over the same period of time as though the 
commutation had not been made by either eliminating weekly payments 
from the first or last part of the payment period or by a pro rata reduction 
in the weekly benefit amount over the entire payment period.   
876 Iowa Administrative Code 6.3 contains a life expectancy table to be used in 
determining the amount to be paid to claimants in commutation proceedings.  The rule 
provides, “[t]he life expectancy is determined by taking the age of the person, set forth 
in the ‘age’ column and comparing it to the ‘weeks’ column, which indicates the weeks 
an individual at the age indicated will be expected to continue to live.”  876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 6.3.  The rule provides a presumption of life expectancy and makes 
the number of weeks owed to a claimant under a permanent total disability award 
definitely determinable.   
The claimant argues that she is bringing to a present value the back half of the 
indemnity benefits due while she continues to receive 975 weeks, or 18.75 years, of 
benefits at $344.10 per week.  The claimant alleges that the present value of the back 
half of the weeks is calculated by determining the present value of Ms. Heafey’s 
remaining life expectancy, which the claimant alleges to be 1,950 weeks at a discount 
rate of 2.14 percent, which the claimant alleges equates to 1,340.625508 weeks.  The 
claimant argues that the present value of the front half of benefits, or 802.991930 
weeks, is then deducted from 1,340.625508 weeks for a present value of the back half 
of remaining benefits equaling 537.63357 weeks.  The amount the claimant receives 
based upon that calculation, according to the claimant is $184,999.71.  After a 33 1/3 
percent reduction for attorney’s fees, Ms. Heafey would receive $123,333.14.  
The defendant argues that Ms. Heafey’s calculations are incorrect, in that she 
simply discounted the 976th week, as if it were the first week in a new string of 975 
weeks of benefits.  Instead, the defendant argues that the present value of the middle 
weeks of the 1,950 week stream of benefits is less than the first week.  The defendant 
further argues that many more than 975 weeks of benefits should be discounted from 
the back end of the stream in order for the commutation amount to reach $184,999.71.  
The argument of the defendant is that the longer the accruing weeks of benefits are 
withheld while they are accruing, the greater the interest will be that is owed to the party 
denied the use of the funds over that time.  The interest multiplier increases as the 
weeks are withheld longer.  Because of this, benefits paid from the back end of a 
stream must be discounted more when paid sooner in time than when they are due.  
The defendant argues that the proper interest rate is pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.48 and Iowa Code section 535.3, which provides a discount rate of 3.21 percent.   

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 8 
 
The defendant further argues that the present value of 1,950 weeks should be 
1,133.667537 weeks at $344.10 per week for a total of $390,095.00  After the 
approximately $185,000.00 lump sum is deducted from $390,095.00, $205,095.00 
remains.  This equates to 596.03312 weeks of benefits, which is the present value of 
approximately 746 weeks.  Based upon that math, defendant argues that 746 weeks 
remain in the first part of the stream, as 1,204 weeks would be required to achieve 
$185,000.00 in payment from the back end of the benefit stream based upon a present 
value reduction.  The result of this is that Ms. Heafey’s benefits would expire in 14.35 
years, at age 57 years and 3 months.   
In reviewing the parties’ arguments, I find that the defendant’s argument is more 
convincing.  This reasoning has been previously utilized by this agency.  See e.g. Kelly 
v. Kroblin Refrigerated Xpress, Inc., 2 Iowa Indus. Comm’r Rep. 221, 222 (Appeal Dec. 
1982).  Considering that the claimant is obtaining benefits accruing in the future, it is 
consistent that those benefits would be more heavily discounted.  Therefore, more 
weeks are required to achieve the amount requested by Ms. Heafey in the petition for 
partial commutation.  As the defendant points out, time and interest on the present 
value of future weeks of benefits have not accrued to increase the value of that week to 
the amount due under the previous award.  Ms. Heafey’s remaining life expectancy is 
approximately 37.5 years, which means that benefits in the future have a very small 
present value.  I find that, in order to receive $185,000.00 in payment from the back end 
of the benefit stream based upon present value calculations, 1,204 weeks of benefits 
need to be deducted from the remaining 1,950 weeks of benefits.  This leaves 746 
weeks in the front end of the benefit stream.   
When determining whether a commutation should be granted, the reviewing body 
determines whether granting a commutation is in the claimant’s best interests.  
Dameron v. Neumann Bros., Inc., 339 N.W.2d 160, 164-65 (1983); Diamond v. Parsons 
Co., 256 Iowa 915, 928, 129 N.W.2d 608, 616 (1964).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
identified the following factors to consider in determining whether a commutation is in 
the claimant’s best interest: 
1. The worker’s age, education, mental and physical condition, and actual life 
expectancy (as contrasted with information provided by actuarial tables).   
2. The worker’s family circumstances, living arrangements, and responsibilities 
to dependents.   
3. The worker’s financial condition, including all sources of income, debts, and 
living expenses.   
4. The reasonableness of the worker’s plan for investing the lump sum proceeds 
and the worker’s ability to manage invested funds or arrange for management 
by others (for example, by a trustee or conservator).   

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 9 
 
Dameron, 339 N.W.2d at 164.  A request for a commutation should be approved using 
the best-interest balancing test “unless the potential detriments to the worker outweigh 
the worker’s expressed preference and the demonstrated benefits of commutation.”  Id. 
In determining whether the commutation is in the best interest of a claimant, this 
agency cannot act as a conservator and disregard the claimant’s desires and 
reasonable plans just because success of the plans is not assured.  See e.g. Hessenius 
v. Great Plains Orthotics & Prosthetics, File No. 5044228 (App., Feb. 14, 2019) (citing 
Diamond, 256 Iowa 915, 129 N.W.2d 608 (1964)).  A request for commutation should 
be approved unless the potential detriments to the worker outweigh the worker’s 
expressed preference and the demonstrated benefits of commutation.  Id. (citing 
Dameron, 339 N.W.2d at 164).     
The defendant argues that Ms. Heafey’s plan is speculative and places her in a 
precarious financial position.  The defendant argues that there is no documentation in 
the record with regard to the home that Ms. Heafey claims she wants to purchase.  The 
defendant further claims that Ms. Heafey’s credit card debt is not as recent as she 
claimed in her testimony at hearing.  The defendant claims that Ms. Heafey had three 
years to prepare for her presentation at hearing, but her plan for use of the commutation 
funds has “proved [sic] to be a moving target for analysis.”  (Defendant’s Post-Hearing 
Brief).  Essentially, the defendant argues that the evidence in the record is insufficient 
for the undersigned to order a back half commutation of the claimant’s benefits.  Finally, 
the defendant argues that Ms. Heafey’s benefit stream running out at about age 57 
years and 3 months would present an unreasonable gap in benefits before Social 
Security retirement payments commence.         
Ms. Heafey is 42 years old.  She lives alone with her pets.  Her family, a noted 
support system, live in Coin, Iowa, very near to her.  She is a high school graduate and 
attended some community college.  Ms. Heafey continues to have some physical and 
mental problems; however, she appeared very credible at the hearing.  She also 
testified that she is able to maintain her home and finances on her own.  Ms. Heafey 
receives income from her workers’ compensation award, and from Social Security 
Disability payments.  She manages her expenses well, testifying, and proving by 
evidence that she has about $400.00 to $600.00 in expenses per month.  Ms. Heafey 
indicated that she has significant credit card debt of about $18,000.00, but also 
indicated a plan to repay that debt with proceeds from the commutation.  Ms. Heafey 
also testified that she would take about $1,200.00 per month that she currently pays 
towards credit card debt, and place that into either an investment account or a savings 
account for emergencies as they arise.   
The claimant argues that she has a plan for the money from the back end of the 
commutation.  If the claimant receives $184,500.00 in a back-end commutation, after 
attorney’s fees, she will receive about $123,000.00.  Ms. Heafey indicated that she 
planned to pay off about $18,000.00 in outstanding credit card debt.  She also plans on 
buying a home for about $47,500.00.  She would then sell her current property and 
trailer for about $10,000.00 making the net cost of the home $37,500.00.  If she buys 

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 10 
 
the property discussed at hearing, she also planned on selling a portion of the land on 
which that home sits.  She estimated this could bring a small return, which she will 
invest.  Ms. Heafey would take the remaining proceeds from the commutation, between 
$57,500.00 and $67,500.00, depending on the sale of her current property.  The 
investment will be between a Roth IRA and other investments as discussed with Mr. 
Christiansen.  The defendant is critical of Mr. Christiansen’s report; however, Ms. 
Heafey noted that she met with Mr. Christiansen on two separate occasions to discuss 
her intentions.  
If Ms. Heafey purchased a new home, she could avoid some of the costly repairs 
required on her trailer.  This allows her to save more money to either invest for her 
retirement, or for purchasing a car in the future.  I am troubled by the fact that the 
commutation benefits may end early, but note that the commutation will allow Ms. 
Heafey to invest money to account for potential gaps in benefits.   
Under the circumstances of this case, I find the benefits of the proposed partial 
commutation outweigh the detriments that Heafey may face in the future.   
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in claimant’s exhibits.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
The administrative rule expressly allows taxation of costs for the costs of filing fees.  
The claimant requests costs of $100.00 for the filing fee.  In my discretion, I award the 
claimant one hundred and 00/100 ($100.00) dollars for these costs.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant’s petition for partial commutation is granted.   

HEAFEY V. PELLA CORPORATION 
Page 11 
 
Defendant shall pay the claimant a lump sum payment of future weekly benefits 
of one thousand two hundred four (1,204) weeks of the back end of permanent total 
disability benefits awarded in the February 18, 2008 arbitration decision.   
Defendant shall receive a credit for all benefits paid from the date of the filing of 
the petition until the date the partial commutation is paid.   
Claimant’s right to medical benefits under Iowa Code section 85.27 shall remain 
unaffected by this decision.   
Defendant is assessed one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) for the filing 
fee.   
That defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this       18th       day of December, 2020. 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Laura L. Pattermann (via WCES) 
David L. Jenkins (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
