Case Number: 22003900.01
Case Title:  JONES, EDWARD V. PAPETTIS OF IOWA - LENOX D/B/A MICHAEL FOODS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Jones Edward-22003900.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
EDWARD JONES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 22003900.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                    A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  :      
PAPETTI’S OF IOWA-LENOX d/b/a 
  :                        D E C I S I O N 
MICHAEL’S FOODS, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  :     Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 142.40, 1803, 
 
 
  :    
 
 
     1803.1, 2502, 2701,  
ARCH INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
     2907 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Edward Jones, seeks workers’ compensation benefits from 
defendants, Papetti’s of Iowa-Lenox d/b/a Michael Foods (hereinafter referred to as 
“Michael’s Foods”), as the employer, and Arch Insurance Company, as the insurance 
carrier.  Mr. Jones alleges he sustained a work injury on November 28, 2021.  Hearing 
occurred on December 20, 2024. 
Claimant was the only witness to testify at hearing.  The parties offered Joint 
Exhibits 1 through 4.  Claimant offered Exhibits 1 through 7.  Defendants offered 
Exhibits A through L.  All exhibits were received into evidence without objection.   
At the commencement of the hearing, the parties submitted a hearing report.  On 
that hearing report, the parties entered into several stipulations.  The parties’ 
stipulations are accepted and relied upon in this decision.  No findings of fact or 
conclusions of law will be made with respect to the parties’ stipulations.  The parties are 
now bound by their stipulations. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-15  13:58:46     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant has proven a sequela injury to his low back. 
2. Whether the work injury caused permanent disability and, if so, whether the 
injury should be compensated as a scheduled member injury or as an 
unscheduled injury. 
3. If the injury is determined to be an unscheduled injury, whether claimant’s 
permanent disability should be compensated based upon functional 
impairment or via industrial disability benefits. 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits. 
6. Whether defendants have proven entitlement to apportionment of prior 
injuries and prior disability. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation fees. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
9. Whether costs should be assessed against any party and in what amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Edward Jones is a 57-year-old gentleman, who resides in Creston, Iowa.  Mr. 
Jones grew up in Houston, Texas and graduated from high school in 1986.  He 
attended welding school shortly thereafter and began working in the welding industry at 
the age of 18. 
He commenced employment with Michael’s Foods in the spring of 2019 or 2020.  
Mr. Jones worked as a fabricator for Michael’s Foods, building stairs to various 
machinery and building piping to machinery.  He earned approximately $21.00 per hour 
on the date of injury. 
On November 28, 2021, Mr. Jones was taking a boiler out of service.  He was 
advised that all oil had been drained from the pipe he was supposed to remove.  
Unfortunately, as claimant was capping the end of the pipeline, residual oil in the piping 
caught fire and caused a “flash” to come out of the pipe.  Mr. Jones was working on a 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 3 
 
 
ladder at that time and fell off the ladder when the flash occurred.  Mr. Jones fell to the 
floor, which was covered in oil, he slipped, and fell into a machine.  On cross-
examination, Mr. Jones acknowledged that he cannot state whether his right knee 
twisted when he fell off the ladder on the date of injury.  Nevertheless, he experienced 
right knee symptoms after the fall and reported the fall and symptoms to his supervisor.  
Claimant testified that he had no right knee symptoms before the November 28, 2021 
work incident.  He further testified that he last physically worked for the employer on the 
date of injury. 
Michael’s Foods sent claimant to a physician for evaluation of his right knee.  
Steven A. Freeman, M.D., an internal medicine physician, evaluated claimant on 
December 17, 2021.  Claimant reported jumping off the third rung of a ladder on 
November 28, 2021 and that his right knee struck some equipment.  Claimant reported 
that his right knee felt “loose” at that evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1)  Dr. Freeman 
suspected a medial meniscal tear, obtained an x-ray of the right knee, and made a 
referral to an orthopaedic surgeon.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Michael J. Morrison, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon, evaluated Mr. Jones on 
December 21, 2021.  He noted a small prepatellar bursal sac, noted severe 
degenerative arthritis in the right knee, and recommended an MRI to further clarify the 
work injury.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 1)  The MRI occurred on January 4, 2022 and demonstrated 
a complex tear of the posterior horn of the medial meniscus as well as severe medial 
compartment osteoarthritis.  (Joint Ex. 3) 
Mr. Jones returned to Dr. Morrison on January 4, 2022, after the MRI.  Dr. 
Morrison interpreted the MRI as demonstrating severe medial compartment 
degenerative arthritis.  He also noted a tear of the posterior horn of the medial 
meniscus.  He noted the meniscal tear, “would be attributable to being traumatic and not 
degenerative since he has no prior history of any knee complaints.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 4) 
At the January 4, 2022 evaluation, Dr. Morrison noted claimant’s right knee 
demonstrated no effusion and demonstrated full range of motion.  Dr. Morrison 
recommended against surgical intervention for the meniscal tear because surgery would 
likely worsen claimant’s underlying degenerative arthritis and worsen those symptoms.  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 4)  Instead, Dr. Morrison performed a cortisone injection into the right 
knee.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 4) 
Around this same time, claimant was involuntarily terminated from his 
employment with Michael’s Foods.  Claimant testified that his FMLA expired due to 
missed time from work and he was terminated.   
Mr. Jones returned for further treatment with Dr. Morrison on January 25, 2022.  
Claimant reported that the cortisone injection provided only two to three days of relief 
before his symptoms returned.  Dr. Morrison reiterated, “The tear of the medical 
meniscus would be attributable to his fall, but I again advised him that with the severity 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 4 
 
 
of the medial compartment arthritis, I would not recommend any removal of the medial 
meniscus which would accelerate his arthritic problem.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 5) 
Dr. Morrison did not provide further treatment to claimant after January 25, 2022.  
On February 11, 2022, Dr. Morrison released claimant to return to work without 
restrictions.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 7)  Claimant has not sought further treatment for his right 
knee through the date of the hearing. 
However, defendants sought an independent medical evaluation performed by 
William Boulden, M.D., on March 9, 2022.  (Defendants’ Ex. A)  Dr. Boulden noted there 
was no mention of claimant’s knee twisting at the time of his injury.  Dr. Boulden opined 
that claimant’s knee pain resulted from “a degenerative meniscus problem that is 
longstanding.”  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 2)  Dr. Boulden opined that claimant’s right knee 
issues included chronic arthritis and a degenerative meniscus tear and opined that 
neither is causally related to claimant’s fall at work in November 2021.  (Defendants’ Ex. 
A, p. 3) 
Defendants also sought a supplemental report from Dr. Morrison in April 2022.  
Dr. Morrison confirmed that claimant was at MMI for his right knee injury.  He opined 
that claimant’s degenerative meniscal tear is attributable to or causally related to the 
November 2021 injury at work because claimant had no prior right knee injuries.  
However, Dr. Morrison also confirmed that there was no evidence that claimant’s right 
knee arthritis was accelerated or worsened as a result of the work injury.  Dr. Morrison 
opined that claimant qualifies for a three percent permanent functional impairment.  Dr. 
Morrison’s report does not specify whether this impairment rating was offered pursuant 
to and consistent with the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, as a result of the meniscal tear.  (Defendants’ Ex. D) 
However, Dr. Chen was specifically asked to offer an impairment rating pursuant 
to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Dr. Chen 
concurred with the three percent permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. Morrison.  
(Defendants’ Ex. F, p. 9)  I accept the three percent permanent impairment ratings 
offered by Dr. Morrison and Dr. Chen as the most realistic and credible in this record 
and find that claimant proved a three percent permanent functional impairment of his 
right knee as a result of the meniscal tear resulting from his work injury. 
In July 2022, Mr. Jones obtained employment as a middle school custodian with 
the Creston Community School District.  Prior to commencing his employment with 
Creston Schools, Mr. Jones completed a physical capacity test.  That testing occurred 
on June 21, 2022.  The therapist performing that evaluation noted claimant reported he 
last had right knee pain in February 2020 and confirmed that claimant reported, “No 
pain in right knee today.”  (Defendants’ Ex. J, p. 2)  That testing also demonstrated 
claimant had the ability to perform heavy work and demonstrated the ability to exert 50 
to 100 pounds of force occasionally.  (Defendants’ Ex. J, p. 1)  

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 5 
 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Jones sustained a right elbow and biceps injury while lifting a 
large TV for Creston Schools.  Claimant submitted to additional treatment for the 
unrelated right elbow and biceps injury.  Mr. Jones sought treatment for that injury from 
July 2022 through December 2022.  He reported a litany of health conditions, including 
anxiety, chronic left shoulder pain, chronic left ankle pain, erectile dysfunction, grand 
mal seizure disorder, hemorrhoids, a labral tear in the shoulder, panic attacks and 
postherpetic neuralgia.  However, he did not report ongoing right knee symptoms or low 
back pain during this treatment.  (Joint Ex. 4, pp. 1-20) 
Claimant sought an independent medical evaluation performed by Sunil Bansal, 
M.D. on January 17, 2023.  Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with a right knee posterior 
horn medial meniscus tear and aggravation of medial compartment degenerative joint 
disease.  Dr. Bansal’s history included a description of claimant working on an 8-foot 
ladder and falling from the second to the top rung of the ladder.  This description of the 
height of claimant’s fall contradicts claimant’s own testimony and medical records 
occurring near in time to the injury. 
Dr. Bansal recorded, “Mr. Jones continues to have right knee pain, and his injury 
has resulted in significant limitations with his activities and mobility.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, 
p. 5)  Interestingly, Dr. Bansal’s review of the relevant medical records does not discuss 
the pre-employment functional testing that occurred before claimant started with the 
Creston Schools.  Of course, without this information, Dr. Bansal did not have the 
opportunity to inquire of claimant about his lack of symptoms in his right knee and 
functional capabilities in June 2022 (pre-employment functional testing) versus his 
reported complaints and functional limitations in January 2023 (Bansal IME).  Claimant 
offers no explanation of the disappearance of his right knee symptoms before June 
2022 and reappearance of symptoms before his January 2023 IME with Dr. Bansal. 
Dr. Bansal also reported a history in which claimant “turned to avoid the fire while 
on the ladder and twisted his right knee.  His injury was not a result of a fall, but rather 
the abrupt twisting movement as he dodged the fire.  He jumped off the ladder as he 
twisted his knee.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 8)  Again, this history is not consistent with 
claimant’s hearing testimony or medical records close in time to the injury.  Neither 
claimant nor Dr. Bansal explains this inconsistent history. 
Ultimately, Dr. Bansal concurs with Dr. Morrison that maximum medical 
improvement occurred for claimant’s right knee injury on January 26, 2022.  He 
assigned claimant a 10 percent right lower extremity permanent impairment pursuant to 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, due to a 
finding of reduced flexion range of motion.  Dr. Bansal recommended restrictions that 
preclude frequent kneeling or squatting.  He recommended claimant avoid multiple 
stairs or climbing and recommended claimant avoid prolonged standing or walking 
greater than one hour at a time.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 9)  Interestingly, Dr. Bansal 
recorded no symptoms of low back pain and did not address claimant’s low back as part 
of his independent medical evaluation.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1) 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 6 
 
 
Claimant testified that he developed low back pain in the summer of 2023 and 
attributes it to the work injury occurring in November 2021.  Specifically, Mr. Jones 
described his knee as popping in and out.  He then explained that his symptoms will 
start in his right knee and then work up to the right low back.  He testified that his low 
back pain gradually started and increased.  He described his symptoms in the right side 
of his low back and that the symptoms got so severe they would take his breath away. 
Claimant has not had any medical treatment for his low back since the date of 
injury.  However, he did have Dr. Bansal perform a second IME on September 17, 2024.  
In that second IME, Dr. Bansal recorded that claimant developed low back pain after his 
prior IME due to limping caused by his right knee injury.  Dr. Bansal noted that claimant 
adjusted his gait because his knee pops in and out, causing him to develop low back 
pain.  Dr. Bansal opined that claimant achieved MMI for his low back on the date of his 
IME, September 17, 2024.  Dr. Bansal also assigned a diagnosis of sacroiliitis, awarding 
a five percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of claimant's low 
back symptoms.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, pp. 9-10)  Dr. Bansal recommended claimant avoid 
frequent bending and twisting for his low back and recommended claimant avoid 
prolonged sitting greater than one hour for his low back pain.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 11) 
Defendants asked Dr. Boulden to review and respond to Dr. Bansal’s second 
IME opinion pertaining to claimant’s low back condition.  Dr. Boulden opined, “a limp 
may cause some symptoms, but it does not cause any pathological changes, and once 
again, the limp is related to the fact of severe arthritis in his knee, not to any meniscus 
tear.  Therefore, I disagree with Dr. Bansal.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, pp. 1-2)  Dr. Boulden 
specifically notes, “From an orthopaedic standpoint, I do not agree with anything Dr. 
Bansal has stated in his two different IMEs.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 2) 
Defendants also asked Dr. Morrison to review claimant’s medical records and 
comment on his low back symptoms.  Dr. Morrison noted that there were no reports of 
low back pain prior to or during his treatment of claimant.  He noted no mention of low 
back pain in either Dr. Boulden or Dr. Bansal’s initial IMEs.  Dr. Morrison concluded, 
“any complaints of lower back symptomatology or sacroiliac complaints would have no 
causative relationship to his injury three years previously.”  (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 3) 
Defendants also sought another independent medical evaluation performed by 
Joseph Chen, M.D.  Dr. Chen is a board-certified physical medicine and rehabilitation 
specialist as well as a board-certified spinal cord injury specialist.  (Defendants’ Ex. G, 
p. 3)  Dr. Chen evaluated claimant on October 25, 2024.  Dr. Chen opined that claimant 
did not sustain an acute meniscal tear on November 28, 2021.  However, he noted that 
claimant’s degenerative meniscal tear became symptomatic after this fall at work.  He 
further concurred with Dr. Boulden and Dr. Morrison that claimant’s right knee arthritis 
was not causally related to the work injury.  (Defendants’ Ex. F, p .8) 
Dr. Chen addressed claimant’s low back pain and noted that claimant “believed 
his back pain started due to his left ankle pain, ‘walking funny,’ and recent weight gain.”  
(Defendants’ Ex. F, p. 8)  He concurred with Dr. Morrison that MMI for the right knee 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 7 
 
 
occurred on January 25, 2022.  Dr. Chen concurred with Dr. Morrison’s 3 percent 
permanent functional impairment of the right lower extremity for claimant’s right knee 
injury.  However, he disagreed with Dr. Bansal’s imposition of any work restrictions for 
the right knee, indicating restrictions were not medically necessary.  (Defendants’ Ex. F, 
p. 9) Dr. Chen also opined, “I did not find that Mr. Jones had any objective physical 
examination evidence of sacroiliitis.”  (Defendants Ex. F, p. 10) 
Mr. Jones continues to work full-time, five days per week and 40 hours per week 
as a custodian.  He testified that his low back symptoms affect his work as a school 
custodian, causing him to walk funny when his knee pops.  He described ongoing pain 
at the belt line and up the back of his leg.  He described it as feeling like a knot.  He 
described all duties that require twisting, vacuuming, and bending to be more difficult 
and painful.  Mr. Jones also testified that he does not like to climb ladders and explained 
that it hurts while climbing and that he also does not like to use ladders because of the 
nature of the incident causing his injury with a flash fire. 
Defendants obtained the deposition of claimant’s supervisor, Jared Hagle, at 
Creston Middle School.  (Defendants’ Ex. L)  Mr. Hagel testified that he oversees 
claimant in his employment as a custodian and observes him daily during summer 
custodial work.  (Defendants’ Ex. L, pp. 10-11)  Mr. Hagel clarified that claimant is 
required to lift 50-75 pounds in his custodial position.  He also clarified that claimant 
continues to work 40 hours per week and is on his feet almost all day long.  
(Defendants’ Ex. L. pp. 6-7)  Mr. Hagel also testified that claimant has not reported 
complaints of back pain or symptoms during his employment with Creston Schools and 
that he has not observed any signs or symptoms from claimant.  (Defendants’ Ex. L, p. 
8)  Mr. Hagle’s testimony is consistent with claimant’s pre-employment physical testing, 
reported lack of symptoms in that evaluation, lack of medical treatment for the low back, 
and is found to be credible. 
Mr. Jones testified that he does not believe he could return to work at Michael’s 
Foods or to any of his prior welding positions.  He testified that he cannot carry more 
than 20 pounds now and that it hurts his back.  This testimony is contradicted by 
claimant’s physical capacity testing prior to his employment with Creston Schools, Mr. 
Hagle’s testimony, his lack of treatment for his back, and by his continued performance 
of duties as a custodian. I did not find this testimony to be credible and convincing.  Mr. 
Jones also testified that his balance is affected when his back tightens.   
Considering the competing medical opinion in this record, as well as the other lay 
evidence, I find the opinions of Dr. Morrison to be the most credible and convincing.  Dr. 
Morrison served as the treating orthopaedic surgeon for claimant.  He has the 
orthopaedic credentials to offer credible opinions on claimant’s condition and his 
opinions are reasonable and convincing. 
Specifically, I find that claimant sustained an aggravation of a degenerative 
meniscal tear in his right knee when he fell off a ladder at work on November 28, 2021.  
I find that claimant’s right knee osteoarthritis is unrelated to and was not proven to be 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 8 
 
 
materially aggravated by the November 28, 2021 work incident.  I find that claimant 
sustained a three percent permanent functional impairment of the right leg as a result of 
the November 28, 2021 right knee injury at work.  I find that claimant has no permanent 
work restrictions specifically related to the November 28, 2021 right knee meniscal 
injury or aggravation.  I find the evidence contained in the June 2022 pre-employment 
testing to be convincing and very damaging to claimant’s claim of the need for 
permanent work restrictions for the right knee.  I find claimant achieved maximum 
medical improvement for the right knee on January 25, 2022. 
With respect to claimant’s low back injury claim, I again accept Dr. Morrison’s 
medical opinions and find that claimant failed to prove a low back injury, material 
aggravation of his low back, or sequela injury as a result of the November 8, 2021 right 
knee injury.  I accept the opinions of Dr. Boulden and Dr. Chen to the extent they 
support or concur with those offered by Dr. Morrison.  Specifically, I find the opinions of 
Dr. Boulden and Dr. Chen to be credible and convincing pertaining to claimant’s knee 
arthritis and low back injury claim.  
I reject the opinions of Dr. Bansal in this case as unconvincing and likely to be 
lacking an accurate medical history.  Specifically, I note that Dr. Bansal does not appear 
to have had access to the June 2022 pre-employment testing.  If he had that testing 
available, he made no credible reference to or explanation of those findings relative to 
his history and testing during his evaluation.  This is damaging to Dr. Bansal’s opinions 
pertaining to the right knee, given the claimant’s comments he had no right knee pain at 
his June 2022 testing.   
I also reject Dr. Bansal’s opinions pertaining to the alleged low back injury.  His 
explanation of why claimant’s low back symptoms developed long after his right knee 
injury and after his initial IME are not convincing.  I find that Dr. Morrison, Dr. Boulden, 
and Dr. Chen have superior credentials on the low back claim and offer more credible 
explanation pertaining to the low back. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
A personal injury, contemplated by [Iowa’s workers’ compensation 
act], obviously means an injury to the body, the impairment of health, or a 
disease, not excluded by the act, which comes about, not through the 
natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of a 
traumatic or other hurt or damage to the health or body of an employee…. 
The injury to the human body here contemplated must be something, 
whether an accident or not, that acts extraneously to the natural 
processes of nature, and thereby impairs the health, overcomes, injures, 
interrupts, or destroys some function of the body, or otherwise damages or 
injures a part or all of the body.  
Almquist v. Shenandoah Nurseries, Inc., 218 Iowa 724, 732, 254 N.W. 35, 39 (1934). 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 9 
 
 
A personal injury only arises out of employment if it “is apparent to the rational 
mind, upon consideration of all the circumstances, a causal connection between the 
conditions under which the work is required to be performed and the resulting injury.”  
Burt v. John Deere Waterloo Tractor Works, 247 Iowa 692, 700, 73 N.W.2d 732, 737 
(1955) (internal quotation omitted).  In other words, an injury only arises out of 
employment “if the injury can be seen to have followed as a natural incident of the work 
and to have been contemplated by a reasonable person familiar with the whole situation 
as a result of the exposure occasioned by the nature of the employment.”  Burt, 247 
Iowa at 700-701, 73 N.W.2d at 737 (internal quotation omitted).   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. Morrison to be the most credible and 
convincing.  Specifically, I found that claimant proved a material aggravation of his right 
knee medial meniscus but failed to prove a causal connection of his right knee arthritis 
and the work injury on November 28, 2021.  As such, I conclude claimant proved a 
work-related injury to the right leg but failed to prove that the injury extends beyond the 
right leg. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 10 
 
 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Having found that claimant’s injury is limited to a right knee, medial meniscus 
injury, I conclude this injury is limited to a scheduled member injury to be compensated 
on a 220-week schedule pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p).  I found that 
claimant proved a three percent permanent functional impairment pursuant to the 
opinions of Dr. Morrison.  Three percent of 220 weeks entitles claimant to 6.6 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p), (w), (x). 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for the cost of his independent medical 
evaluation with Dr. Bansal pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 permits 
an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.  
The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the 
subsequent examination. 
The parties also dispute the proper commencement date for permanent partial 
disability benefits.  “Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is 
medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been 
reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be 
determined.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  In this instance, I found that claimant 
achieved maximum medical improvement on January 25, 2022.  At this point in time, 
claimant’s healing period ended and the extent of his loss of permanent impairment 

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 11 
 
 
could be assessed or determined.  I conclude that permanent disability benefits 
commence on January 25, 2022.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
Mr. Jones seeks an award of alternate medical care.  Defendants acknowledged 
at the time of hearing that they would be legally responsible for any causally related 
future medical care for an injury determined to be related to the work injury.  Iowa Code 
section 85.27.  In this instance, neither the alleged back claim nor the right knee arthritis 
is determined to be related.  There is no further treatment recommended at this time for 
the right knee medial meniscus tear.  Therefore, I conclude claimant failed to prove 
entitlement to any alternate medical care at this time. 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement of his independent medical evaluation fees.   
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee 
is being examined is determined to be compensable.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2017).  
“An employer is not liable for the cost of such examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to have a compensable injury. A 
determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform 
an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.”  Iowa Code 
§ 85.39(2); Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023).   
Claimant proved a compensable injury to the medial meniscus in his right knee.  
Dr. Bansal provided an unrebutted opinion that his fees are reasonable and typical for 
similar services in the central Iowa area.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Morrison offered 
an opinion pertaining to claimant’s permanent impairment in April 2022.  Dr. Bansal first 
evaluated claimant in January 2023.  I conclude claimant has established the pre-

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 12 
 
 
requisites of Iowa Code section 85.39(2) and is entitled to reimbursement of Dr. 
Bansal’s independent medical evaluation fees in some amount. 
Mr. Jones asserts entitlement to reimbursement for both of Dr. Bansal’s 
evaluations.  However, claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for one evaluation 
under Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  Larson Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 
861 (Iowa 2009).  Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to reimbursement for Dr. 
Bansal’s initial evaluation totaling $2,956.00. 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of costs against defendants.  Assessment of 
costs is within the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  In this instance, 
claimant obtained a permanent disability award as well as reimbursement of his 
independent medical evaluation fee.  Litigation was necessary to secure these awards.  
Therefore, I conclude that it is appropriate to assess costs in this case. 
Claimant seeks assessment of his filing fee ($128.75).  Defendants will be 
ordered to reimburse claimant’s filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  No further costs 
are awarded. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay to claimant six point six (6.6) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated weekly rate of five hundred twenty-seven and 11/100 
dollars ($527.11). 
Permanent partial disability benefits shall commence on January 25, 2022. 
Defendants shall pay all accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum, along with 
applicable interest pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants are entitled to the stipulated credit in the hearing report against this 
award. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal’s independent medical 
evaluation fee in the amount of two thousand nine hundred fifty-six and 00/100 dollars 
($2,956.00) 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for his litigation costs in the amount of one 
hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($128.75). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
   

JONES V. PAPETTI’S OF IOWA—LENOX d/b/a MICHAEL FOODS 
Page 13 
 
 
Signed and filed this ____15th ___ day of May, 2025. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Gary Mattson  
(via WCES) 
Nathan McConkey  (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
