Case Number: 19003562.01
Case Title:  ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO, MIRIAN V. AEROTEK INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      EscobarDeCarballo Mirian-19003562.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MIRIAN ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO, 
  : 
 
 
  :                   File No. 19003562.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
AEROTEK, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF N.A., 
  :    Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
 
  : 
 
 
    1403.10, 1802, 1803,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
    1803.1, 1804, 2206 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
Claimant Mirian Escobar de Carballo filed a petition in arbitration on December 1, 
2020, alleging she sustained injuries to her right rotator cuff, neck, head, and body as a 
whole while working for Defendant Aerotek, Inc. (“Aerotek”) on September 17, 2019.  
Aerotek and its insurer, Defendant Indemnity Insurance Company of North America 
(“Indemnity Insurance”), filed an answer on January 8, 2021.   
An arbitration hearing was held via Zoom video conference on January 3, 2022.  
Attorney John Dougherty represented Escobar de Carballo.  Escobar de Carballo 
appeared and testified.  Kelly Henley provided Spanish interpretation services during 
the hearing.  Jessica Sarabia, the daughter of Escobar de Carballo, testified on her 
mother’s behalf.  Attorney Peter Thill represented Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance.  
Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 1 through 8, Exhibits 1 through 4, and Exhibits A through F were 
admitted into the record.   
The record was held open through February 18, 2022, for the receipt of post-
hearing briefs.  The briefs were received and the record was closed. 
Prior to the hearing the parties submitted a Hearing Report listing stipulations 
and issues to be decided.  The Hearing Report was approved at the time of the hearing.  
Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance waived all affirmative defenses. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Apr-01  15:32:23     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Escobar de Carballo 
and Aerotek at the time of the alleged injury. 
2. 
Escobar de Carballo sustained an injury on September 17, 2019, which 
arose out of and in the course of her employment with Aerotek. 
3. 
The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
4. 
Although entitlement to temporary benefits cannot be stipulated, Escobar 
de Carballo was off work from September 18, 2019 through January 13, 2021. 
5. 
The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
6. 
At the time of the alleged injury Escobar de Carballo’s gross earnings 
were $487.46 per week, she was married and entitled to two exemptions, and the 
parties believe the weekly rate is $340.25. 
7. 
Prior to the hearing Escobar de Carballo was paid the benefits set forth in 
Exhibit C. 
ISSUES 
1. 
What is the nature of the injury? 
2. 
What is the extent of disability? 
3. 
Has Escobar de Carballo established she is permanently and totally 
disabled under the common law odd-lot doctrine or statute? 
4. 
What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits? 
5. 
Is Escobar de Carballo entitled to temporary total disability, temporary 
partial disability, or healing period benefits from September 18, 2019 through January 
13, 2021? 
6. 
Are Defendants responsible for the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 4? 
7. 
Is Escobar de Carballo entitled to an award of penalty benefits? 
8. 
Is Escobar de Carballo entitled to recover the cost of the independent 
medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39?  
9. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
 
 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 3 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Escobar de Carballo grew up in Guatemala.  (Transcript:9)  She was an orphan 
and did not attend school.  (Tr.:9, 43)  Escobar de Carballo cannot write in English or 
Spanish.  (Tr.:40)  She can read some Spanish, but she cannot read in English.  (Tr.:40)  
Escobar de Carballo has an Iowa driver’s license.  (Tr.:42)   
Escobar de Carballo has experience in childcare, cleaning homes and 
businesses, working in a shirt factory, and in food service.  (Tr.:9-14)  Escobar de 
Carballo ran a day care certified by the Iowa Department of Human Services from 2014 
to 2019.  (Tr.:44)  Escobar de Carballo closed her daycare when her husband had heart 
surgery because she needed to take care of him.  (Tr.:44)   
In August 2019, Aerotek hired Escobar de Carballo and placed her in the bakery 
at Hy-Vee.  (Tr.:16)  Escobar de Carballo has a history of thyroid cancer and diabetes, 
but reported having no problems with her neck, shoulder, or body before working for 
Aerotek.  (Tr.:16-17, 19, 54-55)  While working in the bakery, Escobar de Carballo was 
responsible for taking baked goods on a wheeled rack out of a commercial oven.  
(Tr.:19, 47-48)   
On September 17, 2019, Escobar de Carballo went to the oven at work to 
remove a wheeled rack.  (Tr.:20, 47-48)  When she opened the oven the rack fell 
against her, she fell and hit her head on a table, and the rack fell on top of her.  (Tr.:20, 
48)  Escobar de Carballo worked for a while after the incident, but she could not tolerate 
working and went home for the day.  (Tr.:23, 48)   
On September 18, 2019, Escobar de Carballo sought emergency medical 
treatment at MercyOne where she was examined by Karin Howe, D.O., an emergency 
medicine physician.  (JE 1:1)  Escobar de Carballo reported she was burned when a 15 
shelf cart she pulled out of a walk in oven caught on the floor causing her to fall onto her 
right side.  (JE 1:1)  Escobar de Carballo also reported she hit her head on the table 
when she fell and the shelves hit her on the head.  (JE 1:1)  Escobar de Carballo 
reported she lost consciousness for a few seconds and she experienced multiple 
episodes of dizziness afterwards.  (JE 1:1)  Escobar de Carballo complained of having a 
headache, minor neck pain, right shoulder pain, left knee pain, and right tibula/fibula 
pain.  (JE 1:1)   
Dr. Howe ordered a cervical spine computerized tomography scan.  (JE 1:3)  The 
reviewing radiologist found Escobar de Carballo had no fracture of the cervical spine, 
but noted she had moderate degenerative disc disease at C5-C6.  (JE 1:4, 6)  Imaging 
of her right arm, left knee, pelvis, tibia and fibula did not reveal any fractures.  (JE 1:4)  
Dr. Howe listed an impression of a superficial burn and concussion, ordered Escobar de 
Carballo to keep her burns clean and dry and to apply antibiotic ointment, and she 
discharged her with instructions to follow up with her primary care provider.  (JE 1:4, 7-
10)  Dr. Howe released Escobar de Carballo to return to work on September 23, 2019 
with no restrictions.  (JE 1:5)   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 4 
On September 26, 2019, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with 
Stephen Ash, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon, complaining of bilateral shoulder pain 
following a direct blow and fall at work.  (JE 2:11)  Dr. Ash assessed Escobar de 
Carballo with bilateral shoulder pain and a right long head biceps rupture, he 
recommended right shoulder magnetic resonance imaging, and he imposed restrictions 
of no use of the right arm and no lifting over 20 pounds with the left arm below shoulder 
level.  (JE 2:12, 14)   
Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Carlos Moe, D.O., a family 
medicine physician, on October 7, 2019.  (JE 3)  Dr. Moe assessed her with post-
concussive syndrome, superficial burns of multiple upper extremity sites, a first-degree 
scalp burn, a right lower leg burn, a right shoulder and wrist contusion, and a right knee 
and lower leg contusion.  (JE 3:80)  Dr. Moe prescribed amitriptyline for post-concussive 
syndrome, headache, and sleep, and restricted Escobar de Carballo from working until 
she could be evaluated by a neurologist.  (JE 3:81)   
Escobar de Carballo underwent right shoulder magnetic resonance imaging on 
October 15, 2019.  (JE 2:15)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of “4 x 4 
mm complete to near-complete full-thickness tear in the supraspinatus tendon” with no 
atrophy of the cuff musculature.  (JE 2:15)   
On October 25, 2019, Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Ash reporting her left 
shoulder had improved a great deal, but she was still having right shoulder pain.  (JE 
2:16)  Dr. Ash assessed Escobar de Carballo with bilateral shoulder pain, unspecified 
chronicity and a right rotator cuff tear, discussed operative and nonoperative options 
with Escobar de Carballo, and she elected to proceed with surgery.  (JE 2:17)  Dr. Ash 
recommended a right shoulder arthroscopy arthroscopic subacromial decompression 
with rotator cuff repair and imposed a two-pound lifting restriction below shoulder level 
for the right arm.  (JE 2:17-18)   
On November 19, 2019, Escobar de Carballo commenced treatment with 
Michael Jacoby, M.D., a neurologist.  (JE 4:82)  Escobar de Carballo complained of 
constant left occipital pain without nausea, light and sound sensitivity, concentration and 
sleeping problems, and infrequent dizziness.  (JE 4:82)  Escobar de Carballo told Dr. 
Jacoby she had noticed she would forget why she was going to the store, she had 
trouble doing the wrong activities, she went to the wrong place once, and she threw 
trash into the refrigerator.  (JE 4:82)  Dr. Jacoby documented he observed Escobar de 
Carballo’s language was fluent and logical, her speech was normal, her recent and 
remote memories were preserved, she had an appropriate fund of knowledge, and she 
had a good attention span and good concentration.  (JE 4:84)  Dr. Jacoby assessed 
Escobar de Carballo with post-traumatic headache, occipital neuralgia, concussion, and 
an altered mental status, and prescribed amitriptyline.  (JE 4:84)   
During an appointment on December 20, 2019, Dr. Jacoby administered a 
greater occipital nerve block on the left.  (JE 4:88)  Dr. Jacoby documented Escobar de 
Carballo was alert, appropriately oriented, her language was fluid and logical, her 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 5 
speech was normal, and she had a good attention span and good concentration.  (JE 
4:88)  Dr. Jacoby assessed Escobar de Carballo with occipital neuralgia, concussion, 
and post-traumatic headache.  (JE 4:88) 
Escobar de Carballo reported she did not receive any relief from the injection 
during her next appointment on January 8, 2020.  (JE 4:89)  Escobar de Carballo 
relayed she had throbbing pain all the time in the left occiput area that is worse at night, 
and which radiates from the occiput where the pain is hot and radiates over the top of 
her head and pulses.  (JE 4:89)  Dr. Jacoby documented her vision was fine, but she 
had tearing of her eye with severe pain.  (JE 4:89)  Dr. Jacoby noted Escobar de 
Carballo was alert, her language was fluent and logical, her speech was normal, and 
she had a good attention span and good concentration.  (JE 4:91)  Dr. Jacoby 
documented Escobar de Carballo never picked up the amitriptyline prescription he 
prescribed.  (JE 4:89)  Dr. Jacoby assessed Escobar de Carballo with headache and 
occipital neuralgia and prescribed gabapentin.  (JE 4:91) 
On February 24, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Jose 
Angel, M.D., her primary care provider, for a preoperative exam.  (JE 5:111)  Dr. Angel 
noted Escobar de Carballo’s right shoulder surgery had to be cancelled because her 
blood sugar was too high.  (JE 5:111)  Escobar de Carballo also has a history of thyroid 
cancer and Dr. Angel monitors her thyroid function.  (JE 5:116) 
During a follow-up appointment with Dr. Jacoby on March 18, 2020, Escobar de 
Carballo reported the gabapentin helped for one hour, it upset her stomach, and she 
believed it “makes her feel dumb.”  (JE 4:92)  She also relayed she had been taking the 
amitriptyline he prescribed.  (JE 4:92)  Escobar de Carballo complained of pain in the 
back of her head and neck into the tops of her shoulder, and she complained of “tinnitus 
and ‘radiation’ from [a] phone also bothers her.”  (JE 4:92)  Dr. Jacoby documented 
Escobar de Carballo was alert, her language was fluent and logical, her speech was 
normal, and she had a good attention span and good concentration.  (JE 4:94)  Dr. 
Jacoby assessed her with a headache, neck pain, and arm weakness and noted, “I 
doubt any ominous neuropathology.  Due to continued, unremitting symptoms, and now 
the involvement of neck, MRI of C spine for anatomic clearance needed.  One more 
neurologic attempt for treatment.  Seems a bit histrionic.”  (JE 4:94) 
On March 27, 2020, Escobar de Carballo underwent cervical magnetic 
resonance imaging.  (JE 4:96)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of diffuse 
cervical spondylosis.  (JE 4:97)   
Dr. Ash performed a right shoulder exam under anesthesia, right shoulder 
arthroscopy, arthroscopic subacromial decompression, and arthroscopic rotator cuff 
repair on Escobar de Carballo on April 6, 2020.  (JE 2:19) 
 
On April 9, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Ash.  (JE 2:22)  Dr. Ash documented he spoke with Escobar de Carballo about the 
importance of getting her hand and elbow moving, he ordered physical therapy, and he 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 6 
released her to return to work on April 13, 2020, with restrictions of no use of the right 
arm and a 10 pound lifting restriction with the left arm.  (JE 2:23, 25-26)   
On May 5, 2020, Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Jacoby, complaining of 
pain at the base of her head, neck pain, and a pulsing sensation.  (JE 4:98)  She also 
reported the naproxen he prescribed provided no benefit, and while amitriptyline did not 
help her pain, it helped her sleep.  (JE 4:98)  Dr. Jacoby assessed Escobar de Carballo 
with neck pain and noted she may have “[p]ossible cervical radiculopathy,” discontinued 
her naproxen, and increased her amitriptyline at night.  (JE 4:100-01)   
Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Ash on May 7, 2020, complaining of 
continued pain in her right shoulder and some intermittent numbness and tingling in her 
hand that started eight days ago.  (JE 2:27)  Dr. Ash continued Escobar de Carballo’s 
work restrictions, denied her request for pain medication, and continued her physical 
therapy.  (JE 2:28-30)   
On May 14, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Dr. Angel 
reporting her diabetes was much improved and reporting problems with severe 
insomnia, anxiety, and depression due to the pandemic.  (JE 5:122)  Dr. Angel 
diagnosed Escobar de Carballo with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes, thyroid carcinoma, 
neck pain, occipital neuralgia, and depression and anxiety, and prescribed citalopram 
for her depression and anxiety.  (JE5:125) 
During her appointment with Dr. Ash on June 5, 2020, Escobar de Carballo 
reported her right shoulder was doing slightly better since her last visit.  (JE 2:31)  Dr. 
Ash continued her physical therapy and imposed a two-pound lifting restriction for the 
right arm below shoulder and next to her body.  (JE 2:32-34)   
On June 9, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Einar 
Bogason, M.D., a neurosurgeon, complaining of significant pain over the base of her 
skull on the left side, pain in her neck going down the upper back on the left side, and 
intermittent pain and discomfort going down her left arm.  (JE 4:102)  Dr. Bogason 
documented he reviewed Escobar de Carballo’s cervical magnetic resonance imaging 
with her, noting she had degenerative changes at C4-5, C5-6, and C6-7, with foraminal 
stenosis.  (JE 4:105)  Dr. Bogason found her imaging findings did not appear to be the 
cause of the majority of her pain and he recommended a pain management consultation 
for possible injections.  (JE 4:105)  
On June 24, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with John 
Rayburn, M.D., a physiatrist working in Dr. Ash’s group, complaining of left lateral and 
posterior neck pain from the work injury she described as constant, stabbing, and 
worsening, and aggravated by head movements and relieved by rest and not moving.  
(JE 2:35)  Dr. Rayburn noted cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging from March 
27, 2020, showed multilevel diffuse spondylosis, no acute herniations, and several disc 
osteophyte complexes causing neural foraminal narrowing bilaterally at multiple levels.  
(JE 2:35)  Dr. Rayburn assessed Escobar de Carballo with cervical spondylosis without 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 7 
myelopathy, myalgia, other site, other chronic pain, and cervicalgia, noting “[s]he 
definitely has a soft tissue component in the LEFT upper neck which goes along with 
her mechanism of injury.  Also likely that she flared up the arthritis that was already 
there when she fell, causing facet pain.”  (JE 2:37)  Dr. Rayburn recommended a left 
C3-C6 medial branch block, and if she obtained relief, radiofrequency ablation.  (JE 
2:37)   
Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Ash on July 10, 2020, reporting her right 
shoulder pain was slightly better.  (JE 2:39)  Dr. Ash recommended additional physical 
therapy and continued her two-pound lifting restriction.  (JE 2:40-42)   
On July 10, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Dr. Jacoby, 
reporting she received no benefit from amitriptyline and she had discontinued taking 
gabapentin because it upset her stomach.  (JE 4:106)  Escobar de Carballo reported 
having more pain in her left arm and knee.  (JE 4:106)  Dr. Jacoby documented Escobar 
de Carballo was alert, her language was fluent and logical, her speech was normal, and 
she had a good attention span and good concentration.  (JE 4:109)  Dr. Jacoby 
assessed her with neck pain, discontinued her gabapentin, instructed her to follow up 
with pain management and her primary care physician, and released her from care.  (JE 
4:109)  Escobar de Carballo did not return to Dr. Jacoby for treatment. 
On July 14, 2020 and July 21, 2020, Dr. Rayburn administered left C3-C5 
diagnostic medial branch blocks to Escobar de Carballo.  (JE 2:43, 45)  Escobar de 
Carballo returned to Dr. Rayburn on July 29, 2020, reporting she received no relief from 
the blocks and that her neck pain had increased.  (JE 2:47)  Escobar de Carballo 
described her pain as aching and sharp, reported aggravating factors include turning 
her head, reaching her arm out, and movement, and using a heating pad relieves her 
pain.  (JE 2:47)  Dr. Rayburn opined her symptoms appeared to be coming from the 
muscles in her neck and upper back, noting her facets had improved on exam.  (JE 
2:48)  Dr. Rayburn noted he believed the medial branch blocks had helped her facets 
and he recommended left upper back/cervical region trigger point injections.  (JE 2:49) 
Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Rayburn’s office on August 12, 2020 for the 
injections.  (JE 2:51)  Prior to the procedure Dr. Rayburn’s office tested Escobar de 
Carballo’s blood sugar because she has preexisting diabetes.  (JE 2:51)  The result was 
315, which was too high to do the procedure and Dr. Rayburn rescheduled her 
appointment.  (JE 2:51)   
On August 20, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Dr. Ash, 
reporting her right shoulder pain had improved slightly.  (JE 2:54)  Dr. Ash 
recommended right shoulder magnetic resonance imaging given her continued pain and 
weakness and continued her two-pound lifting restriction.  (JE 2:55-56)   
Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Rayburn’s office on August 27, 2020 for the 
injections.  (JE 2:57)  Prior to the procedure Dr. Rayburn’s office tested Escobar de 
Carballo’s blood sugar because she has preexisting diabetes.  (JE 2:57)  The result was 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 8 
303, which was too high to do the procedure and Dr. Rayburn rescheduled her 
appointment.  (JE 2:57)   
On September 4, 2020, Escobar de Carballo underwent right shoulder magnetic 
resonance imaging.  (JE 4:110)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of a prior 
rotator cuff repair with no evidence of high-grade partial thickness or full-thickness 
rotator cuff retear, mild fatty infiltration of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus, and small 
to moderate amount of subacromial subdeltoid bursal fluid, query bursitis.  (JE 4:110)   
During a follow-up appointment on September 9, 2020, Dr. Ash noted he agreed 
with the radiologist that Escobar de Carballo’s right rotator cuff repair appeared intact.  
(JE 2:59)  Dr. Ash recommended additional physical therapy and imposed a four-pound 
lifting restriction with the right upper extremity below shoulder and next to the body.  (JE 
2:60-62)   
On October 9, 2020, Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Ash complaining of 
right shoulder pain.  (JE 2:63)  Dr. Ash noted the physical therapist noted 
inconsistencies in Escobar de Carballo’s performance during therapy activities.  (JE 
2:63)  Dr. Ash found Escobar de Carballo had reached maximum medical improvement 
October 9, 2020, he released her with restrictions of a one-pound lifting limit up to 
shoulder level and five pounds up to waist level with the right arm, and stated he would 
see her back on an as-needed basis.  (JE 2:64-65)   
On November 2, 2020, using the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001) (“AMA Guides”), Dr. Ash assigned Escobar de 
Carballo a two percent right upper extremity impairment, status post right rotator cuff 
repair.  (JE 2:66)   
Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Rayburn on November 11, 2020, 
complaining of left neck/upper back pain.  (JE 2:67)  Dr. Rayburn noted Escobar de 
Carballo had planned to undergo left upper cervical trigger point injections, but she had 
been unable to undergo the injections due to elevated glucose.  (JE 2:67)  Dr. Rayburn 
documented, “[a]t this point it looks like most of her symptoms are coming from the 
muscles in the neck.  Her facets are improved on exam.”  (JE 2:69)  Dr. Rayburn agreed 
to a one-time treatment of left upper cervical region trigger point injections, which he 
administered on December 3, 2020.  (JE 2:69, 71) 
On January 13, 2020, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Dr. 
Rayburn complaining of left neck/upper back pain.  (JE 2:74)  Dr. Rayburn documented 
she reported the left upper cervical trigger point injection helped “a little bit at the time.”  
(JE 2:74)  Dr. Rayburn noted she appeared to have some enthesopathy at the 
attachment site in the occipital region, told her to do home exercises and work on 
stretching and strengthening her neck muscles, and found she had reached maximum 
medical improvement.  (JE 2:75-76) 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 9 
Escobar de Carballo testified that after Dr. Rayburn released her Aerotek did not 
call and offer her any work.  (Tr.:30)  Escobar de Carballo testified after she did not hear 
from Aerotek she called Aerotek, but she did not receive a return call until a couple of 
weeks later and a man told her Aerotek did not have any work for her because she 
could only lift one pound.  (Tr.:31)   
Escobar de Carballo underwent cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging 
ordered by Dr. Angel on June 28, 2021.  (JE 5:156)  The reviewing radiologist listed an 
impression of mild spinal canal stenosis at C4-5 and C5-6, “[s]evere left neural foramina 
narrowing at C6-C7, likely impinging the exiting C7 nerve root,” moderate right neural 
foramina narrowing at C6-7, moderate bilateral neural foramina narrowing at C5-6, and 
moderate to severe bilateral neural foramina narrowing at C4-5.  (JE 5:156-57) 
On August 25, 2021, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with 
Esmiralda Henderson, M.D., a neurosurgeon, complaining of left occipital neuralgic pain 
and swelling, trapezius muscle pain, pain shooting up her head, and left upper extremity 
pain.  (JE 7, p. 180)  Dr. Henderson noted Escobar de Carballo has multiple issues, it 
was unclear whether she truly has cervical radiculopathy, and surgery would be 
challenging due to her surgical history.  (JE 7, p. 184)  Dr. Henderson recommended 
lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging for her left lower extremity and hip 
complaints.  (JE 7, p. 184) 
On August 31, 2021, Escobar de Carballo attended an appointment with Dr. 
Angel.  (JE 5:158)  Dr. Angel noted Escobar de Carballo had seen Dr. Henderson, she 
underwent cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging, and she was not offered 
surgery, which he agreed with.  (JE 5:158)  Escobar de Carballo complained of right 
shoulder abduction weakness, pain, and discomfort.  (JE5:158)  Dr. Angel examined her 
and diagnosed her with “[d]iabetic frozen shoulder associated with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus” of the right shoulder.  (JE 5:166) 
During a follow-up appointment with Dr. Angel on September 20, 2021, Dr. Angel 
noted Escobar de Carballo’s depression and anxiety were worse with her shoulder pain 
and that she had a history of “right frozen shoulder” that appeared to be “trauma related 
with diabetes.”  (JE 5:162)   
On November 3, 2021, Jacqueline Stoken, D.O., a physiatrist, conducted an 
independent medical examination for Escobar de Carballo and issued her report on 
November 15, 2021.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Stoken reviewed Escobar de Carballo’s medical 
records and examined her.  (Ex. 1)   
Dr. Stoken listed an impression of a traumatic brain injury, neck contusion, burns 
of the face, right arm and leg, and right shoulder rotator cuff tear, status post right 
shoulder exam under anesthesia, right shoulder arthroscopy, arthroscopic subacromial 
decompression, and arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, postconcussive syndrome with 
severe cognitive deficiencies and posttraumatic headaches, chronic neck and shoulder 
pain, complex regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity, and impaired 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 10 
mobility, gait, and ability to perform activities of daily living.  (Ex. 1:12-13)  Dr. Stoken 
opined the November 17, 2019 work injury caused the above diagnoses, noting before 
the work injury Escobar de Carballo was able to engage in life without oversight by her 
family and she did not have chronic neuropathic pain in her right upper extremity.  (Ex. 
1:13)   
On exam, Dr. Stoken found Escobar de Carballo had cervical flexion to 30 
degrees, extension to 20 degrees, side bending to the right 20 degrees and to the left 
30 degrees, rotation to the right 30 degrees and to the left 40 degrees, noting she has 
trigger points and muscle tension in the cervical paraspinals.  (Ex. 1:12)   
Using the AMA Guides Dr. Stoken opined Escobar de Carballo fell within DRE 
Cervical Category II and assigned her an eight percent whole person impairment, noting 
her history and examination are compatible with the injury and she has asymmetric 
range of motion and muscle spasms.  (Ex. 1: 13)  For her right upper extremity, Dr. 
Stoken opined under Chapter 16, Figure 16-1b, page 437 of the AMA Guides Escobar 
de Carballo has a 49 percent impairment of the right upper extremity due to deficits in 
range of motion, which she converted to a 29 percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 
1:13)   
With respect to complex regional pain syndrome for the right upper extremity, Dr. 
Stoken opined: 
Mrs. Carballo fits into the CRPS diagnostic guidelines as described in the 
National Guide Clearinghouse – Complex regional pain syndrome:  
treatment guidelines.  I have enclosed the Guidelines for you. 
1. 
She has continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting 
event. 
2. 
She must report at least one symptom in three of the four 
categories: 
Sensory:  She reports hyperesthesia or allodynia; 
Vasomotor:  She reports temperature asymmetry and/or skin color 
changes and/or skin color asymmetry; 
Sudomotor/Edema:  She reports edema and/or sweating changes 
and/or sweating asymmetry; 
Motor/Trophic:  She reported decreased range of motion and/or 
motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes 
(hair, nail, skin). 
3. 
She must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or 
more of the following categories: 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 11 
Sensory:  She has evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or 
allodynia (to light touch and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint 
movement); 
Vasomotor:  She has evidence to temperature asymmetry and/or 
skin color changes and/or asymmetry; 
Sudomotor/Edema:  She has evidence of edema and/or sweating 
changes and/or sweating asymmetry; 
Motor/Trophic:  She has evidence of decreased range of motion 
and/or motor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia). 
(Ex. 1:13-14)  Using the criteria for rating impairments related to chronic pain from 
Chapter 13, Table 13-22, of the AMA Guides, Dr. Stoken opined Escobar de Carballo 
fits into Class 4 Dominant Extremity and assigned her a 60 percent impairment of the 
whole person finding she is unable to use the involved extremity for self-care or daily 
activities.  (Ex. 1:14)   
For the alleged cognitive impairment, using Chapter 13, Table 13-5, page 
320 of the AMA Guides, Dr. Stoken found Escobar de Carballo scored the 
following:  
Memory:  She scores 1.0 CDR for memory loss.  She has moderate 
memory loss.  More marked for recent events; defect interferes with 
everyday activities.   
Orientation:  She scores 1.0 CDR.  She has moderate difficulty with time 
relationships; oriented for [lace [sic] at examination.  She has geographic 
disorientation elsewhere.   
Judgement and problem solving:  She has a 1.0 CDR with moderate 
difficulty in handling problems, similarities, and differences; social 
judgment usually maintained. 
Community affairs:  She scores a 1.0 CDR.  She is unable to function 
independently at activities although may still be engaged in some; appears 
normal to casual inspection. 
Home and hobbies:  She scores 1.0 CDR.  Mild but definite impairment of 
function at home; more difficult chores abandoned; more complicated 
hobbies and interests abandoned. 
Personal care:  She scores 0.5 CDR.  She is capable of self-care. 
(Ex. 1:14-15)  Using Chapter 13, Tables 13-5 and 13-6, Dr. Stoken opined Escobar de 
Carballo fits into Class II and assigned her a 29 percent whole person impairment 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 12 
noting her CDR is 1.0 and her impairment requires direction of some activities of daily 
living.  (Ex. 1:15)   
For postconcussive headaches, using Chapter 18, Table 18-1, page 571 of the 
AMA Guides, Dr. Stoken assigned Escobar de Carballo a three percent impairment for 
postconcussive headache pain syndrome without significant, identifiable organ 
dysfunction to explain the pain.  (Ex. 1:15)  Using the combined values chart at page 
604, Dr. Stoken assigned Escobar de Carballo a combined 82 percent whole person 
impairment.  (Ex. 1:15)   
Dr. Stoken noted Escobar de Carballo underwent a valid functional capacity 
evaluation on October 27, 2021, which found she functions in the sedentary physical 
demand level.  (Exs. 1:15; 2)  Using the evaluation, Dr. Stoken assigned the following 
restrictions: 
Floor to waist lift 0 lbs. never. 
Waist to overhead lift of 0 lbs. never. 
Horizontal life [sic] of 0 lbs. never. 
Static push of never. 
Static pull of rarely. 
Right single upper extremity carry never. 
Left single upper extremity carry of 10 lbs. occasionally and 15 lbs. rarely. 
Front carry never. 
Elevated work with prolonged use and repetitive reaching with the right 
upper extremity never. 
Elevated work with prolong use and repetitive reaching with the left upper 
extremity 5 lbs. occasionally and 10 lbs. rarely. 
Elevated work, crawling, deep static crouch, never. 
Forward bending/sitting, rotation sitting, rarely. 
Forward bending/standing, rotation standing, kneeling, repetitive squat, 
standing tolerance, walking, stair climbing, occasionally. 
Sitting tolerance – frequently. 
Step ladder climbing never. 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 13 
Dynamic balance rarely. 
(Ex. 1:15-16)  Dr. Stoken found Escobar de Carballo has significant cognitive 
deficits and pain which preclude her from working.  (Ex. 1:16) 
Dr. Stoken recommended future medical care, including an evaluation and 
treatment by an occupational therapist to maximize Escobar de Carballo’s ability to 
perform activities of daily living independently, an evaluation and treatment by a 
physical therapist for complex regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity, 
evaluation and treatment from a speech therapist to work on improving and strategizing 
how to improve function with memory loss, and reasonable future medical care, 
including physician visits, medication, injections, and/or physical therapy for complex 
regional pain syndrome.  (Ex. 1:16)   
Joseph Chen, M.D., a physiatrist, conducted an independent medical 
examination for Aerotek and Indemnity on December 3, 2021, and issued his report on 
December 4, 2021.  (Ex. E)  Dr. Chen reviewed Escobar de Carballo’s medical records 
and examined her.  (Ex. E)   
On exam Dr. Chen noted on exam Escobar de Carballo: 
had significant displays of pain behavior with common maneuvers 
unrelated to her right shoulder including tremoring of her right hand while 
closing a fist and extending her neck and elbow.  These behaviors 
improved towards the end of the appointment.  She had a normal 
neurological examination without focal peripheral nerve deficits.  Skin was 
warm and dry with normal and symmetric capillary refill despite her 
complaints that her fingers turn purple and she gets swelling.  She was 
cooperative, good eye contact, sat in chair.  She grimaced early in the 
appointment as we were discussing her history.  At the end of her 
appointment, I assisted in helping her put her coat on and she moved her 
right shoulder with improved range of motion than when directly examining 
her shoulder planes. 
(Ex. E:24)  Dr. Chen noted no areas of edema, swelling, or erythema of skin in the neck 
and bilateral upper extremities.  (Ex. E:25)   
Dr. Chen documented Escobar de Carballo had diffuse tenderness to light tactile 
stimulation of the cervical spine and tenderness over the left trapezius and scapular 
borders and she was able to perform active flexion to full chin tuck, full neck extension, 
rotation, and side bend with complaints of pulling neck pain with extremes of neck 
flexion, rotation, and side-bending bilaterally.  (Ex. E:25)  Dr. Chen found for her neck 
she had 30 degrees of extension, 30 degrees of flexion, 30 degrees of left and right 
lateral tilt, noting “[n]one of these maneuvers led to complaints of radiating arm pain with 
neck extension.  (Ex. E:25)  Dr. Chen reported “no findings of swelling, scars, 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 14 
discoloration, deformity, atrophy, hair loss, nail changes in the hands or forearms.”  (Ex. 
E:25)   
For her right shoulder Dr. Chen noted Escobar de Carballo: 
had limited right shoulder range of motion in all directions with direct 
examination.  She was noted to have only 20 degrees of shoulder flexion, 
no shoulder abduction, kept her elbow by her side with full internal rotation 
with inability to get her right arm even to neutral for external rotation.  She 
had no extension on direct examination.  She had no atrophy of the right 
rotator cuff or scapular stabilizer muscles.  She had no atrophy of the 
biceps or forearm muscle from side to side comparison. 
(Ex. E:25)  For her left shoulder, Dr. Chen found she had flexion to 150 degrees, 
abduction to 90 degrees and internal and external rotation to 80 degrees.  (Ex. E:25)   
Dr. Chen diagnosed Escobar de Carballo with chronic right shoulder myofascial 
pain “due to multiple substantial personal factors and only minimally related to her 
[September 2019] work injury.”  (Ex. E: 27)  He also found she sustained an acute, 
nearly full-thickness tear to her right supraspinatus muscle.  (Ex. E:27)   
Dr. Chen opined Escobar de Carballo does not meet the criteria for complex 
regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity.  (Ex. E:28)  While Escobar de 
Carballo reported her right hand turns purple and swells at times when she does not 
move it, Dr. Chen found no objective evidence of any trophic or temperature changes in 
her skin, nails, or hair growth consistent with complex regional pain syndrome.  (Ex. 
E:28)   
Dr. Chen further opined she does not have a diagnosis of post-concussive 
headaches or post-concussion syndrome, noting during the appointment with him “[s]he 
reported no concerns of pain in her head based upon the symptom drawing that she 
and her interpreter completed today.”  (Ex. E:28)  Dr. Chen noted he asked her to 
complete a checklist of common post-concussive symptoms that have bothered her 
over the past two days and she scored high with pain, balance problems, headache, but 
also high on cognitive symptoms, sleep symptoms, and emotional symptoms, noting her 
“pattern of escalating symptoms over the past two years is inconsistent with that 
expected of a headache/concussion syndrome and more consistent with the evolution 
and development of a chronic pain condition.”  (Ex. E:29)   
Dr. Chen opined Escobar de Carballo’s right shoulder rotator cuff tear is causally 
related to the work injury, she was diagnosed with a concussion and she received 
appropriate neurological evaluation and treatment.  (Ex. E:29)  Dr. Chen found she does 
not meet a diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity 
stating he did not believe Dr. Stoken considered alternative etiologies for her ongoing 
pain.  (Ex. E:29)   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 15 
Dr. Chen found Escobar de Carballo reached maximum medical improvement on 
October 9, 2020.  (Ex. E:29)  Dr. Chen disagreed with Dr. Stoken’s 82 percent whole 
person impairment, noting as the medical director of an inpatient rehabilitation hospital 
he had not seen any individuals who have had such a marked impairment following 
even catastrophic injuries, including amputation, stroke, or spinal cord injuries.  (Ex. 
E:30)  He disagreed with Dr. Stoken’s 60 percent whole person impairment due to a 
diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome noting Escobar de Carballo did not have 
any objective findings of muscle atrophy or trophic changes of the skin, hair, or nails.  
(Ex. E:30)   
Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Ash’s impairment rating and noted when he helped 
Escobar de Carballo put her coat on he found she had more movement in her right 
shoulder than on exam.  (Ex. E:30)   
Dr. Chen disagreed with the 29 percent impairment Dr. Stoken assigned due to 
traumatic brain injury.  (Ex. E:30)  Dr. Chen noted Escobar de Carballo provided him 
with a detailed and accurate history recalling her past and current events which is 
inconsistent with impairment from clinical dementia, and noted while she has limited 
formal education, she is able to function at an average level in society with the ability to 
provide caregiving for her husband who recently underwent open heart surgery.  (Ex. 
E:30)  Dr. Chen’s findings are consistent with those of Dr. Jacoby. 
Dr. Chen disagreed with Dr. Stoken’s assignment of five percent impairment for 
neck pain and three percent impairment for headache, finding the conditions are 
unrelated to any sequelae of the work injury.  (Ex. E:30)  He also disagreed with Dr. 
Rayburn’s opinion that the work injury led to an aggravation of her preexisting cervical 
spondylosis and facet joint pain, noting she reported the injections she received were 
extremely painful and lead to increased hearing or anxiety/distress following the 
injections.  (Ex. E:30)  Dr. Chen opined her neck pain has been myofascial all along.  
(Ex. E:30)   
Dr. Chen opined Escobar de Carballo should observe a work restriction of no 
overhead work for her right arm as a result of her current level of limited physical fitness 
unrelated to the September 2019 work injury.  (Ex. E:31) 
Lana Sellner, MA, CRC, conducted a vocational analysis regarding Escobar de 
Carballo’s employability for Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance.  (Ex. D)  Sellner reviewed 
Escobar de Carballo’s medical records and work history.  (Ex. D)   
Sellner noted Escobar de Carballo has a history of working in unskilled and semi-
skilled light to heavy work as an oven tender, baker helper, cook helper, kitchen helper, 
housekeeping cleaner, housekeeper, child care assistant, and child monitor.  (Ex. D:10)  
Sellner opined she believed Escobar de Carballo remains employable within a 
sedentary work position.  (Ex. D:12)  Sellner completed labor market research of the 
Des Moines area, and found positions, including light assembly starting at $12.00 per 
hour, cell phone tester, starting at $13.00 per hour, after-school childcare or monitor 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 16 
with an entry wage of $8.61 per hour, and ticket taker/usher, with an entry wage of 
$8.42 per hour, consistent with her functional limitations and residual capacities.  (Ex. 
D:11)  Sellner also believed Escobar de Carballo would be a candidate for 
Mexican/Hispanic grocery stores and restaurants typically found by storefront or word of 
mouth as a hostess, light kitchen help/prep, cashier, order taker, light housekeeping, 
and/or silverware helping with an entry level wage range of $8.56 to $10.21 per hour.  
(Ex. D:11)   
On December 9, 2021, Dr. Ash issued an opinion letter after reviewing Dr. 
Stoken’s independent medical examination as follows: 
Dr. Stoken assigned a 49% right upper extremity impairment due to her 
deficits in range of motion, which converted to a 29% whole person 
impairment for the right upper extremity.  I reviewed Dr. Joseph Chen’s 
evaluation of the patient that he performed on December 3, 2021.  I have 
reviewed it in detail.  It should be noted that in my operative report from 
April 6, 2020, there is a typographical error.  On the first page, under the 
paragraph Details of Operation, the second and third sentences should 
read, she had 170 degrees of elevation.  In 90 degrees of abduction, she 
externally rotated 90 degrees and internally rotated 85 degrees.  The 
originally produced operative report has this typographical error and I have 
a very routine way of describing my shoulder range of motion exam under 
anesthesia.  In summary, at the operation, she did not have significant 
stiffness in the shoulder when she was anesthetized.  Similarly, on my last 
exam of the patient on October 9, 2020, she had no significant limitation of 
motion in the right shoulder passively.  I could elevate her 175 degrees.  In 
90 degrees of abduction, I could externally rotate her 90 degrees and 
internally rotate her 90 degrees.  She externally rotated 40 degrees in 
adduction and could extend 50 degrees.  I think it is possible that Dr. Chen 
would modify some of the statements in the IME if he were award of this 
typographical error. 
(JE 2:78)  Dr. Ash stated he stood by his two percent upper extremity rating.  (JE 2, p. 
78)   
Escobar de Carballo testified she could not return to work as a food service 
worker because she would not be able to lift the big pans, trays, or clean a microwave.  
(Tr.:37)  Escobar de Carballo reported she could not return to a cleaning or janitorial 
position because she would not be able to clean blinds because she cannot lift her arm 
and she would not be able to run the vacuum because a vacuum is heavy.  (Tr.:38)   
Escobar de Carballo testified she has difficulty eating, styling her hair, and 
washing her back because she cannot lift her arm.  (Tr.:38)  Escobar de Carballo 
reported before the work injury she was right-hand dominant and now she has difficulty 
tying her shoes and she has to use her other hand to lift a cup of coffee.  (Tr.:38)  

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 17 
Escobar de Carballo reported she has not cooked a meal since September 2019 
because the pans are heavy.  (Tr.:46)   
Escobar de Carballo testified she started having problems with her memory after 
the September 17, 2019 work injury, but reported that when she contracted Covid-19 
her memory started bothering her “a little bit more.”  (Tr.:56)  Escobar de Carballo 
relayed she believes she has decreased short-term memory as a result of the accident.  
(Tr.:65) 
On cross-examination, Escobar de Carballo admitted she told Dr. Stoken she 
has headaches two-thirds of the days in a month that last 12 hours per day.  (Tr.:61)  
She also reported she told Dr. Stoken she has sensitivity to sound and light and that her 
sensitivity to sound is the same, but her sensitivity to light has improved.  (Tr.:62-63)  
Escobar de Carballo responded, “[y]es, I get a lot of – It’s not exactly a headache.  It’s 
the part in the back that received the impact.  It bothers me a lot.”  (Tr.:61)  When asked 
whether she told Dr. Stoken she experiences migraine symptoms 5 to 9 days per 
month, as follows,” [y]es; yes, but I don’t think it’s a migraine.  I think it’s when I hit my 
head, that pain has stayed there, but – I don’t think it’s a migraine, but I did tell her I do 
have strong pain.”  (Tr.:63)  Escobar de Carballo relayed the pain has remained the 
same.  (Tr.:63)  At the time she saw Dr. Stoken, Escobar de Carballo was taking 
naproxen for headache pain.  (Tr.:64)  At the time of the hearing she was not taking 
naproxen because it was not helping with her headache pain.  (Tr.:64)   
Escobar de Carballo reported she has difficulty getting up and down from a chair 
or a bed, “whenever I sort of strain a little bit to lie down or sit that I get pain the back of 
the neck where I was hit.”  (Tr.:65)   
Sarabia stated it is difficult for her mother to drive because it hurts too much for 
her to rotate her arm, so she drives her unless it is a short drive.  (Tr.:73)  Sarabia 
reported her mother can no longer sweep and mop due to the function of moving her 
shoulder and arm.  (Tr.:74)  Sarabia helps her mother scrub her back, set the table and 
move things because of her arms.  (Tr.:74)  Sarabia stated her mother cannot stir or 
move pots with food in them because the pots are too heavy.  (Tr.:74)   
Sarabia reported sometimes when she speaks to her mother she looks at her like 
she does not understand what she was saying, whether it was a statement or a 
question.  (Tr.:74)  Sarabia stated she has to track her mother on her phone because 
she will forget where to turn at her house and will call stating she is lost.  (Tr., p. 75)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Applicable Law 
This case involves the issues of nature and extent of disability, temporary 
benefits, recovery of medical bills, penalty benefits, and recovery of an independent 
medical examination and costs under Iowa Code sections 85.27, 85.34, 85.39, 86.13, 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 18 
and 86.40.  In 2017, the Iowa Legislature enacted changes to Iowa Code chapters 85, 
86, and 535 effecting workers’ compensation cases.  2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 
(amending Iowa Code sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 
85.70, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, 86.42, and 535.3).  Under 2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 
section 24, the changes to Iowa Code sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 
85.34, 85.39, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, and 86.42 apply to injuries occurring on or after the 
effective date of the Act.  The occurred after the changes to the statute, therefore, the 
new provision of the statute apply to these cases.   
II. 
Nature of the Injury 
Escobar de Carballo alleges she sustained injuries to her right shoulder and 
cervical spine caused by the September 2019 work injury and that the work injury 
caused her to develop dementia and a cognitive impairment, post-concussive 
headaches, and complex regional pain syndrome.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance 
agree Escobar de Carballo sustained an injury to her right shoulder caused by the work 
injury, but deny she sustained an injury to her cervical spine or that the work injury 
caused her to develop dementia, a cognitive impairment, post-concussive headaches, 
or complex regional pain syndrome. 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, the employee’s injuries arose out of and in the course 
of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 
552 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a 
hazard connected with the employment, and not merely incidental to the employment.  
Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held, an injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act 
which he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer. 
Farmers Elevator Co., Kingsley v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 19 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert 
opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the 
claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the 
examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other 
factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., 
Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 
It is well-established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to 
finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment 
and the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the 
employment was a proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).  
A. 
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome 
Two physicians have given opinions on whether the work injury caused Escobar 
de Carballo to develop complex regional pain syndrome, Dr. Stoken, a physiatrist who 
conducted an independent medical examination for Escobar de Carballo, and Dr. Chen, 
a physiatrist who conducted an independent medical examination for Aerotek and 
Indemnity Insurance.  Dr. Stoken opined Escobar de Carballo developed complex 
regional pain syndrome caused by the work injury and Dr. Chen opined Escobar de 
Carballo does not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome.  
No physician, other than Dr. Stoken, has diagnosed Escobar de Carballo with complex 
regional pain syndrome.   
In reaching her conclusion, Dr. Stoken used reported she used “the CRPS 
diagnostic guidelines as described in the National Guide Clearinghouse – Complex 
regional pain syndrome:  treatment guidelines.”  (Ex. 1:13)  The Division of Workers’ 
Compensation has adopted the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides for evaluating 
impairment.  876 IAC 2.4.  Dr. Stoken did not use the AMA Guides in determining 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 20 
whether Escobar de Carballo meets the criteria for complex regional pain syndrome.  I 
do not find her opinion persuasive. 
Table 16-16 at page 496 of the AMA Guides provides objective criteria for 
determining whether an individual meets a diagnosis of complex regional pain 
syndrome, as follows: 
Local clinical signs 
Vasomotor changes: 
 Skin color:  mottled or cyanotic 
 Skin temperature:  cool 
 Edema 
Sudomotor changes: 
 Skin dry or overly moist 
Trophic changes: 
 Skin texture:  smooth, nonelastic 
 Soft tissue atrophy:  especially in fingertips 
 Joint stiffness and decreased passive motion 
 Nail changes:  blemished, curved, talonlike 
 Hair growth changes:  fall out, longer, finer 
Radiographic signs 
 Radiographs:  trophic bone changes, osteoporosis 
 Bone scan:  findings consistent with CRPS 
Interpretation 
≥ 8 
Probable CRPS 
≤ 8 
No CRPS 
The AMA Guides provide “[a]t least eight of these findings must be present concurrently 
for a diagnosis of CRPS.  Signs are objective evidence of disease perceptible to the 
examiner, as opposed to symptoms, which are subjective sensations of the individual.”  
AMA Guides p. 496.   
Under the “Current Status” section of her report, Dr. Stoken discussed Escobar 
de Carballo’s complaints of pain involving her head and neck, right shoulder and her 
alleged cognitive problems.  (Ex. 1:10-11)  The “Physical Examination” section of her 
report includes findings from a mini mental status exam, reflexes, cervical range of 
motion, and right wrist and elbow range of motion.  (Ex. 1:12)  On exam, Dr. Stoken 
noted “[t]he right hand is mottled purplish in color and very cold compared to the left 
hand.  She exhibits allodynia and hyperalgesia in the right upper extremity.  The right 
hand is cooler than the left hand.”  (Ex. 1:12)  Dr. Stoken did not note any radiographic 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 21 
signs supporting her diagnosis, sudomotor changes, or trophic changes on exam.  Dr. 
Stoken did not find and list eight or more of the objective criteria contained in the AMA 
Guides in reaching her conclusion.   
Dr. Chen used the AMA Guides in preparing his report.  He noted on exam 
Escobar de Carballo’s “[s]kin was warm and dry with normal and symmetric capillary 
refill.”  (Ex. E.:24)  Dr. Chen opined Escobar de Carballo does not meet the criteria for 
complex regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity, noting while Escobar de 
Carballo reported her right hand turns purple and swells at times when she does not 
move it, he found no objective evidence of any trophic or temperature changes in her 
skin, nails, or hair growth consistent with complex regional pain syndrome.  (Ex. E:28)   
No physician, other than Dr. Stoken, has diagnosed Escobar de Carballo with 
complex regional pain syndrome.  Based on the lack of objective findings made by Dr. 
Chen using the AMA Guides and the evidence presented at hearing, I find Escobar de 
Carballo has failed to establish she developed complex regional pain syndrome as a 
result of the work injury.   
B. 
Cognitive Deficits and Post-Concussive Headaches 
Escobar de Carballo avers she sustained permanent cognitive deficits and post-
concussive headaches caused by the work injury.  Aerotek and Indemnity reject her 
assertion.   
Dr. Stoken assessed Escobar de Carballo with a traumatic brain injury and post-
concussive syndrome with “severe cognitive deficiencies and posttraumatic 
headaches.”  (Ex. 1:13)  Based on a conversation Dr. Stoken had with Escobar de 
Carballo and her daughter, Dr. Stoken assigned Escobar de Carballo a 29 percent 
whole person impairment for cognitive deficits related to a traumatic brain injury using 
Chapter 13, Table 13-5 for Clinical Dementia Rating and Table 13-6, Criteria for Rating 
Impairment Related to Mental Status of the AMA Guides.  (Ex. 1:15)  Using Chapter 18, 
Table 18-1, page 571 of the AMA Guides, she assigned Escobar de Carballo a three 
percent impairment for post-concussive headache pain syndrome without significant 
identifiable organ dysfunction to explain the pain.  (Ex. 1:15)   
Dr. Chen opined Escobar de Carballo does not have a diagnosis of clinical 
dementia, post-concussive headaches, or post-concussive syndrome.  (Ex. E:28-30)  A 
professional interpreter provided Spanish interpretation services during his independent 
medical examination.  (Ex. E:15)  During Dr. Stoken’s independent medical examination 
Escobar de Carballo’s daughter provided interpretation services for her mother and 
filled out the forms for her mother.   
Dr. Chen noted Escobar de Carballo provided a detailed and accurate history 
recalling past and current events that is inconsistent with an impairment from clinical 
dementia.  (Ex. E:30)  Dr. Chen further noted, “[s]he reported no concerns of pain in her 
head based upon the symptom drawing that she and her interpreter completed today.”  

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 22 
(Ex. E:28)  Dr. Chen documented he asked her to complete a checklist of common post-
concussive symptoms that have bothered her over the past two days and she scored 
high with pain, balance problems, headache, but also high on cognitive symptoms, 
sleep symptoms, and emotional symptoms, noting her “pattern of escalating symptoms 
over the past two years is inconsistent with that expected of a headache/concussion 
syndrome and more consistent with the evolution and development of a chronic pain 
condition.”  (Ex. E:29)   
I find Dr. Chen’s opinion, as supported by the record to be the most persuasive.  
When the oven rack fell on Escobar de Carballo she hit her head on a table.  The day 
after the work injury she sought emergency medical treatment and she was diagnosed 
with a concussion.  (JE 1)  A few weeks later Dr. Moe, a family medicine physician 
assessed her with post-concussive syndrome and restricted her from working until she 
had been evaluated by a neurologist.  (JE 3:81)   
On November 19, 2019, Escobar de Carballo commenced treatment with Dr. 
Jacoby, a neurologist.  (JE 4:82)  Dr. Jacoby assessed Escobar de Carballo with post-
traumatic headache, occipital neuralgia, concussion, and an altered mental status, and 
prescribed amitriptyline.  (JE 4:88)  When she returned on December 20, 2019, Dr. 
Jacoby administered a greater occipital nerve block on the left.  (JE 4:88)  During her 
follow-up appointment on January 8, 2020, Escobar de Carballo reported she received 
no relief from the injection and Dr. Jacoby noted she had not filled her amitriptyline 
prescription.  (JE 4:89)  Dr. Jacoby documented Escobar de Carballo complained her 
“[p]ain is present all the time in the left occiput that throbs and [is] worse at night.  [Her] 
pain radiated from the occiput where the pain is hot and it radiates over the top of the 
head and pulses.”  (JE 4:89)  Dr. Jacoby assessed her with a headache and occipital 
neuralgia and prescribed gabapentin.  (JE 4:91)   
When she returned to Dr. Jacoby on March 18, 2020, Escobar de Carballo 
relayed the gabapentin helped for one hour, the medication upset her stomach and she 
believed it “makes her feel dumb.”  (JE 4:92)  During the appointment she complained 
of pain back in the back of her head and neck into the tops of her shoulder and of 
“tinnitus and ‘radiation’ from [a] phone also bothers her.”  (JE 4:92)  Dr. Jacoby 
assessed her with a headache, neck pain, and arm weakness and noted “I doubt any 
ominous neuropathology.  Due to continued, unremitting symptoms, and now the 
involvement of neck, MRI of C spine for anatomic clearance needed.  One more 
neurologic attempt for treatment.  Seems a bit histrionic.”  (JE 4:94) 
On May 5, 2020, Escobar de Carballo returned to Dr. Jacoby, complaining of 
pain at the base of her head, neck pain, and a pulsing sensation.  (JE 4:98)  She also 
reported naproxen provided no benefit, and while amitriptyline did not help her pain, it 
helped her sleep.  (JE 4:98)  Dr. Jacoby assessed Escobar de Carballo with neck pain 
and noted she may have “[p]ossible cervical radiculopathy,” discontinued her naproxen, 
and increased her amitriptyline at night.  (JE 4:100-01)   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 23 
During a follow-up appointment two months later on July 10, 2020, Escobar de 
Carballo reported she received no benefit from the amitriptyline and she had 
discontinued taking gabapentin because it upset her stomach.  (JE 4:106)  Dr. Jacoby 
assessed her with neck pain and discontinued her gabapentin, instructed her to follow 
up with pain management and her primary care physician and to return as needed.  (JE 
4:109)  Escobar de Carballo has not returned to Dr. Jacoby or seen another neurologist 
or neuropsychologist since Dr. Jacoby released her from care.   
After treating her for four months, Dr. Jacoby documented he doubted she had 
“any ominous neuropathology,” due to her “continued, unremitting symptoms, and now 
the involvement of neck,” he ordered cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging, and 
documented he would make “[o]ne more neurologic attempt for treatment,” and 
documented Escobar de Carballo seemed “a bit histrionic.”  (JE 4:94)  During her final 
appointment Dr. Jacoby did not assess Escobar de Carballo with any neurological 
condition.  At the time of the hearing Escobar de Carballo was not receiving any 
treatment for a post-concussive disorder or headaches.  No neuropsychological testing 
has been done regarding her alleged dementia/cognitive impairment.  Based on all the 
record evidence, including claimant’s testimony and that of her daughter, I do not find 
Escobar de Carballo has met her burden of proof she sustained a cognitive disorder or 
dementia, permanent post-concussive disorder, or permanent headaches caused by the 
work injury.   
C. 
Cervical Spine 
Escobar de Carballo avers the work injury caused an aggravation of her 
preexisting degenerative cervical spine condition.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance 
reject her assertion. 
Three physiatrists have provided causation opinions on whether Escobar de 
Carballo sustained a work injury to her cervical spine in this case, Dr. Rayburn, a 
treating physiatrist, Dr. Stoken, and Dr. Chen.  Dr. Rayburn assessed Escobar de 
Carballo with cervical spondylosis without myelopathy, myalgia, other site, other chronic 
pain, and cervicalgia and opined she “likely flared up” the preexisting arthritis in her 
cervical spine when she fell, causing facet pain.  (JE 2:37)  Dr. Stoken opined Escobar 
de Carballo sustained a neck contusion and she has chronic neck pain caused by the 
work injury.  (Ex. 1:12-13)  Using the AMA Guides, Dr. Stoken opined Escobar de 
Carballo fell within DRE Cervical Category II and assigned her an eight percent whole 
person impairment, noting her history and examination are compatible with the injury 
and she has asymmetric range of motion and muscle spasms.  (Ex. 1: 13)  Dr. Chen 
has opined Escobar de Carballo’s neck condition was not caused or aggravated by the 
work injury, opining her pain was myofascial.  (Ex. E:30)  I find Dr. Stoken’s opinion, as 
supported by Dr. Rayburn’s opinion to be the most persuasive.   
When she sought emergency medical treatment the day after the injury, Escobar 
de Carballo complained of having a headache, minor neck pain, right shoulder pain, left 
knee pain, and right tibula/fibula pain.  (JE 1:1)  Based on her cervical spine pain 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 24 
complaint, Dr. Howe ordered a cervical spine computerized tomography scan.  (JE 1:3)  
The reviewing radiologist found Escobar de Carballo had no fracture of the cervical 
spine, but noted she had moderate degenerative disc disease at C5-C6.  (JE 1:4, 6)   
In March 2020, while she was treating with Dr. Jacoby she again complained of 
neck pain.  (JE 4:92-94)  Dr. Jacoby assessed her with a headache, neck pain, and arm 
weakness, and he ordered cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging.  (JE 4:94)  Dr. 
Bogason, a treating neurosurgeon, examined Escobar de Carballo and reviewed her 
cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging, which he found showed degenerative 
changes at C4-5, C5-6, and C6-7 with foraminal stenosis.  (JE 4:105)  Dr. Bogason 
found her imaging findings did not appear to be the cause of the majority of her pain 
and he recommended a pain management consultation for possible injections.  (JE 
4:105)  Following his recommendation, Escobar de Carballo commenced treatment with 
Dr. Rayburn.  (JE 2)  Dr. Rayburn opined Escobar de Carballo likely flared up the 
preexisting arthritis in her neck when she fell, causing facet pain and he commenced 
treating her.  (JE 2:37)   
There was no evidence presented at hearing Escobar de Carballo complained of 
or sought treatment for cervical spine pain before the work injury.  Following the work 
injury she reported having ongoing pain in her cervical spine, requiring treatment, 
including injections.  At the time of both independent medical examinations Escobar de 
Carballo complained of tenderness with tactile stimulation to her cervical spine.  (Ex. 
E:25; 1:12)  I find Escobar de Carballo has met her burden of proof the work injury 
aggravated her preexisting cervical spine condition.  A permanent impairment to the 
cervical spine is compensated as an unscheduled injury, therefore, extent of disability 
for this work injury is determined using industrial analysis. 
 
D. 
Right Shoulder 
The parties agree Escobar de Carballo sustained a permanent injury to her right 
shoulder caused by the work injury.  The parties disagree on the nature of the injury and 
extent of disability.  Three physicians have given opinions on the nature and extent of 
Escobar de Carballo’s permanent impairment to her right shoulder, Dr. Ash, a treating 
orthopedic surgeon, and Drs. Stoken and Chen.     
Dr. Ash performed a right shoulder exam under anesthesia, right shoulder 
arthroscopy, arthroscopic subacromial decompression, and arthroscopic rotator cuff 
repair on Escobar de Carballo on April 6, 2020.  (JE 2:19)  Following surgery Escobar 
de Carballo continued to complain of right shoulder pain.  Repeat magnetic resonance 
imaging showed her right rotator cuff repair appeared intact.  (JE 2:59; JE 4:110)   
During an appointment on October 9, 2020, Dr. Ash documented the physical 
therapist noted inconsistencies in Escobar de Carballo’s performance during therapy 
activities.  (JE 2:63)  He found she had reached maximum medical improvement and 
released her with restrictions of a one-pound lifting restriction up to shoulder level and 
five pounds up to waist level with the right arm.  (JE 2:64-65)  On November 2, 2020, 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 25 
using the AMA Guides, Dr. Ash assigned Escobar de Carballo a two percent right upper 
extremity impairment, status post right rotator cuff repair.  (JE 2:66)  Dr. Chen also 
agreed with his rating. 
For her right upper extremity, Dr. Stoken opined under Chapter 16, Figure 16-1b, 
page 437 of the AMA Guides Escobar de Carballo has a 49 percent impairment of the 
right upper extremity due to deficits in range of motion, which she converted to a 29 
percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:13)  Dr. Stoken found she had zero degrees 
flexion, extension, adduction, and abduction.  (Ex. 1:18)  She did not make any 
comparison findings for the left shoulder.   
For her right shoulder Dr. Chen noted Escobar de Carballo 
had limited range of motion in all directions with direct examination.  She 
was noted to have only 20 degrees of shoulder flexion, no shoulder 
abduction, kept her elbow by her side with full internal rotation with 
inability to get her right arm even to neutral for external rotation.  She had 
no extension on direct examination.  She had no atrophy of the right 
rotator cuff or scapular stabilizer muscles.  She had no atrophy of the 
biceps or forearm muscle from side to side comparison. 
(Ex. E:25)  For her left shoulder, Dr. Chen found she had flexion to 150 degrees, 
abduction to 90 degrees and internal and external rotation to 80 degrees.  (Ex. 
E:25)   
Dr. Chen diagnosed Escobar de Carballo with chronic right shoulder 
myofascial pain “due to multiple substantial personal factors and only minimally 
related to her [September 2019] work injury.”  (Ex. E: 27)  He also found she 
sustained an acute, nearly full-thickness tear to her right supraspinatus muscle.  
(Ex. E:27)  Dr. Chen documented, “[a]t the end of her appointment, I assisted in 
helping her put her coat on and she moved her right shoulder with improved 
range of motion than when directly examining her shoulder planes.”  (Ex. E:24)  
Dr. Chen did not describe the improved range of motion with any specificity.   
Escobar de Carballo takes issue with how Dr. Chen performed his 
examination.  As discussed in greater detail below, I have serious concerns 
regarding her credibility, as noted by multiple treating physicians.  Dr. Stoken 
found Escobar de Carballo had no range of motion for her right shoulder.  Dr. 
Chen found she only had 20 degrees of flexion.  These findings differ significantly 
from those of Dr. Ash.  (JE 2)  However, when Dr. Ash released Escobar de 
Carballo from care, he released her with permanent restrictions of lifting one 
pound up to shoulder level and five pounds up to waist level with the right arm.  
(JE 2:64-65)  Dr. Stoken documented her findings and rating for the right 
shoulder in her report, consistent with Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides.  (Ex. 1:18)  
Escobar de Carballo has very limited ability to use her right upper extremity.  
Having diabetes impacted Escobar de Carballo’s recovery.  There was no 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 26 
credible evidence presented at hearing that her diabetes is the sole cause of her 
shoulder range of motion problems.  But for the work injury she would not have 
needed surgery and permanent work restrictions.  For these reasons, I find Dr. 
Stoken’s opinion to be the most persuasive.   
IV. 
Healing Period Benefits  
Iowa Code section 85.33 (2019) governs temporary disability benefits, and Iowa 
Code section 85.34 governs healing period and permanent disability benefits.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).  Escobar de Carballo 
seeks healing period benefits from September 18, 2019 through January 13, 2021, 
when she was released by Dr. Rayburn. 
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 
696 N.W.2d 596, 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability benefits 
and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss of 
earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefit depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap, 
824 N.W.2d at 556. 
“[A] claim for permanent disability benefits is not ripe until maximum medical 
improvement has been achieved.”  Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 193, 201 (Iowa 2010).  “Stabilization of the employee’s condition ‘is the event 
that allows a physician to make the determination that a particular medical condition is 
permanent.’”  Dunlap, 824 N.W.2d at 556 (quoting Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning, 
779 N.W.2d at 200).  If the employee has a permanent disability, then payments made 
prior to permanency are healing period benefits.  Id.  If the injury has not resulted in a 
permanent disability, then the employee may be awarded temporary total benefits.  Id. 
at 556-557.   
Iowa Code section 85.33(1) governs temporary total disability benefits as follows: 
[e]xcept as provided in subsection 2 of this section, the employer shall pay 
to an employee for injury producing temporary total disability weekly 
compensation benefits, as provided in section 85.32, until the employee 
has returned to work or is medically capable of returning to employment 
substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.  
Under Iowa Code section 85.33(6), “‘employment substantially similar to the 
employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of the injury’ includes, for 
purposes of an individual who was injured in the course of performing as a professional 
athlete, any employment the individual has previously performed.”   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 27 
The evidence supports Escobar de Carballo was off work from September 18, 
2019 through January 13, 2021, when she was released without any restrictions by Dr. 
Rayburn.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance did not present any evidence of offers of 
work made to Escobar de Carballo.  I find she is entitled to healing period benefits from 
September 18, 2019, through January 13, 2021, at the stipulated weekly rate of 
$340.25. 
V. 
Extent of Disability 
Compensation for an unscheduled injury through the industrial method is 
determined by evaluating the employee’s earning capacity.  Westling v. Hormel Foods, 
810 N.W.2d 247, 251 (Iowa 2012); Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 852.  In considering the 
employee’s earning capacity, the deputy commissioner evaluates several factors, 
including “consideration of not only the claimant’s functional disability, but also [his] age, 
education, qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in similar employment.”  
Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Deutmeyer, 789 N.W.2d 129, 137-38 (Iowa 2010).  The inquiry 
focuses on the injured employee’s “ability to be gainfully employed.”  Id. at 138.  
The determination of the extent of disability is a mixed issue of law and fact.  
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  Compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2).  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Id. § 85.34(2)(u).  When considering the extent of 
disability, the deputy commissioner considers all evidence, both medical and 
nonmedical.  Evenson v. Winnebago Indus., Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 370 (Iowa 2016). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held, “it is a fundamental requirement that the 
commissioner consider all evidence, both medical and nonmedical.  Lay witness 
testimony is both relevant and material upon the cause and extent of injury.”  Evenson, 
881 N.W.2d 360, 369 (Iowa 2016) (quoting Gits Mfg. Co. v. Frank, 855 N.W.2d 195, 199 
(Iowa 2014)).  Escobar de Carballo avers she is permanently and totally disabled under 
the statute and under the odd-lot doctrine.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance aver she is 
not. 
In Iowa, a claimant may establish permanent total disability under the statute, or 
through the common law odd-lot doctrine.  Michael Eberhart Constr. v. Curtin, 674 
N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004) (discussing both theories of permanent total disability 
under Idaho law and concluding the deputy’s ruling was not based on both theories, 
rather, it was only based on the odd-lot doctrine).  Under the statute, the claimant may 
establish the claimant is totally and permanently disabled if the claimant’s medical 
impairment together with nonmedical factors totals 100 percent.  Id.  The odd-lot 
doctrine applies when the claimant has established the claimant has sustained 
something less than 100 percent disability, but is so injured that the claimant is “unable 
to perform services other than ‘those which are so limited in quality, dependability or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.’”  Id. (quoting Boley v. 
Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 130 Idaho 278, 281, 939 P.2d 854, 857 (1997)).   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 28 
“Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.”  Wal-Mart 
Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 501 (Iowa 2003) (quoting IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 2000)).  Total disability “occurs when the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee’s experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform.”  IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 633.   
As analyzed above, I rejected many of Dr. Stoken’s opinions.  I do not find 
Escobar de Carballo has established the work injury caused her to develop complex 
regional pain syndrome, a cognitive disorder or dementia, or that she sustained a 
permanent post-concussive disorder and headaches caused by the work injury.  I do 
find the work injury caused her right rotator cuff tear and aggravated her preexisting 
cervical condition.  Given my disagreement with much of Dr. Stoken’s opinion, I also 
reject the permanent restrictions she imposed.   
Multiple medical providers questioned Escobar de Carballo’s commitment to 
treatment, including Dr. Jacoby, Dr. Ash, her treating physical therapist, and Dr. Chen.  
This leads me to believe she is not a credible witness.  Claimants who lack credibility 
sustain work injuries just as claimants do who are credible.  On October 9, 2020, Dr. 
Ash found Escobar de Carballo had reached maximum medical improvement and he 
released her with restrictions of lifting up to one pound to shoulder level and five pounds 
up to waist level with the right arm.  (JE 2:64-65)  Escobar de Carballo has very limited 
use of her right arm as found by Dr. Ash, based on the restrictions he imposed.   
At the time of Sellner’s December 5, 2021 report Escobar de Carballo was 54.  
(Ex. D:9)  Escobar de Carballo attended no formal schooling.  She is illiterate in English 
and Spanish.  I believe retraining would be difficult for her.  At the time of the hearing 
Escobar de Carballo had not applied for any jobs.  I do not find she is motivated to 
return to work.   
Sellner correctly noted Escobar de Carballo has a history of working in unskilled 
and semi-skilled light to heavy work as an oven tender, baker helper, cook helper, 
kitchen helper, housekeeping cleaner, housekeeper, child care assistant, and child 
monitor.  (Ex. D:10)  Sellner opined she believed Escobar de Carballo remains 
employable within a sedentary work position.  (Ex. D:12)  Escobar de Carballo lives in 
the urban Des Moines area where there are a number of sedentary jobs.  I find she has 
not established she is permanently and totally disabled under the odd-lot doctrine.   
Sellner’s report does not provide the lifting requirements of the light assembly 
work, cell phone tester position, after-school childcare or monitor, or ticket taker 
positions, or whether these purported positions are full-time or part-time.  (Ex. D:11)  I 
do not believe she could work as a dishwasher, hotel housekeeper, general production 
worker in a meat packing plant or as a linen/towel folder with the restrictions imposed by 
Dr. Ash.  No information was provided concerning the food service position at Grand 
View.  (Ex. D:11)  Based on all the factors of industrial disability, I find Escobar de 
Carballo has sustained a 40 percent industrial disability.   

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 29 
Escobar de Carballo avers the commencement date for permanent partial 
disability benefits is January 14, 2021.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance aver the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is October 9, 2020.  Under 
the statute, “[c]ompensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is 
medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been 
reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be 
determined” using the AMA Guides.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2).  As discussed above, Dr. 
Rayburn found Escobar de Carballo reached maximum medical improvement on 
January 13, 2021, and he released her from care.  At that time permanency benefits 
could have been determined as claimed by Escobar de Carballo.  Escobar is awarded 
200 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, at the stipulated weekly rate of 
$340.25, commencing on January 14, 2021.   
VI. 
Medical Bills 
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  Id.  “The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id. § 85.27(4).  If the 
employee is dissatisfied with the care, the employee should communicate the basis for 
the dissatisfaction to the employer.  Id.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on 
alternate care, the commissioner “may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Id.  The statute requires the employer to 
furnish reasonable medical care.  Id. § 85.27(4); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (noting “[t]he employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability”).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
the employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer 
has denied liability for the injury, or has abandoned care.  Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).   
Escobar de Carballo avers Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance should be 
responsible for the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 4 after they discontinued her care.  
Escobar de Carballo did not provide a summary itemizing what the bills were for.  As 
discussed above, I found Escobar de Carballo sustained permanent impairments to her 
right shoulder and cervical spine.  I did not find she sustained dementia, a permanent 
cognitive impairment, permanent post-concussion headaches or post-concussive 
disorder, or complex regional pain syndrome caused by the work injury.  I find the 
treatment she received set forth in Exhibit 4 that was not authorized, reasonable or 
beneficial.  Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning, 779 N.W.2d at 206; Brewer-Strong v. 
HNI Corp. 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 2018).  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance are not 
responsible for the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 4, but remain responsible for all 
causally connected medical bills necessitated by the work injury.   
 
 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 30 
VII. 
Penalty Benefits 
Escobar de Carballo seeks an award of penalty benefits alleging Aerotek and 
Indemnity Insurance ignored her cervical spine injury and only paid the 2 percent 
shoulder rating.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance aver no penalty benefits should be 
awarded.   
Iowa Code section 86.13 governs compensation payments.  Under the statute’s 
plain language, if there is a delay in payment absent “a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse,” the employee is entitled to penalty benefits, of up to fifty percent of the amount 
of benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse.  Iowa Code § 86.13(4); see also Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 
554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996) (citing earlier version of the statute).  “The application 
of the penalty provision does not turn on the length of the delay in making the correct 
compensation payment.”  Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236 
(Iowa 1996).  If a delay occurs without a reasonable excuse, the commissioner is 
required to award penalty benefits in some amount to the employee.  Id.   
The statute requires the employer or insurance company to conduct a 
“reasonable investigation and evaluation” into whether benefits are owed to the 
employee, the results of the investigation and evaluation must be the “actual basis” 
relied on by the employer or insurance company to deny, delay, or terminate benefits, 
and the employer or insurance company must contemporaneously convey the basis for 
the denial, delay, or termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 86.13(4).  An employer may establish a 
“reasonable cause or excuse” if “the delay was necessary for the insurer to investigate 
the claim,” or if “the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the employee’s 
entitlement to benefits.”  Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260.  “A ‘reasonable basis’ for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.’”  Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 
813 N.W.2d 250, 267 (Iowa 2012).  “Whether a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ can generally 
be determined by the court as a matter of law.”  Id.  The issue is whether the employer 
had a reasonable basis to believe no benefits were owed to the claimant.  Id.  “If there 
was no reasonable basis for the employer to have denied the employee's benefits, then 
the court must ‘determine if the defendant knew, or should have known, that the basis 
for denying the employee's claim was unreasonable.’”  Id. 
Benefits must be paid beginning on the eleventh day after the injury, and “each 
week thereafter during the period for which compensation is payable, and if not paid 
when due,” interest will be imposed.  Iowa Code § 85.30.  In Robbennolt, the Iowa 
Supreme Court noted, “[i]f the required weekly compensation is timely paid at the end of 
the compensation week, no interest will be imposed . . . . As an example, if Monday is 
the first day of the compensation week, full payment of the weekly compensation is due 
the following Monday.”  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.  A payment is “made” when the 
check addressed to the claimant is mailed, or personally delivered to the claimant.  
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996) (abrogated by 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 (Iowa 2005) (concluding the 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 31 
employer’s failure to explain to the claimant why it would not pay permanent benefits 
upon the termination of healing period benefits did not support the commissioner’s 
award of penalty benefits)). 
When considering an award of penalty benefits, the commissioner considers “the 
length of the delay, the number of the delays, the information available to the employer 
regarding the employee’s injuries and wages, and the prior penalties imposed against 
the employer under section 86.13.”  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 336 (Iowa 2008).  The purposes of the statute are to punish the employer and 
insurance company and to deter employers and insurance companies from delaying 
payments.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237.   
Dr. Stoken conducted an independent medical examination in November 2021, 
finding Escobar de Carballo sustained a permanent impairment to her cervical spine 
caused by the work injury.  Dr. Rayburn had previously opined her cervical spine 
condition was causally connected to the work injury in June 2020, over a year before.  
Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance did not contemporaneously send a letter to Escobar 
de Carballo providing the reason for their refusal to pay permanent partial disability 
benefits for the cervical spine condition after receiving Dr. Stoken’s report, or even after 
receiving Dr. Chen’s report.  I find Escobar de Carballo should be awarded $2,000.00 in 
penalty benefits based on the failure. 
VIII. 
Independent Medical Examination 
Escobar de Carballo seeks to recover the $4,200.00 cost of Dr. Stoken’s 
independent medical examination.  (Ex. 1)  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance aver 
Escobar de Carballo is not entitled to recover the cost of the examination because the 
examination was not reasonable and expanded well beyond her right shoulder injury.   
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) provides: 
2.  If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination. . . . An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for 
the cost of an examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the 
injury for which the employee is being examined is determined to be 
compensable under this chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is 
not liable for the cost of such an examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to be a compensable 
injury.  A determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination 
made pursuant to this subsection, shall be based on the typical fee 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 32 
charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the local 
area where the examination is conducted.   
Dr. Stoken provided an impairment rating after Dr. Ash provided an impairment 
rating in this case.  Escobar de Carballo disagreed with the rating and sought an 
independent medical examination.  As discussed above, I found Escobar de Carballo 
sustained permanent impairments to her right shoulder and cervical spine caused by 
the work injury.  Aerotek and Indemnity Insurance did not present any evidence showing 
the cost of Dr. Stoken’s report exceeds the cost of reports prepared by other expert 
witnesses for similar cases.  I find Escobar de Carballo is entitled to recover the cost of 
Dr. Stoken’s independent medical examination. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Defendants shall pay Claimant two hundred (200) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated rate of three hundred forty and 25/100 dollars 
($340.25) per week, commencing on January 14, 2021. 
Defendants shall pay Claimant healing period benefits from September 18, 2019, 
through January 13, 2021, at the stipulated rate of three hundred forty and 25/100 
dollars ($340.25) per week. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for all benefits paid to date.  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall pay Claimant two thousand and 00/100 dollars ($2,000.00) in 
penalty benefits. 
Defendants shall reimburse Claimant four thousand two hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($4,200.00) for the cost of the independent medical examination. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _1st __ day of April, 2022. 
 
 
        HEATHER L. PALMER 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

ESCOBAR DE CARBALLO V. AEROTEK, INC. 
Page 33 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
John Dougherty (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
