Case Number: 23005593.01
Case Title:  YOUNG, BRITTANY V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Young Brittany-23005593.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRITTANY YOUNG, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
File No. 23005593.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC., 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                      
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  :      HEAD NOTE NOS:  1803; 1803.1; 3000; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
           
          4000; 4000.2   
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Brittany Young, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against JB Hunt Transport, Inc., employer, and Indemnity 
Insurance Co. of North America, both as defendants.  This case was heard on August 
21, 2024, and considered fully submitted on September 27, 2024, upon the 
simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5; Claimant’s Exhibits 1-9; Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-C, along with the testimony of claimant.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant’s injury caused any permanent impairment. 
2. Whether claimant’s injury is confined to the scheduled left leg and right 
shoulder. 
3. Claimant’s rate; 
4. Whether claimant can meet her burden to prove an unreasonable denial, 
delay, or termination of payments based upon the issue of weekly rate. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Feb-03  14:01:11     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 2 
 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The parties agree claimant was an employee at the time of the work injury of May 
3, 2023. They further agree claimant sustained an injury to her shoulder. The 
commencement date of benefits is September 11, 2023.  
Defendants waive all affirmative defenses. 
There are no credits in dispute. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Brittany Young is a 31 year old with a high school diploma and a CDL. 
(Hearing Transcript pages 7-8). In November 2019, she received her Class A CDL 
licensure. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, page 1) The license is no longer valid due to her 
accident of May 3, 2023.   
At hearing, claimant testified that her nephew, age 11, lived with her on May 3, 
2023, and that she provided him with food, clothes, and a place to live without return 
compensation. (Tr., pp 20-21) The nephew began living with her around October 2022. 
In her January 23, 2024, deposition, she testified the nephew’s mother had parental 
rights but claimant had limited guardianship through DHS. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, page 
11.) In the July 19, 2023, answers to interrogatories, she did not identify any 
dependents. (DE C:33)  
In regard to her marital status, claimant was married at the time of the accident. 
(Tr., p. 20; DE A:12) 
It is found that claimant was married at the time of her injury but that the written 
interrogatories support a finding that claimant did not have full custody and 
responsibility of the minor child. There was no documentary evidence that supported 
her testimony that she had guardianship of the minor child including DHS findings, tax 
returns, or employment wage records, and no dependents were identified in the 
answers to interrogatories. The interrogatory answers are more persuadable than the 
testimony at hearing or at the deposition. Based on these factual findings, the correct 
status of claimant as it pertains to this case is married and entitled to two exemptions.  
Her past work history includes factory work, cashier work, farming, prison guard, 
and in-home health care. (CE 2:2-4). She held approximately 13 different positions prior 
to the May 3, 2023, injury. None of the positions were in an office setting.  

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Claimant was in a car accident in 2020 wherein she sustained whiplash injuries, 
and a herniated disc in 2018 while working at a care facility. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1) 
She suffered back pain that radiated into the left leg. (JE 1:4) Claimant was not a 
candidate for surgery due to unrelated issues including uncontrolled diabetes. (JE 1:4) 
Following the back injury, she avoided work with heavy lifting. (Tr., pp. 25-26) She could 
not perform in-home health aide duties due to the lifting requirements. (DE A:6) She 
testified in her deposition that she quit working at the postal service because she could 
not handle the weight of the mail and that she did not want to work standing for 
extended periods of time. (DE A:7)  
On or about May 3, 2023, claimant was driving a truck hauling turkeys. Her daily 
work tasks included performing a pre-trip inspection, driving, and completing paperwork. 
She did not have to load or unload the turkeys. Claimant testified that her job with 
defendant employer had a 100-pound maximum lift. (CE 6:1)  
While navigating a curve on the I-380/I-80 interchange, her brakes engaged, and 
the truck tipped onto its passenger side. While the medical records refer to this as a 
rollover, claimant clarified that the vehicle tipped to the side. She was belted at the time 
of the incident, but the seatbelt became unlatched when the vehicle tipped over and she 
was tossed around the inside of the cab. During the accident, claimant must have hit 
against the seatbelt release which caused her to be tossed about the cab. She landed 
on her upper back and right shoulder with her leg positioned upwards. (JE 1:28)  She 
was extracted, feet first, through the windshield after a prolonged period. (JE 1:12)  She 
asserts she injured her neck, back, right shoulder, right upper extremity and left knee 
and left leg.  
Her back and knee have mostly resolved but she continues to have pain, 
discomfort and range of motion loss in the neck and right shoulder. Defendants 
accepted the claim and authorized claimant’s medical treatment.  
Claimant was terminated from her position with defendant employer on 
September 15, 2023.  
On May 3, 2023, claimant was taken to the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics via ambulance. At the emergency department, she complained of pain in her 
right side, left knee, hip, neck, and back. (JE 1:6)  Multiple imaging studies were 
ordered including CTs of the abdomen, pelvis, cervical spine, and chest, CT angio of 
the neck and head, and thoracic and lumbar spine. (JE 1:15) These tests were negative 
for vascular injury. (JE 1:26-27) No other trauma was noted from the radiographs. She 
had two lacerations from glass on the lateral side of the left knee/leg. (Id.) The glass 
was removed and sutures were placed. (JE 1:16) She had mild tenderness over the 
midline lower cervical spine and paraspinal musculature and tenderness over the 
midline thoracic spine and paraspinal musculature. (JE 1:17) She had intact sensation 
in the bilateral upper extremities and no pain with palpation or range of motion except 
for the right shoulder. (JE 1:19) She was discharged and told to return in two weeks to 
have the sutures removed. (JE 1:16).  

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Claimant’s diabetes remained uncontrolled. (JE 1:27) 
On May 5, 2023, claimant presented to the West Burlington SE Iowa Regional 
Medical Center ER for right shoulder pain. (JE 2) She had tenderness to palpation of 
the posterior and anterior shoulder and right-sided neck tenderness. (JE 2:1)  Claimant 
was administered a toradol injection for muscle strain and neck strain and shoulder 
pain. (JE 2:2-3) An MRI was recommended. (Id.)  
On May 18, 2023, claimant was seen in follow up at UIHC for removal of the 
sutures. (JE 1:28) Patrick Hartley, M.D. attended to claimant and noted that the CT 
imaging had ruled out spinal injury. (JE 1:28) Claimant was concerned there was a 
foreign body embedded below the skin in her leg and x-rays showed subcutaneous 
foreign bodies but Dr. Hartley was reluctant to explore her wounds and planned to 
contact the orthopedic trauma team for recommendations. (JE 1:31)  Claimant “denie[d] 
any cervical or thoracic pain.” (JE 1:28). Dr. Hartley documented that claimant had 
“good range of motion of her cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine”. (JE 1:31)  Regarding 
her right shoulder there were concerns that claimant had sustained a rotator cuff or 
biceps tendon injury, and an MRI was ordered. (JE 1:32) Claimant was placed under 
temporary work restrictions. (JE 1:34). 
No lift/push/pull > 5 lbs with right arm. No reach above shoulder with right 
arm. 
No kneel of left knee. No repetitive climbing. 
Keep left abrasion wounds clean. 
(JE 1:33, 36)  
On June 15, 2023, claimant saw Dr. Hartley in follow-up for evaluation of her 
right shoulder pain, thoracic myofascial strain, left knee contusion and left knee 
abrasion with retained subcutaneous glass fragments. (JE 1:35) The MRI results were 
consistent with rotator cuff strain and possible superior labral tear. (Id.) Claimant 
reported continued right shoulder pain both superior and posterior and decreased ROM 
with popping sensation with activity and occasionally frozen shoulder. Her left leg was 
tender at the site of the abrasion. Dr. Michael C. Willey, an ortho specialist, had 
recommended surgical removal. (Id.) On July 7, 2023, she underwent surgery to 
remove the subcutaneous foreign body. (JE 1:42-44) During the procedure, it was 
discovered that there were at least 6 small pieces of glass in her subcutaneous tissue. 
(JE 1:43)  
On July 3, 2023, claimant received a modified work duty job offer at Hopefully 
Yours Thrift Store in Burlington, Iowa, where she would be asked to do work within her 
doctor’s restrictions. (DE B:27)  
Claimant was seen at UIHC by Hailey Saunders, PA-C, on July 26, 2023, due to 
persistent lateral knee pain with a palpable foreign body that was removed on 

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 5 
 
07/07/2023. (JE 1:45) She reported that she was doing well since the removal of the 
foreign body, was full weightbearing, and had full range of motion. (Id.) Claimant 
reported that her left knee pain had been minimal and continued to improve. (Id.) 
Claimant continued to have limitations due to the right shoulder. (Id.)  Claimant’s 
sutures were removed, and she was given no restrictions for her left knee. (JE 1:46) 
Claimant was seen on 07/31/2023, by Matthew J. Bollier, M.D., for an orthopedic 
consult of claimant’s right shoulder pain. (JE 1:49) Claimant reported increased pain 
along the superior lateral shoulder which worsened with any range of motion. (Id.) 
Examination showed tenderness to palpation anteriorly over the biceps tendon and AC 
joint and mild tenderness posteriorly. (JE 1:49) Her range of motion was  
 
            ACTIVE 
Flexion 110 degrees 
Abduction 90 degrees 
Adduction 30 degrees 
Extension 30 degrees 
Internal rotation 20 degrees 
External rotation 30 degrees 
(JE 1:52) She had positive Hawkins, Neer impingement, empty can sign, biceps load 
test, and speed test. (JE 1:52) She also had pain with shoulder range of motion above 
shoulder height. (Id.)  
His examination of claimant’s neck revealed “no tenderness, no radicular 
symptoms today with neck ROM.” (JE 1:52) Her MRI was reviewed which showed no 
discrete rotator cuff or labral tearing, possible SLAP tear. (JE 1:53) Because of her 
allergy to cortisone, Dr. Bollier recommended claimant undergo a course of physical 
therapy and a prescription of meloxicam. (JE 1:53)  
Claimant testified that at her first meeting with Dr. Bollier, he grabbed her right 
arm and yanked it straight into the air and then laughed at her, telling her that he 
thought she was going to punch him. (Tr., pp. 48-49) She testified he did not examine 
her, but merely laughed and told her the shoulder was frozen. (Tr., p. 49)  

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 6 
 
On 08/28/2023, claimant was seen by Dr. Willey at UIHC for her left knee 
complaints.  (JE 1:54). She had been doing well and her incision was healed. She 
reported that she was walking well and that she was working with physical therapy for 
her right shoulder. (JE 1:54)  She stated she had “tenderness over the incision and 
partial numbness in a saphenous nerve distribution from the left knee traumatic 
laceration.” (JE 1:55) Dr. Willey advised “[s]he can add scar treatments with PT (topicals 
like lidocaine or advanced scar gel may be useful)” and assigned a permanent partial 
impairment rating of 0 percent for the left knee and released her to work without 
restrictions. (JE 1:56) Dr. Willey noted that claimant’s range of motion and strength were 
within normal limits, she had no neurologic dysfunction, no roentgenographically 
determined joint space narrowing, and no ligamentous instability. (JE 1:56)  
Claimant was seen by Dr. Bollier on 09/11/2023 for her right shoulder pain and 
reported her symptoms had not improved. (JE 1:58). She stated that she had been 
experiencing pain along the superior lateral shoulder, numbness throughout the entire 
arm with redness in her hand along with persistent painful clicking. (JE 1:58) On 
examination, she exhibited no neck tenderness and no radicular symptoms with the 
neck range of motion. (JE 1:60) Dr. Bollier opined that claimant may be developing 
frozen shoulder secondary to her uncontrolled diabetes but that she would not be doing 
any damage by working through some of the discomfort. (JE 1:61) Dr. Bollier 
discontinued physical therapy as it was not providing any benefits. (JE 1:61) Dr. Bollier 
found claimant to be at MMI with no work restrictions and no permanent impairment. 
(Id.) If claimant could get her A1c to 8.5 or less there were more options for treatment 
for her shoulder. (Id.)  Dr. Bollier’s no impairment rating does not reflect claimant’s 
physical therapy results, the pain complaints during her visit, or the functional 
constraints she exhibited at the July 31, 2023, visit as she had not improved. She also 
had positive Hawkins, Neer impingement, empty can sign, biceps load test and speed 
test.  
Her last physical therapy appointment was on October 10, 2023. (JE 3:1) It was 
noted that the patient goals were partially achieved. She could not, on an occasional 
basis, lift 70 pounds bilaterally from floor to waist, carry 15 pounds for 20 feet, or 
overhead lift 15 pounds. (JE 3:1)  
On June 18, 2024, she underwent an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D. (JE 5) In the 
subjective portion of the report, Dr. Bansal noted that claimant’s truck flipped over onto 
its side and slid off the road. (JE 5:10) There was no mention that claimant was on her 
phone at the time.  
On examination of claimant’s neck, Dr. Bansal noted, “[t]here is tenderness to 
palpation over the cervical paraspinal musculature, greater on the right. Spasms are 
noted over the right cervical paraspinals.” (JE 5:11) Claimant had reduced range of 
motion in the neck. (JE 5:11) He noted tenderness to palpation over the thoracic back 
but that claimant had full range of motion. (JE 5:11) She exhibited tenderness to 
palpation of the right shoulder, greatest anteriorly. (JE 5:11) Claimant relayed to Dr. 
Bansal that her shoulder pops, which is painful, she cannot reach behind her back very 
far, and she has limited movement without pain but denies any frozen shoulder. (JE 

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 7 
 
5:14) Her limit in lifting is a full gallon of milk. (JE 5:14) She also has neck pain that 
radiates into her shoulder blade area as well as numbness and tingling shooting all the 
way down to her arm into her hands, involving her fingers. (JE 5:14) On examination, he 
noted that she had a loss of sensory discrimination over the thumb, index, and long 
fingers. (JE 5:12) The radiating neck pain was mentioned once during her September 
2023 visit, but it did not extend into her hand. The medical record noted radiating pain 
into the arm and redness into the hand.   
Dr. Bansal assigned an 8 percent upper extremity impairment for the right 
shoulder, which equals a 5 percent impairment of the body as a whole, and assigned a 
5 percent whole person impairment for her neck. (JE 5:17) Additionally, Dr. Bansal 
agreed with the restrictions recommended by the valid FCE performed on July 3, 2024, 
recommended an MRI of the cervical spine, and stated “given adequate diabetic control, 
she would be a candidate for labral repair for her right shoulder.” (JE 5:18) 
Dr. Bansal correctly documented that the incident was a tip over but used 
“rollover” throughout the opinion section of his report. He did not state that the body was 
subjected to the same forces in a tip over as they are in a rollover. He stated that 
claimant’s body was subjected to “multi-directional forces as the vehicle tipped and 
rolled.” He stated that in rollover accidents, the occupant experiences rapid acceleration 
and deceleration in multiple planes, resulting in compressive forces and that claimant’s 
body potentially impacted surfaces if her arm was extended. (JE 5:15) (emphasis 
added) There was no medical documentation nor verbal testimony by claimant that she 
extended her arm. Further, claimant was not involved in a rollover, but a tip over. There 
is also limited evidence that claimant experienced rapid acceleration or deceleration in 
multiple planes. These assumptions, without additional supporting evidence, do not 
have sufficient indicia of reliability.  
This is true for Dr. Bansal’s assessment of the neck which also relies on 
mechanism of injury involving “significant forces acting on her body during the rollover 
event” including rapid acceleration and deceleration forces and complex multi- 
directional forces, rapid changes in direction and velocity. (JE 5:15) Further, Dr. Bansal 
uses equivocal language in his report such as “as this acute phase subsided, the 
underlying discogenic issues may have manifested as the more chronic symptoms 
reported later, such as the muscle cramps between her shoulder blades and the 
radiating numbness of her arm.” (JE 5:17) This is not an opinion based on a reasonable 
degree of medical certainty but rather an expression of possibility.  
Dr. Bansal assigned a DRE Cervical Category II impairment rating to claimant’s 
alleged neck complaints. (JE 5:17)  Based on radicular complaints, spasms, and loss of 
range of motion, Dr. Bansal assigned a 5 percent whole person impairment. (JE 5:17) 
Additionally he adopted the work restrictions recommended by Therapist Short. (JE 
5:18) 
Dr. Bansal’s and Dr. Bollier’s opinions are both flawed. Dr. Bansal relies on 
possibilities and incorrect assumptions, and Dr. Bollier ignores confirmed physical 
limitations presented by claimant.  

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Weighing the evidence as a whole and claimant’s credible testimony that she 
was thrown about the cab, Dr. Bansal’s opinions are given slightly more weight.  
On July 3, 2024, claimant underwent an FCE with Daryl Short, DPT at WorkWell 
Short Physical Therapy, PLLC. (JE 4) Her results were deemed valid based on 
consistent effort and consistent performance. (JE 4:1)  Therapist Short placed claimant 
in the mid-medium category of physical work which included lifting up to 35 pounds on 
an occasional basis to waist level due to decreased functional strength and endurance 
in the right shoulder. (JE 4:3) He also recommend she limit elevated work and/or 
reaching above shoulder height or higher to only an occasional basis due to decreased 
functional strength and endurance of her right shoulder and neck. (JE 4:3)  
Her pain at the onset of the FCE was 2 on a 10 scale in her neck and 4 on a 10 
scale in the right shoulder. (JE 4:2) As testing progressed, the pain in the neck 
increased to 3 on a 10 scale and the pain in the shoulder increased to 7 on a 10 scale. 
(JE 4:2)    
On July 16, 2024, Phil Davis, M.S. provided a Vocational Assessment for Ms. 
Young. (CE 1)  Based on the work restrictions adopted by Dr. Bansal, Mr. Davis opined 
that claimant was limited to light physical demand level work. (CE 1:6) Limited use of 
her right arm precluded her ability to return to any of her past employment activities 
including her truck driving, factory work, health care, and fast food service employment. 
(CE 1:6)  
The FCE restrictions, which were adopted by Dr. Bansal, placed claimant in the 
mid-medium category of physical demand. However, Mr. Davis felt that claimant’s 
capabilities fell within a range between light to aspects of medium physical demand 
level. (JE 1:6) Limitations were noted in the use of her right dominant hand/arm in 
reaching to shoulder and above shoulder height on an occasional basis.  
Based on the FCE and Dr. Bansal’s restrictions, Mr. Davis determined that 
claimant was physically (greater than 80 percent) precluded from performing all the 
essential functions of her past employment. (JE 1:6) When comparing her reported pre-
injury wage to her current wage, claimant incurred an estimated 40 percent-70 percent 
loss in income. (CE 1:7)  
It was not clear why claimant could not return to her employment as a truck 
driver. Claimant testified that she did not do any heavy lifting or unloading, but engaged 
in pre and post-delivery inspection of her truck.  
Her right arm limitations, which formed the basis of Mr. Davis’ opinions on loss of 
earning capacity, included lifting 35 pounds bilaterally at waist level and occasional 
lifting or reaching to shoulder height or above with material and non-material handling 
activities. It wasn’t clear from the testimony regarding claimant’s prior positions that her 
work in fast food or factory work would be limited.  

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Following her termination from defendant employer, claimant obtained a job with 
a Papa John’s pizza restaurant. (DE A:2, depo p. 5:1–11) She started as a driver, 
working approximately 40 hours per week, 5 days a week. She testified that she shared 
she had been released without formal work restrictions but that her manager and/or 
supervisors were aware of her restrictions and limitations. (Tr., pp. 35-36) Claimant did 
not ask for accommodations due to her injuries nor was she provided any. (Tr., pp. 37-
38) The work she did included delivery via a motor vehicle, folding pizza boxes, doing 
dishes, cleaning the windows, sweeping and mopping the floor. On some occasions, 
she would deliver to 60 different addresses which would necessitate her exiting and 
entering her vehicle, reaching and carrying pizza boxes and traversing stairs to reach 
the customer. (Tr., pp. 38-40) Claimant testified that she would like to return to truck 
driving but that she would need accommodations to lift her hood and pull her fifth-wheel 
pin and a few other things. (Tr., p. 44)  
As a shift lead, she makes approximately $800-$900 every two weeks as 
opposed to approximately $2,000 before taxes each week for defendant employer.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 10 
 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Claimant alleges injuries to left knee, right shoulder, and neck arising out of and 
in the course of her employment. Defendants admit to an injury to claimant’s shoulder 
but deny that she injured her neck. Claimant testified at hearing that her left knee pain 
and disability has resolved.  
Defendants argue that the lapse in treatment and complaint regarding the neck 
pain show that claimant’s neck pain arising from the motor vehicle accident was 
transitory and did not require treatment. Claimant argues that she consistently raised 
neck pain as an ongoing symptom but that care providers focused on the shoulder. 
There was a short period between directly after the accident to September where 
claimant did not report any neck pain. At the May 18, 2023 visit, Dr. Hartley documented 
that claimant had good range of motion of her cervical spine and she denied any 
cervical pain. At her first appointment with Dr. Bollier, there was no documented report 
of neck pain. Claimant did not testify that she complained of neck pain and it was 
ignored, but did testify that Dr. Bollier laughed at her and treated her arm and shoulder 
cavalierly.  
The greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that claimant reported neck 
pain immediately after the accident and for the next week. However, the neck pain 
abated and claimant did not bring up the neck pain until several months later. A year 
later, on June 18, 2024, Dr. Bansal documented tenderness to palpation over the 
cervical paraspinal musculature and said that her neck pain was characteristic of 
discogenic pathology. There were no radiographs confirming this. Imaging of the whole 
spine including the cervical segments was conducted by the team at UIHC and there 
was nothing to indicate she had discogenic pathology. 
The greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that claimant sustained a 
temporary injury to her neck that returned to baseline shortly after the accident. She did 
not raise the issue of neck pain to Dr. Hartley throughout the summer and when she did 
bring up neck pain as a symptom in September 11, 2023, she stated that the numbness 
throughout the entire arm began two weeks prior. Her September 11, 2023, examination 
revealed no neck tenderness and no radicular symptoms with the neck range of motion. 
(JE 1:60) Dr. Bollier attributed her shoulder symptomatology to her uncontrolled 
diabetes. In the FCE, while claimant did report pain in the neck, the “some” and 
“significant” limitations related to her shoulder dysfunction.  
Prior to July 1, 2017, injuries to the shoulder were considered proximal to the arm 
and compensated industrially as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the prior Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(u) (2016).  See Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 1177, 

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 11 
 
38 N.W.2d 161, 163 (1949). In 2017, the state legislature enacted significant 
amendments to Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws.  As part of those amendments, the 
legislature specified that injuries to the shoulder should be compensated as scheduled 
member injuries on a 400-week schedule.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n) (2017).   
The legislature did not intend to limit the definition of “shoulder” under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n) to the glenohumeral joint.  Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC., 972 
N.W.2d 662, 670 (Iowa 2022).  The muscles that make up the rotator cuff are included 
within the definition of “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n).  Deng v. Farmland Foods, 
Inc., 972 N.W.2d 727, 728 (Iowa 2022).   
Claimant’s ongoing symptomatology related to her work injury of May 3, 2023, is 
limited to her right shoulder. The findings of Dr. Bollier are not reliable, however. In the 
face of significant objective signs of dysfunction, Dr. Bollier still assigned a zero percent 
impairment rating and no restrictions. The more reliable opinions as it relates to 
claimant’s right shoulder are from Dr. Bansal who assigned an 8 percent upper 
extremity impairment rating.   
RATE 
The basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the time of 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36 (2015).  Weekly earnings are the gross salary, wages, or 
earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  (Id.)  The various subsections 
of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the 
type of earnings and employment.  (Id.) 
Claimant asserts that she was married and entitled to three exemptions. At the 
time of her injury, claimant was married but separated. She also had an 11-year-old 
minor living with her at the time, providing him with food, clothing and housing. 
Defendants argue that claimant did not carry her burden to show three exemptions, as 
there was no documentary evidence that she claimed the minor on her tax returns. 
There is no agency precedent that requires documentary evidence as proof of 
exemptions. Claimant testified without impeachment that she had the care of a minor 
child at the time of the injury and that she provided that minor child with food, housing, 
and clothing. However, her interrogatory answers indicated no dependents. The 
interrogatory answers are ones that can be given after a review of records and 
supplemented if incorrect. There is no supplementation correcting this information and it 
is found that the more reliable evidence regarding claimant’s exemptions are the 
answers to interrogatories. For the purpose of calculating the workers’ compensation 
benefit, it is found claimant is married and entitled to two exemptions.  
For gross wages, claimant presented her wage claim in Exhibit 9. 
Iowa Code section 85.36 states:   

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 12 
 
The basis of compensation shall be the weekly earnings of the injured 
employee at the time of the injury.  Weekly earnings means gross salary, 
wages, or earnings of an employee to which such employee would have 
been entitled had the employee worked the customary hours for the full 
pay period in which the employee was injured as regularly required by the 
employee’s employer for the work or employment for which the employee 
was employed, computed or determined as follows and then rounded to 
the nearest dollar:   
6.  In the case of an employee who is paid on a daily or hourly basis, or 
by the output of the employee, the weekly earnings shall be computed by 
dividing by thirteen the earnings, including shift differential pay but not 
including overtime or premium pay, of the employee earned in the employ 
of the employer in the last completed period of thirteen consecutive 
calendar weeks immediately preceding the injury.  If the employee was 
absent from employment for reasons personal to the employee during part 
of the thirteen calendar weeks preceding the injury, the employee’s weekly 
earnings shall be the amount the employee would have earned had the 
employee worked when work was available to other employees of the 
employer in a similar occupation.  A week which does not fairly reflect the 
employee’s customary earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous 
week with earnings that fairly represent the employee’s customary 
earnings.   
The Iowa Supreme Court stated in Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 
192 (Iowa 2010):   
Consistent with the remedial nature of workers’ compensation laws, 
statutes for computation of wage bases are “meant to be applied, not 
mechanically nor technically, but flexibly, with a view always to achieving 
the ultimate objective of reflecting fairly the claimant’s probable future 
earning loss.”   
(Id.) at 197.   
Justice Hecht continued in Jacobson to explain the word “customary”.  He wrote:   
We do not interpret the word “customary” so rigidly as to conclude that 
just because an employee’s schedule or output is neither fixed nor 
guaranteed, the employee cannot have “customary” earnings.  
“Customary” means “based on or established by custom”; “commonly 
practiced, used or observed”; or “usual.”  Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate 
Dictionary 285 (10th ed.2002)  We have previously defined “customary” as 
“typical.”  Griffin Pipe, 663 N.W.2d at 866.  Ascertainment of an 
employee’s customary earnings does not turn on a determination of what 
earnings are guaranteed or fixed; rather, it asks simply what earnings are 
usual or typical for that employee.  As discussed above, an employee 

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 13 
 
need not justify the variance with a particular explanation.  The amount of 
the variance alone, by the magnitude of its departure from the usual 
earnings of the employee, may suffice to justify the exclusion of a week’s 
earnings from the weekly rate calculation.  Put another way, even an 
employee whose wages fluctuate can have an unusually low or 
abnormally high week of output and resulting earnings. We think it is 
important that when the legislature clarified its intent in the 2000 
amendment to have atypical weeks excluded from the calculation, it added 
the language to section 85.36(6) which specifically addressed the 
calculation of weekly earnings for employees paid, daily, hourly or by 
output.  An employee like Harris, who is paid by output (miles driven), is 
likely to have fluctuating earnings.  The fact that the legislature included 
the language authorizing the exclusion of noncustomary earnings in this 
subsection indicates it expected that even employees with variable 
earnings will on occasion have earnings that diverge from the customary.   
(Id.) at 199.   
Claimant asserts her gross weekly wages are $1,980.52 which is based on the 
fourteen weeks prior to the injury date of May 3, 2023. During the week of March 12, 
2023 – March 18, 2023, claimant was paid $309.76. (CE 8:32-34) Claimant testified she 
had COVID and was not able to work a full week. She testified that it was typical of her 
to work a full week driving between 1320 miles to 2655 miles per week. This is 
confirmed by her wage records. Both parties excluded the week of March 12, 2023, in 
their wage calculations following the hearing. (See CE 8 and Defendants’ Brief p. 15) 
Defendants argue that claimant is improperly including mobile phone reimbursement as 
well as a safety service bonus.  There was no testimony regarding those two issues, but 
from the pay stubs, a mobile phone stipend and performance bonuses were paid every 
week and there is no evidence to the contrary that the amounts are not customary.  The 
claimant’s rate calculation includes an average weekly wage of $1,980.52. Given her 
marital status, the correct benefit rate is $1,237.29. Based on the rate calculation, 
defendants underpaid claimant by $159.63 ($1,237.29 - $1,077.66) per week for TTD.  
PENALTY  
An employer may not unilaterally decide to deny, delay, or terminate benefits 
without adhering to section 10A.315. Iowa Code § 10A.315 (2023).  Section 
10A.315(4)(c) creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow, to show the 
employer met its burden of a “reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1)-(3).1   First, the 
employer’s excuse must be preceded by a reasonable investigation and evaluation into 
whether the benefits were owed.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(1); Baker v. 
Bridgestone/Firestone & Old Republic Inc., 872 N.W.2d 672, 678 (Iowa 2015).  Second, 
                                                 
 
1 See also unpublished opinion.  Pettegill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 40 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 2015).   

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 14 
 
the results of the reasonable investigation were “the actual basis . . . 
contemporaneously” relied on by the employer for the denial, delay or termination of the 
benefits.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4)(c)(2).   Third, the employer “contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of their denial, delay or termination.”  Iowa Code § 
10A.315(4)(c)(3).  An employer cannot unilaterally decide to terminate benefits without 
adhering to section 10A.315.   Iowa Code § 10A.315.  
Claimant seeks a penalty award based on the rate miscalculation and 
subsequent underpayment of benefits. Prior to the hearing, defendants based the rate 
calculation on claimant being single and entitled to two exemptions. Defendants 
propose a calculation of $1,882.79 as an average weekly wage and an S2 status. 
Defendants’ proposed rate of $1,077.66 requires an S2 status with an average weekly 
wage of $1,836.00 and does not match the findings of facts.  
Based on the incorrect marital status and the incorrect calculation of the average 
weekly wage, claimant is entitled to a penalty benefit. At no time did defendants correct 
the rate error, not even when they received the answers to interrogatories that indicated 
claimant was married at the time of the May 3, 2023, accident. Defendants have 
provided no explanation for the incorrect rate calculation, did not communicate with 
claimant how the rate was calculated and did not correct the rate calculation even when 
it received evidence to the contrary. Based on the foregoing, claimant is entitled to a 50 
percent penalty for the underpayment of TTD benefits.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant 18.423 weeks of temporary benefits at the 
weekly benefit rate of one thousand two hundred thirty-seven and 29/100 dollars 
($1,237.29) per week less the credit of benefits previously paid at one thousand 
seventy-seven and 66/100 dollars ($1,077.66) per week. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant 32 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the weekly benefit rate of one thousand two hundred thirty-seven and 29/100 
dollars ($1,237.29) per week. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant 50 percent of the underpayment of temporary 
partial benefits for the 18.423 weeks of benefits owed.  
Defendants shall pay medical expenses for future medical care related to 
claimant’s right shoulder.  
Defendants shall pay interest as provided in the Iowa code section 85.30. 
That all accrued benefits, plus interest as allowed by law, shall be paid to 
claimant in a lump sum. 

YOUNG V. JB HUNT TRANSPORT, INC. 
Page 15 
 
Defendants shall pay the cost of the hearing transcript pursuant to rule 876 Iowa 
administrative code 4.33. 
 
Signed and filed this __3rd ___ day of February, 2025. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
 
Chris Scheldrup (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
