Case Number: 19006619.02
Case Title:  FOLEY, JACOB V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Foley Jacob-19006619.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JACOB FOLEY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  File No. 19006619.02 
 
Claimant, 
  :   
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :  
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :               Head Note Nos.:  1108 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Jacob Foley, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from John Deere Dubuque Works, a self-insured employer.  The 
claimant was represented by Mark Sullivan.  The defendant was represented by Dirk 
Hammel. 
The matter came on for hearing on August 8, 2022, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh via Zoom videoconferencing.  The record in the 
case is quite voluminous and consists of joint exhibits 1 through 8; claimant’s exhibits 1 
through 9; and defense exhibits A through D.  The claimant testified under oath at 
hearing.  Buffy Nelson served as court reporter for the proceedings.  The matter was 
fully submitted on October 7, 2022, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following stipulations and issues for determination: 
The parties have stipulated that Mr. Foley sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment on June 24, 2019.  There are, however, numerous 
disputes regarding the nature and extent of this injury.  Deere has only stipulated that 
he sustained an injury to his elbow.  To that end, while Deere admits the injury itself, 
Deere denies that there was any injury to his shoulder and further denies the causal 
relationship of his admitted injury to any temporary or permanent disability in his 
shoulder.  Deere does concede there was both temporary and permanent disability in 
his elbow/arm.  If it is found that the disability does extend into the shoulder, there is an 
issue as to whether the disability is industrial or scheduled. 
The parties have stipulated to all of the elements comprising the rate of 
compensation and have submitted a rate of $690.86 per week.  There is no dispute 
regarding past medical expenses and the parties have stipulated to the benefits paid by 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Feb-07  09:55:46     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 2 
Deere.  Claimant does seek future medical treatment for his shoulder.  Affirmative 
defenses have been waived with the exception of notice.  Defendant has raised a notice 
defense regarding the shoulder portion of the claim. 
The defendant does not contest claimant’s IME, however, defendant has paid 
half of the IME bill since a portion of the IME was spent dealing with claimant’s denied 
shoulder claim.  Defendant contends that the other half of the IME is not compensable. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Jacob Foley was 40 years old as of the date of hearing.  He testified 
live and under oath at hearing.  I find him to be generally credible.  The defendant 
challenges Mr. Foley’s credibility, suggesting he made false accusations against his 
treating physician.  It is true that Mr. Foley’s testimony regarding his treating physician 
was not favorable.  He clearly did not have a good relationship with the physician.  On 
the broader question of his actual credibility, however, his testimony is credible.  His 
testimony generally matches up with other portions of the record including the 
contemporaneous medical documentation.  There was nothing about his demeanor 
which caused me any concern for his truthfulness. 
Mr. Foley graduated from high school in 2000 and testified he was an average 
student.  In general, he appears bright and has good communication skills.  He has 
worked in construction, office furniture sales and assembly before starting at Deere in 
approximately January 2011.  Since starting at John Deere Dubuque Works he has 
worked primarily in assembly.  Mr. Foley was also able to perform some apartment 
building maintenance work on the side while working for Deere where he earned about 
$12.00 per hour (for 10 to 15 hours per week) performing side work.  Since this work 
injury, he has been elected to a position for the union with the shop committee. 
In June 2019, Mr. Foley sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment.  (Hearing Report, paragraph 2)  Mr. Foley testified that he was on a 
job in the crawler assembly area which required him to use a sledgehammer.  
(Transcript, page 19; Claimant’s Exhibit 5)  He was required to pound pins into a 
crossbar.  He described the work activity as labor intensive and physically challenging.  
(Tr., pp. 20-21)  He testified that he transferred out of this position some time before 
June 24, 2019.  (Tr., p. 23)  He moved just a short distance down on the line.  The 
person who replaced him, however, was unable to perform the job.  On June 24, 2019, 
Mr. Foley returned to perform the sledgehammer function of the job.  While performing 
using the sledgehammer, he sustained the injury.  “And just one certain hit just - - it shot 
from my fingers up to my neck, and I couldn’t - - I dropped the sledgehammer.”  (Tr., p. 
27)  Again, this is not really in dispute as the defendant has stipulated to the injury itself.  
The fighting issue in the case is whether this disability caused by this injury extended in 
any way into his right shoulder. 
Mr. Foley reported this incident immediately and it is well-documented in Deere’s 
health notes.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1-2)  He initially saw a chiropractor and had treatment for a 
couple of weeks.  (Jt. Ex. 2)  He also had some physical therapy.  At that time, he was 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 3 
complaining primarily of right elbow pain.  He then had an MRI of the right elbow in July 
2019.  (Jt. Ex. 3)  On August 14, 2019, he saw Robert Bartelt, M.D., at Cedar Valley 
Orthopedics.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 165)  Dr. Bartelt reviewed the MRI, noting mild degenerative 
changes with bone spurs and possibly a “loose body.”  An injection was performed on 
this date.  Thereafter, Mr. Foley continued to follow up with Cedar Valley Orthopedics.  
In October, Todd Johnston, M.D., became his physician.  Mr. Foley testified he was 
treated poorly by Dr. Johnston.  (Tr. ,pp. 36, 44-45, 85-86)  The incident itself, however, 
was reported consistently to Dr. Johnston who diagnosed right tennis elbow.  (Cl. Ex. 5, 
p. 170)  Dr. Johnston recommended surgery which was performed on November 26, 
2019.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 194)  Mr. Foley testified his right arm was immobilized following the 
surgery which is verified in the physical therapy records.  He did not like the sling. 
The surgery was not particularly successful in resolving Mr. Foley’s symptoms.  
He underwent more physical therapy.  Mr. Foley testified that during physical therapy he 
began to have symptoms in his right shoulder from doing particular exercises.  (Tr., pp. 
31-32)  He returned to Dr. Johnston in January 2020, with essentially the same 
symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 176)  Dr. Johnston maintained his restrictions (no gripping 
pulling or pushing more than 15 pounds) and ordered more therapy.  In spite of this, the 
plant nurse kept Mr. Foley on half days and no lifting at all. 
Mr. Foley continued in physical therapy and followed up with Dr. Johnston 
throughout most of 2020.  His physical therapy was discontinued for a period of time 
due to the Covid-19 pandemic, as well as for a break recommended by Dr. Johnston.  
On March 11, 2020, claimant’s counsel wrote a letter of representation to Deere’s legal 
counsel indicating that Mr. Foley was also suffering from a right shoulder sequela.  (Def. 
Ex. B, p. 4)  The first medical record I can locate in the file which references right 
shoulder symptoms is in the Deere Health notes on May 20, 2020.  The following is 
documented therein: 
The John Deere attorney had received a letter from the patient’s attorney 
dated 11 March 20 stating that the employee was having symptoms in the 
right shoulder he believes related to physical therapy.  Today I questioned 
Jacob about this and he said that he thinks it was some time back in 
February he was given a resistance band to use at home by the 
occupational therapist to help strengthen the elbow and after pulling on that 
repeatedly he started getting some right shoulder pain.  He says he told 
Scott the occupational therapist about this and he says Scott told him to 
stop using it and within a few days the right shoulder pain had resolved and 
has not recurred. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 24)  Mr. Foley testified consistently with this.  He testified that he began to 
have right shoulder pain while in physical therapy in early 2020 and those symptoms 
subsided when he stopped performing the band therapy.  He also testified he had a 
break from therapy. 
On June 18, 2020, Dr. Johnston explained to Mr. Foley that he believes “there is 
something broader going on with his elbow, explained that he is having triceps and 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 4 
anconeous pain.  I believe the triceps is due to scar tissue and portal holes, I believe 
that will soften and loosen up with time.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 184)  He recommended casting 
the arm and providing even more significant restrictions stating that if this treatment did 
not work further surgery may be needed to address the ongoing symptoms.  (Id.)  The 
cast was placed on his arm on that date.  Mr. Foley did not like the cast and complained 
to Deere Health.  The cast was quickly removed and when he returned to Dr. Johnston, 
he was released without restrictions.  “Explained that his elbow may have a few flare 
ups, but I do not anticipate any further treatment for this issue.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 191) 
Mr. Foley reported to Deere Medical the following day.  The following is 
documented: 
He states Dr. Johnson [sic] released him from his care and said that he was 
as good as he was going to get his maximum medical improvement.  That 
he could do nothing more for him.  Told him to go back to his normal job 
without restrictions.  Jacob states he would like to go back to OT.  He reports 
that his right elbow pain is unchanged it hurts with active grasping and 
pinching motions at certain times causing a pain rated 6 to 7/10 on a pain 
scale of 0 to 10.  He states the pain will last for a few minutes after he stops 
the activity for a few minutes but quickly resolves.  EE reports that he would 
like to see if you get more range of motion and better strength as it is not 
been able to complete his OT.  He reports no problems with his job as shop 
committee person and he denies having difficulty with restrictions of 15 
pounds. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 35)  According to the records, he started therapy again and it was 
somewhat helpful.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 36; Tr., p. 46) 
Therapy continued.  He had physical therapy with both Finley Westmark and 
Dubuque Physical Therapy.  In August 2020, records document that Mr. Foley began 
complaining about right shoulder pain in therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 105-107)  In September 
2020, the following is documented.  “He states he feels he still has a big knot in his R 
anterior shoulder and elbow.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 197)  Anterior right shoulder pain was 
documented as being constant.  Over the next several weeks throughout October 2020, 
right shoulder pain and symptoms were regularly documented at the therapy visits.  (Jt. 
Ex. 7, pp. 206-221) 
On October 7, 2020, Dr. Johnston prepared a report which assigned a 4 percent 
impairment rating for Mr. Foley’s right upper extremity and recited further opinions from 
his June 2020 report.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 192-193) 
Deere filled out an “Incident Investigation Form” in January 2021.  While the form 
is dated “January 7, 2020”, I find that this is most likely a typographical error.  The 
following is documented on this form: 
6/24/19 the employee injured his right elbow while performing repetitive 
work in D144 production crawler using the tie band cutter, gripping and 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 5 
turning the hose fittings, and using a sledgehammer.  Since this injury the 
employee stated he was on restrictions and then had surgery, so he had 
not performed any production type work.  In July of 2020, the employee was 
elected into the shop committee role where he follows up on employee 
concerns, grievances, and performs office work 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  In this report, Deere further documented that Mr. Foley “stated the 
shoulder pain is because of the injury in 2019 to his elbow.”  (Def. Ex. A)  On January 
21, 2021, Deere’s legal counsel wrote a denial letter.  “Mr. Foley was interviewed by the 
Safety Department on January 7, 2021, and stated there is nothing in his current job 
that caused his shoulder pain.”  (Def. Ex. C, p. 5) 
Mr. Foley returned to Deere Medical in September 2021 indicating he was having 
difficulty with his left elbow and requesting further treatment.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 47)  He 
started treating again with Dubuque Physical Therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 222-223)  Mr. 
Foley continued to undergo significant amounts of physical therapy.  Deere was paying 
for this treatment, including the shoulder treatment and then stopped, notifying the 
claimant that the shoulder portion of the claim had been denied.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 15-18)  
In addition, he was evaluated by Joseph Buckwalter, M.D., at University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics on September 27, 2021.  Dr. Buckwalter referred him to the 
tendinopathy clinic where he was given a diagnostic injection in November 2021.  He 
was seen again by Dr. Buckwalter in February 2022.  Dr. Buckwalter opined the 
following.  “The etiology of his pain may be multifactorial with lateral epicondylitis and 
soft tissue scarring, …”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 326)  He recommended further physical therapy. 
Mr. Foley underwent extensive further therapy and complaints of right shoulder 
pain persisted in the therapy notes all the way through May 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 241-
291) 
In June 2022, Dr. Buckwalter examined Mr. Foley again and ordered an 
EMG/NCS, which had not been performed prior to hearing. 
In June 2022, claimant was also evaluated again by Robin Sassman, M.D., for 
purposes of an independent medical examination (IME).  Dr. Sassman reviewed 
medical records and examined Mr. Foley on two occasions.  (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 21-22)  Dr. 
Sassman took a clinical history and performed a thorough physical examination in June 
2022.  (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 29-31)  On July 3, 2022, she prepared a report setting forth a 
number of expert medical opinions.  She diagnosed the following: 
1. Right elbow pain and right lateral epicondylitis status post a right 
elbow arthroscopy posterior lateral plica excision, open tennis elbow 
release on 11/26/2019 by Todd Johnston, MD, with continued 
symptoms of pain over the lateral condyle and in the distribution of 
the radial nerve.  
2. Right shoulder pain with concern of impingement syndrome and 
bicipital tendonitis. 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 6 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32)  She opined that these conditions were caused by the original injury on 
June 24, 2019.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32)  She opined that he is not at maximum medical 
improvement for his shoulder condition and requires further medical evaluation.  (Cl. Ex. 
4, pp. 34-35)  I find Dr. Sassman’s medical opinions to be the most accurate and 
credible assessment of Mr. Foley’s conditions at the time of hearing. 
Mr. Foley testified that he continues to experience significant symptoms in both 
his right elbow and right shoulder at the time of hearing. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is notice. 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 
N.W. 91 (1940). 
The greater weight of evidence supports a finding that the claimant provided 
notice of his work injury on the same date the injury occurred. 
Under the plain language of the statute, an injured worker need only to provide 
notice that an injury occurred, not which body parts were affected. 
The next issue is whether the claimant sustained any temporary or permanent 
disability as a result of the stipulated work injury, and, if so, which body parts were 
injured. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 7 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Having reviewed the evidence in the record, I find that the claimant sustained an 
injury to his left upper extremity on June 24, 2019, which extended from his right 
shoulder to his hand.  His symptoms were initially primarily located in his right elbow 
and hand which led to a right elbow surgery in November 2019.  As his treatment 
progressed, however, he developed symptoms in his right shoulder as well.  I find that 
all of the treatment set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 1, is causally related to the work injury.  
This is based upon the claimant’s credible testimony, the contemporaneous treatment 
notes from the physical therapists and Deere medical staff, as well as the expert 
medical opinion of Dr. Sassman. 
Deere has focused intensely on the fact that Mr. Foley did not start complaining 
of consistent right shoulder pain until long after the original injury.  When he started 
complaining of consistent right shoulder pain, Deere conducted a new investigation, as 
though his complaints were unrelated to his original injury.  (Def. Ex. A)  At the time of 
hearing, this approach appears quite cynical.  Mr. Foley was clearly communicating that 
he believed his shoulder pain was related to his June 2019, work injury.  Deere, 
however, did not seek any medical opinions or otherwise investigate whether his 
original injury somehow resulted in the condition in his right shoulder.  I find Dr. 
Sassman’s medical opinion to be more credible than the evidence submitted by Deere 
on this point, which is none.  Based upon the record of evidence before the agency, I 
find it more likely than not that the claimant’s work injury resulted in the condition and 
symptoms in his right shoulder. 
The next issue is whether claimant is at maximum medical improvement for his 
conditions. 
The imposition of a rating of permanent impairment is equivalent to an opinion 
that further significant improvement from the injury is not expected. Absent a showing 
that further improvement was expected, healing period ends when a permanent rating is 
given. Brown v. Weitz Company, File No. 830840 (App. March 13, 1990); Miller v. 
Halletts Materials, File No. 861983 (App. November 23, 1992). The persistence of pain 
does not prevent a finding that the healing period is over, provided the underlying 
condition is stable. Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 1993). Medical 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 8 
stability is viewed in terms of industrial disability; if it is unlikely that further treatment of 
pain will decrease the extent of permanent industrial disability, continued pain 
management will not prolong healing period. Id. at 392.  Specifically, when a condition is 
stable medically further treatment “may extend the length of the healing period if a 
substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result.”  Id. at 391.  On the 
other hand, if the continued treatment is merely expected to assist with the symptoms 
rather than “decrease the extent of permanent disability” then the healing period should 
end.  Id. 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
In this case, the greater weight of evidence supports a finding that claimant has 
not reached maximum medical improvement.  I reject the impairment rating of Dr. 
Johnston.  On June 18, 2020, Dr. Johnston explained to Mr. Foley that he believed 
“there is something broader going on with his elbow, explained that he is having triceps 
and anconeous pain.  I believe the triceps is due to scar tissue and portal holes, I 
believe that will soften and loosen up with time.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 184)  He recommended 
casting the arm and providing even more significant restrictions stating that if this 
treatment did not work further surgery may be needed to address the ongoing 
symptoms.  (Id.)  The cast was placed on his arm on that date.  After Mr. Foley 
complained to Deere Health about this treatment, Dr. Johnston suddenly, and without 
much explanation, changed his medical opinion.  He opined that Mr. Foley was at 
maximum medical improvement and no further treatment was required.  Simply stated, 
this is not a believable or credible MMI opinion.  Since then, Mr. Foley has gone on and 
received additional treatment on the elbow, both in physical therapy, as well as through 
Dr. Buckwalter.  At the time of hearing, he had just had an EMG/NCV, the results of 
which were not available at the time of hearing.  Dr. Sassman has opined that he is not 
at maximum medical improvement.  The greater weight of evidence supports a finding 
that claimant is not at maximum medical improvement for any part of his right upper 
extremity or shoulder. 
The claimant is seeking further treatment for both his right elbow and right 
shoulder and has listed alternate medical care as an issue for determination. 
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 9 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27 (2013). 
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See 
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  Determining what care is 
reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The employer’s obligation turns 
on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; Harned v. Farmland 
Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).   
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
An employer’s statutory right is to select the providers of care and the employer 
may consider cost and other pertinent factors when exercising its choice. Long, at 124. 
An employer (typically) is not a licensed health care provider and does not possess 
medical expertise. Accordingly, an employer does not have the right to control the 
methods the providers choose to evaluate, diagnose and treat the injured employee. An 
employer is not entitled to control a licensed health care provider’s exercise of 
professional judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory 
Ruling, May 18, 1988). An employer’s failure to follow recommendations of an 
authorized physician in matters of treatment is commonly a failure to provide reasonable 
treatment. Boggs v. Cargill, Inc., File No. 1050396 (Alt. Care January 31, 1994). 
The defendants have not offered any specific medical treatment for claimant’s 
right shoulder condition even though they have paid for a significant portion of this 
treatment.  Having found that the right shoulder condition is causally related to the June 
2019, work injury, I find that the defendant is responsible for treatment for this condition. 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to an IME. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).   

FOLEY V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS  
Page 10 
Having found that the shoulder condition is causally connected to the work injury, 
I find that claimant is entitled to full reimbursement for Dr. Sassman’s IME. 
The issue of permanency is not ripe for determination at this time. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Claimant is not at maximum medical improvement for his June 24, 2019, work 
injury. 
Defendant shall pay reimburse medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
1. 
Defendant shall authorize treatment for claimant’s right shoulder injury with Dr. 
Buckwalter. 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Sassman’s IME as documented in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 8, page 44. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendant. 
Claimant may file a new petition when the bifurcated issue of permanency is ripe. 
Signed and filed this _7th _ day of February, 2023. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Mark Sullivan (via WCES) 
Dirk Hamel (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
