Case Number: 1649999.01
Case Title:  OPPMAN, RAY V. EATON CORPORATION/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Oppman, Ray-164999.01.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
EATON CORPORATION and 
OLD REPUBLIC INS. CO., 
 
     Petitioners, 
 
vs. 
 
RAY P. OPPMAN and 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
 
     Respondents. 
 
 
 
Case No. CVCV065676 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR JUDICIAL 
REVIEW 
 
On November 3, 2023, the above-captioned matter came before this Court for 
hearing. Petitioners Eaton Corporation (“Eaton”) and Old Republic Insurance 
Company were represented by attorney Kent Smith. Respondent Ray Oppman 
(“Oppman”) appeared through attorney James Fitzsimmons, and the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa was represented by Jonathan Bergman. After hearing the arguments of 
Counsel and reviewing the court file, including the briefs filed by the parties and the 
Certified Administrative Record (“Cert. Rec.”), the Court enters this Ruling.  
I. 
BACKGROUND FACTS. 
Oppman began working for Eaton in 1994 at its plant in Belmond, Iowa. At 
issue in this particular case is an injury he sustained on January 23, 2018. While 
working on some equipment, Oppman stepped on a slippery patch on the floor, 
causing him to fall and injure his right knee. He was immediately taken to a doctor, 
who gave Oppman a knee brace, crutches, and a recommendation that he limit 
ambulation at work. Cert. Rec. 428-29. An MRI later revealed that Oppman had torn 
several ligaments and his meniscus. Id. at 434. Following his knee injury and the 
resulting surgery on May 2, 2018, medical professionals continued to note Oppman’s 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 9

2 
 
antalgic1 gait. Id. at 31-32. Shortly after his surgery, Oppman’s doctors and physical 
therapist made notes regarding Oppman's worsening lower back pain. Id. On or 
around September 25, 2018, an MRI of Oppman’s lower back indicated degenerative 
changes throughout his lumbar spine, including a diffuse disc bulge and severe 
central canal narrowing. Id. at 547. Oppman has since had many doctor visits and 
procedures related to the pain in his lower back. On October 15, 2018, Oppman was 
terminated by Eaton for excessive absences following the exhaustion of his FMLA 
leave. Id. at 311. 
While Eaton has agreed that Oppman’s knee injury was work-related, they deny 
that the back injury was also work-related. On November 9, 2022, Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joseph Walsh issued an Arbitration Decision that 
concluded that the back injury was a sequela condition for which Eaton must 
compensate Oppman. Oppman was awarded permanent total disability benefits as 
well as the cost of any future medical treatment for his knee and back conditions. On 
appeal, Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Joseph Cortese affirmed the Deputy 
Commissioner’s findings with some substituted analysis, the specifics of which will be 
discussed below as necessary. Ultimately Commissioner Cortese agreed that the back 
condition was a sequela injury and also that Oppman was permanently and totally 
disabled. This decision constituted final agency action. Eaton now petitions this court 
for judicial review of Commissioner Cortese’s decision. 
II. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW. 
 
In an administrative proceeding, the Court’s review is governed by Iowa Code 
section 17A.19. A party challenging agency action bears the burden of demonstrating 
                                                          
1 Antalgic means “marked by or being an unnatural position or movement assumed by someone to minimize or 
alleviate pain or discomfort (as in the leg or back).” Antalgic, MERRIAM-WEBSTER MEDICAL DICTIONARY, available 
at https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/antalgic. 
Commented [SW1]: You can remove this if you like, 
but I had to look up what this word means. 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 9

3 
 
the action's invalidity and resulting prejudice. Iowa Code § 17A.19(8)(a). This can be 
shown in a number of ways, including proof the action was ultra vires; legally 
erroneous; unsupported by substantial evidence in the record when that record is 
viewed as a whole; or otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of 
discretion. See id. § 17A.19(10).  
The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the 
part of the agency. Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 
2002). Where the issue is one of fact, the Court must accept the agency’s factual 
findings unless they are “not supported by substantial evidence in the record before 
the court when that record is viewed as a whole.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f); see also 
Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 457, 464-465 (Iowa 2004). 
III. 
ANALYSIS. 
Eaton challenges the agency’s decision on two grounds. First, they argue that 
the finding of a sequela injury is not supported by substantial evidence. Second, they 
claim the finding of total and permanent disability is irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable. 
A. Sequela Injury 
Eaton first challenges the finding that Oppman’s back injury was causally 
related to the knee injury. “Medical causation presents a question of fact that is vested 
in the discretion of the workers' compensation commission.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. 
Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 2011) (citing Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & 
Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). A determination of fact can only be 
overturned on judicial review if it “is not supported by substantial evidence in the 
record before the court when that record is viewed as a whole.” Iowa Code § 
17A.19(10)(f). “‘Substantial evidence’ means the quantity and quality of evidence that 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 9

4 
 
would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to 
establish the fact at issue when the consequences resulting from the establishment of 
that fact are understood to be serious and of great importance.” Id. § 17A.19(10)(f)(1). 
Deputy Commissioner Walsh weighed the evidence, including expert testimony, 
provided by both parties. 
Having reviewed the entire record as a whole, I find that a greater weight 
of evidence supports a finding that Mr. Oppman did sustain a functional 
impairment in his low back which resulted from his original work injury. 
This is based upon Dr. Kuhnlein’s expert opinion, Dr. Baker’s opinion as 
a treating physician, combined with Mr. Oppman’s credible testimony, as 
well as relevant treatment records. I reject the opinion of [Eaton’s expert] 
Dr. Chen . . . this opinion is simply not believable in light of the 
treatment records and opinions of Dr. Baker. 
 
Id. at 36. On appeal, Eaton presented an additional expert opinion, that of Dr. Bollier, 
which Commissioner Cortese did not find persuasive.  
When claimant reported his back pain to Dr. Bollier during treatment, 
Dr. Bollier documented, “[w]e explained that per work comp rules, the 
back pain is not considered a work injury” and he directed claimant to 
follow up with his primary care provider. . . Dr. Bollier cited to no specific 
“work comp rules” supporting his assertion. He later agreed with Dr. 
Chen’s opinions and provided no analysis to explain his bare 
conclusions. I do not find Dr. Bollier’s opinion persuasive. 
 
Id. at 23-24 (alteration in original). Commissioner Cortese also agreed with Deputy 
Commissioner Walsh that Oppman’s experts were more persuasive.  
As the finder of fact, the agency determines the weight to assign an expert 
opinion, assessing the accuracy of the facts provided to the expert as well as other 
surrounding circumstances. Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 1998). 
The agency may reject or accept the expert evidence entirely or in part.  Pease, 807 
N.W.2d at 850. In our appellate posture, we “are not at liberty to accept contradictory 
opinions of other experts in order to reject the finding of the 
commissioner.” Id. (citation omitted).  
In sum, the law is clear; the Court cannot reweigh the evidence in this case. 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 9

5 
 
Both the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner found Oppman’s experts were 
stronger than Eaton’s and therefore agreed that the back injury was caused by the 
knee injury. There is substantial evidence in the form of multiple expert opinions that 
support this finding. The Commission’s finding on this issue is affirmed.2 
B. Total and Permanent Disability 
Eaton also contends that the Commission incorrectly awarded industrial 
disability based on the conclusion that Oppman was totally and permanently disabled 
as a result of his work injury. They note that none of the doctors who evaluated 
Oppman found that he was totally disabled. Furthermore, Eaton argues that even if 
Oppman is totally and permanently disabled, it is due to health concerns that were 
diagnosed after his work injury and Eaton is therefore not liable. The determination of 
industrial disability is an application of law to the facts; therefore, the Court must 
consider if the decision reached was “irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.” 
Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 857 (Iowa 2009). 
There are two ways that a claimant can show total and permanent disability. 
Michael Eberhart Const. v. Curtin, 674 N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004). The first is to 
show that the claimant’s “medical impairment together with the nonmedical factors 
total 100%.” Id. (quoting Boley v. Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 939 P.2d 854, 857 
(Idaho 1997)). The second is to show that the claimant is an “odd-lot” worker. Id.  
[A] worker becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury makes the 
worker incapable of obtaining employment in any well-known branch of 
the labor market. An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled if the only 
services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, 
or quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist[.]” . . 
. 
 
We therefore hold that when a worker makes a prima facie case of total 
disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
                                                          
2 Because of this, the finding that the Second Injury Fund is not liable for Oppman’s injury is also affirmed. See 
Cert. Rec. 11, 36. 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 9

6 
 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce 
evidence of suitable employment shifts to the employer. If the employer 
fails to produce such evidence and the trier of fact finds the worker does 
fall in the odd-lot category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total 
disability. 
 
Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 105-107 (Iowa 1985) (quoting Lee v. 
Minneapolis St. Ry. Co., 41 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Minn. 1950)).  Oppman argues that he is 
an odd-lot worker, because he has spent the entirety of his twenty-four-year career 
working for Eaton in manufacturing and is unable to continue his work there given his 
limitations. Cert. Rec. 274.  
Though Deputy Commissioner Walsh did not explicitly address if Oppman was 
an odd-lot worker, he did conclude that there was no meaningful employment 
available for Oppman at Eaton. Referring to the recommendation from multiple 
doctors that Oppman avoid working on slippery surfaces, the Deputy Commissioner 
stated, “While the stated reason for his termination appears to be excessive 
absenteeism, the reality is there was no gainful work that Mr. Oppman could perform 
for Eaton because of the slippery surfaces.” Id. at 38. Deputy Commissioner Walsh 
then acknowledged Oppman’s many other health conditions. 
I agree that claimant has numerous health concerns which are not 
related to his work injury, however, the facts demonstrate convincingly 
that Mr. Oppman has had these conditions for some time and he was 
always able to work with these conditions. In fact, he not only worked 
but he was highly productive and valuable. He was able to perform all of 
the tasks in a fairly heavy work environment with minimal limitations. 
He is now unable to work because of a combination of all of these 
conditions – both work related and non-work related. The employer is 
required to “take the injured worker as it finds him.” Given the serious 
conditions in his right knee and back, I have found he is no longer able 
to perform any meaningful work in the competitive job market. 
 
Id.  
 
On appeal, Commissioner Cortese disagreed with the determination that there 
was no meaningful employment available for Oppman at Eaton at the time that 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 9

7 
 
Oppman was released to return to work following his injury. Id. at 25. He did find that 
at the time of the hearing, Oppman would not be able to return to work at Eaton 
“given his current permanent restrictions.” Id. The Commissioner then concluded his 
analysis with the following: 
Claimant has a number of serious medical conditions that either 
preexisted or developed after he injured his right knee and low back. 
Claimant has a history of asthma dating back to childhood and morbid 
obesity. At the time of his first appointment with Dr. Bollier on April 5, 
2018, claimant had been taking prednisone daily to manage his asthma 
for at least three years. He was short of breath and had a history of sleep 
apnea and used a CPAP at night. After Dr. Bollier released him from care 
claimant was diagnosed with lymphedema, lower extremity edema, left 
lower extremity cellulitis and necrosis of muscle, chronic right-sided 
heart failure, chronic heart failure with preserved injection fracture, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, nocturnal hypoxemia, pulmonary 
hypertension, cor pulmonale, uncontrolled diabetes type 2, and drug-
induced hypokalemia. 
 
Claimant is a seriously ill, morbidly obese man. I do not find the work 
injury caused or materially aggravated, accelerated or “lit up” his 
pulmonary, cardiac, or other health conditions. The work injury caused 
claimant’s right knee condition and materially aggravated, accelerated, 
and “lit up” his low back condition, and he now requires permanent work 
restrictions. As correctly noted by the deputy commissioner, despite his 
personal comorbidities and another prior work injury he worked full-time 
for defendant-employer for 20 years. Claimant was a motivated worker, 
despite his breathing problems and large size. Following his termination 
claimant applied for work but was not hired before the Social Security 
Administration found he was permanently and totally disabled. 
Considering all the factors of industrial disability, I find claimant has 
established he is permanently and totally disabled under the statute. 
 
Id. at 26 (internal citations omitted). 
 
The Court has three main concerns regarding the Commissioners’ industrial 
disability analysis. First, there seems to be a contradiction between the finding that 
Eaton had suitable employment for Oppman after his injury and the finding of 
permanent and total disability. Second, it seems to equate conditions that Oppman 
had before his injury and conditions that were diagnosed after. Finally, it does not 
engage in the burden-shifting analysis prescribed by Iowa courts in Guyton and 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 9

8 
 
similar cases, which is to say there is no discussion of whether there is suitable 
employment available elsewhere in the market. This does not mean that the 
Commissioner’s conclusion is necessarily incorrect; rather, it is impossible with the 
record before the Court to determine if the Commissioner’s decision was irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  
The Court therefore remands this case to the Commissioner for a more specific 
finding on Oppman’s industrial disability that the Court can review. The record before 
the Court contains little evidence regarding Oppman's employability3; therefore, on 
remand both parties should be given the opportunity to present evidence regarding 
whether Oppman was an odd-lot worker. The agency should then make a specific 
finding on this issue when considering only the limitations created by Oppman’s work 
injury and the conditions that preexisted the injury so that the Court can conduct a 
more intelligent review, if necessary, of the agency’s findings.  
IV. 
DISPOSITION. 
IT IS THE ORDER OF THE COURT that Decision of the Workers’ 
Compensation Commission is AFFIRMED with regard to the designation of the 
sequela injury of the lower back.  Court costs are taxed to Petitioner. 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the Decision is REMANDED to the agency for 
the limited purpose of conducting a more specific finding and analysis regarding the 
designation of permanent and total disability in accordance with this decision. 
                                                          
3 Oppman noted at the agency hearing that he had applied for employment at “a couple of places” following his 
termination. Cert. Rec. 357. It is unclear from the record if he was rejected, and he stopped his search all together 
once he was approved for SSDI benefits. Id. That said, rejected job applications are not the only way to demonstrate 
a prima facie case of permanent and total disability. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 267 (Iowa 
1995). 
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 9

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV065676
EASTON CORPORATION ET AL VS RAY P OPPMAN ET AL
Type:
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2023-12-05 15:20:13
E-FILED                    CVCV065676 - 2023 DEC 05 03:20 PM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 9
