Case Number: 22002317.02
Case Title:  SCHMUECKER, ROBERT V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      SchmueckerRobert-22002317.02D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROBERT SCHMUECKER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 22002317.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY 
  : 
ACTION PROGRAM, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :       Head Notes: 1800; 1803; 1803.1; 2500 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Robert Schmuecker, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Hawkeye Area Community Action Program, 
(“Hawkeye”) and their insurer West Bend Mutual Insurance Company.  James Hoffman 
appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Tyler Smith appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on April 4, 2024, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
A few short minutes into the hearing, the claimant’s video feed cut out unexpectedly.  
Counsel for the claimant and the defendants agreed that the matter could proceed with 
the claimant participating via only audio.    
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibit 1, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-B.  The exhibits were received into the record without objection. 
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Lee Eaton was appointed the official 
reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record closed at 
the conclusion of the hearing, and the matter was considered fully submitted following 
briefing by the parties on May 3, 2024.     
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-13  16:29:44     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
  
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on February 14, 2022.   
 
3. That the alleged injury was a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That the alleged injury was a cause of permanent disability.   
 
5. That the disability was a scheduled member disability to the shoulder.   
 
6. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits was 
October 10, 2023.   
 
7. That, at the time of the work injury, the claimant was single, and entitled to 
one exemption.  The resulting stipulated weekly compensation rate was four 
hundred sixty-eight and 20/100 dollars ($468.20).     
 
8. That the claimant was paid 25.1 weeks of compensation at the stipulated rate, 
and the defendants are entitled to a credit for the same.   
 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.  Entitlement to temporary 
disability and/or healing period benefits was no longer in dispute.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The extent of permanent disability benefits. 
  
2. Whether the disability is an industrial disability. 
  
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
 
 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 3 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Robert Schmuecker, the claimant was 53 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He is right-handed.  (Testimony).  He worked for Hawkeye for six days 
prior to the stipulated work incident.  (Testimony).  He testified that on February 14, 
2022, he fell between a lift and a box truck, injuring his right shoulder.  (Testimony).  He 
initially reported to his primary care physician before being referred to a physician by 
Hawkeye’s workers’ compensation carrier.  (Testimony).   
On February 15, 2022, presented to Brian Meeker, D.O., at the Vinton Family 
Medical Clinic, with complaints of right shoulder pain.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1-5).  His pain 
increased when he lifted his arm.  (JE 1:1).  Mr. Schmuecker recounted unloading a box 
truck, reaching back, and falling onto his outstretched right arm and shoulder.  (JE 1:1).  
Mr. Schmuecker told the doctor that he had a history of right shoulder pain, including a 
prior recommendation for a right shoulder surgery.  (JE 1:1).  Upon physical 
examination, Dr. Meeker observed that Mr. Schmuecker did not want to abduct his arm 
and was only comfortable with it in an adducted position.  (JE 1:3).  X-rays of the right 
shoulder were unremarkable.  (JE 1:3-4).  Dr. Meeker reviewed an MRI performed in 
2015, and noted that is showed five issues: 
1. Peripheral full-thickness supraspinatus tear 18 mm anterior posterior 
dimension and 9 mm mediolateral dimension. 
2. Infraspinatus tendinosis. 
3. Possible small SLAP tear superior labrum. 
4. Mild degenerative changes of the AC joint.  No inferior spurring. 
5. Subcortical cyst formation and cortical irregularity in the anterior aspect 
of the greater tuberosity.   
(JE 1:4-5).   
Dr. Meeker told the claimant that his re-injury of his right shoulder necessitated a 
referral to an orthopedic surgeon.  (JE 1:5).   
 
Jeffrey Westpheling, M.D., examined Mr. Schmuecker on February 17, 2022.  
(JE 2:2-7).  Mr. Schmuecker recounted his fall, and subsequent right shoulder pain.  (JE 
2:5).  He indicated that he had significant pain in the lateral aspect of his right shoulder.  
(JE 2:5).  Dr. Westpheling recommended an MRI of the right shoulder and showed the 
claimant how to perform certain exercises to reduce the risk of adhesive capsulitis.  (JE 
2:6).  An x-ray was performed, which was unremarkable.  (JE 2:3).  Dr. Westpheling 
restricted the claimant from working with his right arm.  (JE 2:2).   
 
On February 22, 2022, Dr. Westpheling visited with Mr. Schmuecker regarding 
his right shoulder pain.  (JE 2:10-11).  Dr. Westpheling reviewed the MRI report and 
opined that the claimant experienced a “nearly complete full-thickness tear of the 
supraspinatus tendon.”  (JE 2:10).  Dr. Westpheling diagnosed Mr. Schmuecker with a 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 4 
complete tear of the right rotator cuff, prescribed tramadol, and provided a ambulatory 
referral to orthopedic surgery.  (JE 2:10).  The doctor continued the temporary 
restrictions of no use of the right arm.  (JE 2:8).   
 
Thomas Gorsche, M.D., examined Mr. Schmuecker on March 7, 2022, for his 
right shoulder pain.  (JE 3:1-3).  Mr. Schmuecker rated his pain 9 out of 10.  (JE 3:1).  
He recounted the incident leading to his right shoulder injury.  (JE 3:1).  Dr. Gorsche 
reviewed the results of the MRI and opined that the claimant had an acute full-thickness 
retracted rotator cuff tear in his right shoulder.  (JE 3:2).  Dr. Gorsche recommended 
surgery, and noted that an attempted repair may not be successful due to the retraction.  
(JE 3:2).  
 
Mr. Schmuecker went to the emergency room for complaints of neck, chest, and 
epigastric pain after he ate a chip that got stuck in his throat.  (JE 5:1-7).  He was given 
medication and discharged.  (JE 5:1-7).  There was no mention in this record about his 
right shoulder or neck pain that stemmed from that issue.  (JE 5:1-7).   
 
Erica Silbernagel, D.O., examined the claimant on April 18, 2022, for a 
preoperative evaluation as requested by Dr. Gorsche.  (JE 1:6-15).  Mr. Schmuecker 
noted being sober from methamphetamine for three years.  (JE 1:6).  He smoked 
marijuana and cigarettes on a daily basis.  (JE 1:6).  He was cleared for surgery.  (JE 
1:6-15).   
 
On April 25, 2022, Dr. Gorsche performed a complete rotator cuff tear of the 
claimant’s right shoulder.  (JE 4:1).   
 
Dr. Silbernagel examined the claimant again on June 16, 2022, for increasing 
shoulder pain during physical therapy.  (JE 1:16-20).  Dr. Silbernagel recommended Mr. 
Schmuecker keep his follow-up appointment with an orthopedic physician on June 20, 
2022.  (JE 1:20).   
 
On November 28, 2022, Mr. Schmuecker returned to Dr. Silbernagel’s office with 
anxiety issues.  (JE 1:21-24).  The doctor noted that Mr. Schmuecker complained loudly 
and yelled about political issues.  (JE 1:21).  He also complained of chronic shoulder 
pain.  (JE 1:21).  There is no additional pertinent information regarding the chronic 
shoulder issues.  (JE 1:21-24).   
 
Dr. Gorsche examined the claimant again on December 13, 2022, with continued 
complaints of right shoulder pain.  (JE 3:4-5).  Dr. Gorsche reviewed the recent MRI and 
opined it showed an “area of full-thickness tear anterior 18 mm supraspinatus insertion.”  
(JE 3:4).  Dr. Gorsche discussed the option of a repeat surgery, but Mr. Schmuecker 
was unsure as to whether he wanted to proceed with a repeat surgery.  (JE 3:4).  Dr. 
Gorsche recommended no lifting greater than 10 pounds.  (JE 3:5).   
 
Dr. Silbernagel visited with Mr. Schmuecker for another pre-operative 
examination on February 14, 2023.  (JE 1:25-32).  This examination was requested by 
Dr. Gorsche ahead of a planned right shoulder surgery.  (JE 1:25).  Mr. Schmuecker 
told the doctor that he occasionally took Tylenol PM for his right shoulder pain.  (JE 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 5 
1:25).  He occasionally took Tylenol during the day for a headache.  (JE 1:25).  He told 
Dr. Silbernagel that he had “ongoing neck pain on the right side due to his shoulder.”  
(JE 1:25).   
 
Dr. Gorsche performed another right shoulder surgery on the claimant on 
February 22, 2023.  (JE 4:2).  This was to repair a recurrent right rotator cuff tear.  (JE 
4:2).   
J. Joe Hawk, M.D., C.I.M.E., performed an IME on the claimant on June 5, 2023.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1-9).  Following the IME, Dr. Hawk issued a report detailing his 
findings.  (CE 1:1-9).  The claimant noted that Dr. Hawk’s IME occurred within a few 
months of his second surgery, during a time in which he wore a sling.  (Testimony).  In 
spite of this, Mr. Schmuecker felt that Dr. Hawk’s IME was quite thorough and involved 
considerable testing.  (Testimony).   
In preparing his report, Dr. Hawk interviewed Mr. Schmuecker.  (CE 1:2).  Mr. 
Schmuecker recounted how he was injured, and some of his medical appointments.  
(CE 1:2).  Mr. Schmuecker claimed that his second surgery did not return his right 
shoulder to its pre-accident condition.  (CE 1:2).  He also claimed to have pain in his 
right neck and headaches that he attributed to the right shoulder.  (CE 1:2).  
Interestingly, Mr. Schmuecker made no mention of his previously documented daily 
marijuana use to Dr. Hawk.  (CE 1:2).  Dr. Hawk also reviewed a number of medical 
records in preparing his report.  (CE 1:4-8).   
Dr. Hawk then undertook a physical examination of the claimant.  (CE 1:3-4).  Dr. 
hawk noted the claimant to have pain and spasm to the right levator scapulae, trapezius 
and paraspinal muscles.  (CE 1:3).  He then measured the range of motion in the 
claimant’s right shoulder.  (CE 1:3).  He found the claimant to have 90 degrees of 
forward flexion, 40 degrees of extension, 60 degrees of abduction, “full ROM” 
adduction, 50 degrees of external rotation, and 90 degrees of internal rotation.  (CE 
1:3).  He also documented some strength deficits in the right shoulder.  (CE 1:3).  Dr. 
hawk then documented a self-reported pain severity score of 18.5 out of 20 and noted 
“Table 18-4.”  (CE 1:3).   
The doctor then provided an opinion on the claimant’s impairment pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (CE 1:8-9).  
Based upon Figure 16-40 on page 476 of the Guides, Dr. Hawk noted the claimant’s 90 
degrees of flexion would provide a 6 percent upper extremity impairment, and his 40 
degrees of extension would provide a 1 percent upper extremity impairment.  (CE 1:8).   
He also found that the claimant would have a 6 percent impairment due to his limited 
abduction, a 4 percent impairment due to deficits in internal rotation, and a 1 percent 
impairment due to deficits with external rotation.  (CE 1:8).  Dr. Hawk added these 
values together to arrive at an 18 percent upper extremity impairment based upon range 
of motion deficits.  (CE 1:8).  Dr. Hawk then converted the 18 percent upper extremity 
impairment rating to an 11 percent whole person impairment.  (CE 1:8).   

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 6 
Dr. Hawk then added impairment pursuant to Table 18-6 and 18-7 due to the 
claimant’s claimed headaches and neck pain.  (CE 1:8).  He opined that this amounted 
to an additional 3 percent.  (CE 1:8).  He then combined the 11 percent whole person 
impairment with the 3 percent whole person impairment to arrive at a 14 percent whole 
person impairment rating.  (CE 1:9).   
The doctor next discussed permanent restrictions.  (CE 1:9).  Dr. Hawk provided 
the following permanent restrictions: 
…he should have no overhead work and limit below shoulder height weight 
to five to ten pounds.  Specifically, he cannot climb into heavy equipment 
and large trucks as one would need the right upper extremity to grasp the 
pull bar to get in the cab.  It is my opinion that he would not be able to crawl 
under mobile homes to work on the winterizing as he has described to me.    
(CE 1:9)  Dr. Hawk recommended muscle relaxers, Tylenol, gabapentin, and 
intermittent physical therapy.  (CE 1:9).   
 
On July 10, 2023, Dr. Gorsche examined Mr. Schmuecker following his second 
surgery.  (JE 3:6-7).  Despite his second surgery, the claimant continued to complain of 
pain in his right shoulder that was “no better than what it was 2 months ago, and in fact 
he thinks maybe has more pain since the second surgery than what he had after the 
first.”  (JE 3:6).  Dr. Gorsche provided the claimant with work restrictions for two more 
months.  (JE 3:6).  If no improvement was shown after that time, Dr. Gorsche 
recommended a functional capacity evaluation (“FCE”) to determine permanent 
impairment and permanent restrictions.  (JE 3:6).   
 
Dr. Gorsche wrote a letter to an individual in West Bend, Wisconsin, regarding 
the claimant.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Gorsche reviewed the claimant’s medical records and the 
FCE in order to provide his opinions.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Gorsche opined that Mr. 
Schmuecker achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) on October 10, 2023.  
(JE 3:8).  Dr. Gorsche then used Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46 of the Guides to 
provide the claimant with a 12 percent impairment rating to the right upper extremity 
based upon a loss of motion.  (JE 3:8).  He then noted that a loss of strength could be 
used, based upon Table 16-35, to provide an impairment rating of 12 percent of the 
right upper extremity.  (JE 3:8).  Using either method, Dr. Gorsche placed the claimant 
at a 12 percent right upper extremity impairment since the Guides does not allow for 
combining the impairment ratings for this issue.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Gorsche also adopted 
permanent restrictions based upon the FCE including no lifting more than 20 pounds 
and no overhead work.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Gorsche added a restriction of limiting Mr. 
Schmuecker to only occasional crawling.  (JE 3:8).   
 
On March 21, 2024, Dr. Westpheling responded to a check-box letter from 
defendants’ counsel.  (JE 2:12-13).  Dr. Westpheling agreed with the following 
statements: 
1. Dr. Hawk’s impairment rating based on his examination of Mr. Schmuecker 
on June 5, 2023, is inappropriate pursuant to the 5th Edition AMA Guides as 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 7 
Dr. Hawk made determinations as to permanency of alleged conditions prior 
to Mr. Schmuecker being placed at maximum medical improvement. 
  
2. It is your opinion that Mr. Schmuecker’s work duties on or leading up to 
February 14, 2022, and his associated treatment for his shoulder thereafter 
were not a significant or substantial contributing factor to his complaints and 
conditions of neck pain, spasms of muscles around his neck, and 
associated headaches, as diagnosed by Dr. Hawk, and you disagree with 
Dr. Hawk’s opinion that such diagnosed conditions resulted in any sort of 
permanent impairment injury that could be rated per the 5th Edition AMA 
Guides.   
(JE 2:12-13).   
 
Dr. Gorsche responded to a check box letter from defendants’ counsel indicating 
his assent to the following statements: 
1. Dr. Hawk’s impairment rating based on his examination of Mr. Schmuecker 
on June 5, 2023, is inappropriate pursuant to the 5th Edition AMA Guides as 
Dr. Hawk made determinations as to permanency of alleged conditions prior 
to Mr. Schmuecker being placed at maximum medical improvement. 
  
2. It is your opinion that Mr. Schmuecker’s work duties on or leading up to 
February 14, 2022, and his associated treatment for his shoulder thereafter 
were not a significant or substantial contributing factor to his complaints and 
conditions of neck pain, spasms of muscles around his neck, and 
associated headaches, as diagnosed by Dr. Hawk, and you disagree with 
Dr. Hawk’s opinion that such diagnosed conditions resulted in any sort of 
permanent impairment that could be rated per the 5th Edition AMA Guides.   
 
3. You stand by your previously issued opinion/report regarding maximum 
medical improvement and permanency for Mr. Schmuecker’s February 14, 
2022, right shoulder injury issued on October 25, 2023 – that is, he 
sustained a permanent injury to his shoulder only (not to his body as a 
whole) and the extent of permanency per the 5th Edition AMA Guides is 12% 
to his right upper extremity.  In addition, it is your opinion that Mr. 
Schmuecker did not sustain any sort of injury (sequela or otherwise) to his 
neck, head, or other body part or system that would result in a body as a 
whole injury or rating.   
(JE 3:9-10).   
Mr. Schmuecker was off work for some time.  (Testimony).  Since his release by 
Dr. Gorsche with permanent restrictions, he has not returned to work with Hawkeye.  
(Testimony).   
At the time of the hearing, he could lift his left arm with no issues.  (Testimony).  
He testified that he could only lift his right arm to a certain height; however, due to the 
lack of video feed, I could not verify this independently.  (Testimony).  He testified that 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 8 
he experienced issues with sleep, as well as continued pain.  (Testimony).  On several 
occasions during the hearing, he testified that he begged doctors for pain medications, 
but none were ever prescribed.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Permanent Disability 
 
The parties stipulated that the claimant sustained a permanent disability to his 
right shoulder.  There is a question as to whether or not the claimant’s right shoulder 
injury extended to his neck and right upper extremity, thus implicating an industrial 
disability analysis.  The defendants contend that the injury is limited to the right 
shoulder.  The claimant contends that the injury extends to the body as a whole. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 9 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).   
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code 85.34(2)(v).  The extent 
of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
 
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of aftereffects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in Iowa Code 
85.34(a) – (u) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. MacIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.1d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936).   
 
In this case, there is no dispute that the claimant sustained an injury to his right 
shoulder.  The question is whether the claimant sustained permanent injuries to his 
neck and right arm, thus extending his injuries to the body as a whole entitling him to an 
industrial disability analysis.   
 
Mr. Schmuecker points to his testimony in support of this notion.  He claimed that 
he told his treating doctors on a number of occasions that he experienced constant neck 
pain and tingling into his right upper extremity.  Despite treatment with several 
physicians, there is only one mention in the medical records by a treating physician of 
neck pain.  This is from Dr. Silbernagel, who noted Mr. Schmuecker complained of 
“ongoing neck pain on the right side due to his shoulder.”  (JE 1:25).  Dr. Hawk, the 
claimant’s IME doctor is the only other physician to explicitly document these 
complaints.  There are a number of issues with Dr. Hawk’s IME, many of which will be 
discussed below.  As to this particular issue, Dr. Hawk’s report relies entirely on the 
statements of Mr. Schmuecker.   
 
On the other hand, Dr. Gorsche, who performed two surgeries on Mr. 
Schmuecker, never documented any complaints of neck pain or headaches.  Mr. 
Schmuecker testified that the silence of Dr. Gorsche’s records as to this issue makes 
the records false.  He claimed that he always told Dr. Gorsche about right arm issues, 
headaches, and neck pain.  The idea that Dr. Gorsche would consciously exclude 
complaints made by a patient from his records, or would not document consistent 
complaints made by a patient strains credulity, and harms the claimant’s credibility as to 
this issue.  In fact, Dr. Gorsche even agreed in a check-box letter that Mr. Schmuecker 
sustained no injury to his neck, head, or other body systems.  The overwhelming 
evidence indicates that the claimant had an injury only to his right shoulder.  The 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 10 
claimant did not provide sufficient evidence to carry his burden of proof to show that any 
body part sustained permanent disability beyond his right shoulder.   
 
Therefore, the claimant’s permanent impairment is evaluated as permanent 
disability to a scheduled member.  When the result of an injury is loss to a scheduled 
member, the compensation payable is limited to that set forth in the appropriate 
subdivision of Iowa Code 85.34(2).  Barton v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 
N.W.2d 660 (1961).  “Loss of use of a member is equivalent to “loss” of the member.  
Moses v. National Union C.M. Co., 194 Iowa 819, 184 N.W. 746 (1921).  Pursuant to 
Iowa Code 85.34(2)(w), the workers’ compensation commissioner may equitably prorate 
compensation payable in those cases wherein the loss is something less than that 
provided for in the schedule.  Blizek v. Eagle Signal Co., 164 N.W.2d 84 (Iowa 1969).  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) states that compensation for permanent disability to a 
shoulder shall be compensated based upon four hundred weeks.   
 
There are two conflicting opinions as to the extent of Mr. Schmuecker’s right 
shoulder disability.  The first is the opinion of Dr. Hawk.  Claimant’s counsel retained the 
services of Dr. Hawk for an IME conducted on June 5, 2023.  It is of great importance to 
note that the claimant wore a sling during this examination.  He performed some range 
of motion exercises to the best of his ability, but the IME was conducted within less than 
4 months of his second surgery.  Dr. Hawk’s IME report is silent as to whether the 
claimant achieved MMI at the time of the examination.  Nevertheless, the doctor used 
the Guides to provide the claimant with an 18 percent upper extremity impairment 
based upon his measured deficits in range of motion.   
 
The second opinion is from Dr. Gorsche.  It is dated October 25, 2023.  Dr. 
Gorsche is a surgeon who treated the claimant.  As part of his treatment, he performed 
two surgeries on the claimant’s right shoulder.  Dr. Gorsche opined that the claimant 
achieved MMI on October 10, 2023.   He then referenced Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-
46 to provide an impairment based upon a loss of range of motion of 12 percent of the 
shoulder.  He also considered an impairment based upon a loss of strength.  If that 
measurement was used, he provided the claimant with a 12 percent impairment to the 
right upper extremity using Table 16-35 of the Guides.  As Dr. Gorsche notes, the two 
impairment ratings cannot be combined.   
Dr. Hawk conducted his examination, including testing range of motion of the 
claimant’s shoulder within four months of the claimant’s second surgery.  This appears 
to be prior to the claimant achieving MMI for his right shoulder.  Iowa Courts have held 
that, “…a claim for permanent disability benefits is not ripe until [MMI] has been 
achieved.”  Bell Bros. v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 201 (Iowa 2010).  The Guides 
indicates that an impairment is considered permanent when the injured worker achieves 
MMI.  Guides, page 2.  Dr. Hawk examined the claimant while he was still wearing a 
brace.  This calls into question the accuracy of the ranges of motion found during the 
IME.  Additionally, Dr. Hawk based his opinions, at least in part, on his interview with the 
claimant rather than the medical records.  My only concern with Dr. Gorsche’s report is 
that he does not document the exact range of motion measurements found upon 
examination in arriving at his impairment rating.   

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 11 
 
In their posthearing brief, counsel for the claimant urges the undersigned to 
disregard the impairment ratings in the Guides and argues that the Guides “…were 
never meant to be a mathematical computation only since various doctors differ.  The 
Guidelines are even labeled a guideline, not an absolute rule.”  This argument is 
completely contrary to applicable Iowa law and the intent of the Guides.  I am bound by 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) to utilize the Guides.  Furthermore, I am prohibited from 
using any lay testimony or agency expertise to determine loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment.  See Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  To disregard applicable 
Iowa law, as urged by claimant’s counsel would undermine confidence in the workers’ 
compensation system.   
 
Based upon the foregoing, I find that the opinions of Dr. Gorsche were more 
credible.  Thus, the claimant sustained a 12 percent permanent impairment to his right 
shoulder.  The claimant is entitled to 48 weeks of permanent impairment benefits at the 
stipulated rate.  This is based upon the following calculation 12 percent x 400 weeks = 
48 weeks.  The commencement date for benefits as stipulated was October 10, 2023. 
IME Reimbursement Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for an IME performed by Dr. Hawk, 
amounting to two thousand eight hundred thirty-three and 33/100 dollars ($2833.33).   
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.     
. . .    
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.    
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).     
The Iowa Supreme Court determined that an “examination” required “to perform 
an impairment rating” must include certain steps as required under the AMA Guides.  
Mid American Construction, LLC, v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024).  These steps 

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 12 
include: determining whether an injured worker achieved MMI, reviewing past medical 
records to ascertain knowledge as to any past injuries to the injured worker, opining as 
to whether the work injury caused the impairment, conducting a physical examination of 
the claimant in order “to assess the employee’s status and perform accurate 
measurements…”, and determining a diagnosis.  Id.   
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  This burden may 
be met either by “…evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to support or 
challenge the fee charged in a particular case…” or by agency expertise in adjudicating 
claims in the local area where the examination was conducted.  Mid American 
Construction, LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024).   
An opinion finding a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment 
rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. 2021).     
It is well accepted Iowa law that a claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for 
one IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 
N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009).   
Dr. Hawk examined the claimant on June 5, 2023.  Dr. Gorsche issued his letter 
regarding permanent impairment on October 10, 2023.  The claimant did not meet the 
requirements of Iowa Code section 85.39, as his IME with Dr. Hawk was performed 
prior to the issuance of an opinion of permanent impairment by a physician retained by 
the defendants.  Therefore, the claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for the costs of 
Dr. Hawk’s IME.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the defendants shall pay the claimant 48 weeks of benefits at the above 
stipulated rate of compensation.   
That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is October 
10, 2023.   
That the claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for the costs of Dr. Hawk’s IME 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
That the defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   

SCHMUECKER V. HAWKEYE AREA COMMUNITY ACTION PROGRAM 
Page 13 
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this 13th day of June, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James P. Hoffman (via WCES) 
Tyler Smith (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
