Case Number: 23700726.01
Case Title:  TOWNS, LATOYIA V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Towns Latoyia-23700726.01mJRD.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
LATOYIA TOWNS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 23700726.01 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
SILVER OAKS NURSING AND 
  : 
REHABILITATION CENTER,  
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                        DECISION 
 
 
  : 
CCMSI, 
  :  
 
 
  :                        
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
 
   Head Note: 2701 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
On September 7, 2023, the claimant filed a petition for alternate care pursuant to 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) and 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48. The defendants filed an 
answer admitting liability for injuries related to claimant’s right upper extremity and right 
shoulder. 
 
 
The undersigned presided over the hearing held via telephone and recorded 
digitally on September 19, 2023. That recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48(12). Claimant participated 
personally, and through her attorney, Dennis Currell. The defendants participated through 
their attorney, Tyler Block.   
 
 
Prior to the hearing, the claimant submitted ten pages of exhibits, marked as 
Exhibits 1-5. The defendants submitted seven pages of exhibits labeled A. The 
evidentiary record consists of Claimant’s Exhibit 1-5 and Defendants’ Exhibit A.   
 
 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate medical care. 
Consequently, this decision constitutes final agency action, and there is no appeal to the 
commissioner. Judicial review in a district court pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 17A is 
the avenue for an appeal. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Sep-20  09:44:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER 
Page 2 
 
ISSUE 
 
 
The issue under consideration is whether an order for certain alternate medical 
care is appropriate.   
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 
Claimant, Latoyia Towns, alleges that she sustained an injury to her right shoulder 
and right upper extremity that arose out of, and in the course of her employment with the 
defendant-employer on April 18, 2023. She alleges that she lifted a heavy patient and felt 
pain in her right upper extremity. She testified that she told her supervisor of her injury, 
along with her charge nurse, human resources representative, administrator, and 
corporate director of nursing. (Testimony). According to the claimant, the employer told 
her that they would move forward with filing a workers’ compensation claim. (Testimony). 
   
 
The claimant told her employer that she was going to seek care with the 
emergency room at the end of her shift, which she did. (Testimony). She initially went to 
a walk-in clinic, who recommended that she seek emergent care. (Testimony; Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1). At the emergency room, Ms. Towns complained of right arm pain and right 
shoulder pain. (CE 1). She noted that she felt a pop in her right shoulder while she was 
lifting a very heavy patient. (CE 1). The examination in the emergency room showed mild 
pain to palpation of the AC joint. (CE 1:3). The emergency physician opined that the 
claimant may have torn her rotator cuff muscle or “just caused a sprain of her AC joint or 
caused tendinitis.” (CE 1:3). The emergency room physician ordered physical therapy.  
(Testimony; CE 1:3).   
 
 
Ms. Towns began physical therapy. (Testimony). She testified that there were 
problems with some of her physical therapy appointments, as there was an issue with 
authorization and identification of the proper workers’ compensation insurance carrier. 
(Testimony). As of June of 2023, she completed seven visits for physical therapy. (CE 
1:4). She was not improving at that time. (CE 1:4). The therapist recommenced further 
imaging to rule out a rotator cuff or pectoral tear. (CE 1:4).   
 
 
Ms. Towns further testified that she received no accommodation to attend her 
physical therapy appointments, and that she had to make appointments on her off time. 
(Testimony). The physical therapist requested an MRI, as physical therapy appeared to 
not be working to solve Ms. Towns’ issues. (Testimony).   
 
 
Since Ms. Towns had not heard from the workers’ compensation carrier as to this 
issue, she returned to her own primary care provider, on her own volition, and requested 
that the MRI be ordered. (Testimony). This visit occurred on June 28, 2023 with Anita 
Sharma, PA-C. (CE 2). Ms. Towns complained of an injury to her right arm with associated 
arm weakness, painful range of motion, and tingling or numbness. (CE 2). Ms. Sharma 
opined that the claimant had an injury to her shoulder and upper arm. (CE 2). She 
recommended an MRI. (CE 2). Her primary care physician ordered the MRI, and it was 
completed in July of 2023. (Testimony).   

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER 
Page 3 
 
 
 
In August of 2023, the defendants arranged for care with Matthew Bollier, M.D., an 
orthopedic physician. (DE A). Dr. Bollier performed an examination on the claimant, 
though she testified that “he didn’t say much.” (Testimony; DE A; CE 4). Dr. Bollier 
recounted the claimant’s treatment to date. (DE A). Ms. Towns had pain in her anterior 
shoulder, which traveled into her pectoralis and down her right arm. (DE A). The MRI 
obtained in July showed no labral or rotator cuff tear, but showed rotator cuff 
tendinopathy. (DE A). Ms. Towns expressed frustration about her continued right shoulder 
pain to the doctor. (DE A). She also told the doctor that she developed numbness and 
tingling in her 4th and 5th fingers following cessation of her physical therapy in May. (DE 
A). Dr. Bollier opined that the claimant’s work injury was “a significant factor in our 
causation assessment regarding her shoulder pain.” (DE A). Dr. Bollier recommended 
that the claimant have corticosteroid injections into her subacromial and glenohumeral 
spaces to reduce inflammation and improve her pain. (DE A). Dr. Bollier also 
recommended she continue strengthening exercises on her own. (DE A). Dr. Bollier 
recommended a 10-pound lifting restriction for the claimant. (DE A).  
  
 
Ms. Towns testified that Dr. Bollier only offered a cuff for the claimant’s right elbow 
in order to alleviate any numbness in her right 4th and 5th fingers. (Testimony). Dr. Bollier 
also recommended certain injections to the right arm. (Testimony). These injections have 
since been scheduled for October, with a subsequent follow-up visit scheduled with Dr. 
Bollier in early November. Ms. Towns testified to a dissatisfaction with Dr. Bollier’s care. 
(Testimony).   
 
 
Ms. Sharma saw the claimant again on an unidentified date. (CE 5). After 
examination, Ms. Sharma diagnosed the claimant with tendinitis of her right rotator cuff. 
(CE 5). She noted that: “[w]ork comp is fighting against cortisone injection.” (CE 5). As a 
result, she provided a referral to an orthopedic surgeon. (CE 5). Ms. Sharma also 
diagnosed the claimant with numbness in her finger. (CE 5). She ordered an EMG and 
nerve conduction study due to numbness in the claimant’s 4th and 5th fingers. (CE 5).  
  
 
Ms. Towns confirmed that her primary care physician recommended a nerve 
conduction study and an orthopedic referral at PCI. (Testimony). The primary care 
physician scheduled a nerve conduction test for September 18, 2023; however, Ms. 
Towns could not attend this evaluation, as she was working. (Testimony). It has since 
been rescheduled. (Testimony).   
 
 
Ms. Towns was never advised that care with her primary care physician or the 
emergency room, or physical therapist was not authorized. (Testimony).     
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obligated to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER 
Page 4 
 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
Iowa Code 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 
1997).   
 
 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical care 
provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 
759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 195, 197 
(Iowa 2003)). “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), our legislature 
sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the competing interests of 
their employers.”  Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 202, 
207; IBP, Inc. v. Harker, 633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 2001)).   
 
 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975). An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 19, 1988). Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, and 
defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening Decision, June 17, 
1986).   
 
 
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.” Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003)(emphasis in original). Such employer-
provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the injury 
without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code section 85.27(4).   
 
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). An injured 
employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack thereof) may share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties cannot reach an agreement 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER 
Page 5 
 
on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order the care.” Id. “Determining what care is reasonable 
under the statute is a question of fact.” Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire 
Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436. As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the 
employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is unreasonable. Id. at 
124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436. Because 
“the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the question of reasonable 
necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided 
care, standing alone, is not enough to find such care unreasonable. Id.   
 
 
I would first note that there is no proof in the record that the claimant expressed a 
dissatisfaction with her care before filing the original notice and petition concerning 
application for alternate care. Iowa Code section 85.27(4) requires that a claimant 
express their dissatisfaction with care, in writing, prior to the filing of a petition seeking 
alternate medical care. The record contains copies of e-mails between claimant’s counsel 
and the adjuster, but these e-mails are limited to a discussion about the claimant’s 
statement and arrangement of an examination with Dr. Bollier, including whether this 
represented an examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. This alone could be 
fatal to the claimant’s request for alternate medical care.  
  
 
The claimant argues that the defendants abandoned medical care, and as such 
she sought care with her primary care provider. Based upon this, the claimant argues that 
the primary care provider (a physician’s assistant) should be deemed the authorized 
treating provider, and thus be allowed to direct the claimant’s medical care. The problem 
with this claim is that the defendants did not abandon care. While there was a short time 
at the outset that care was not promptly authorized by the defendants, they eventually 
provided authorization for some care. As admitted during the hearing, the defendants 
authorized physical therapy appointments for a time. While this care was initially ordered 
by an unauthorized provider, it represents the defendants assuming responsibility for 
directing care. While the defendants have not moved with great speed in directing the 
claimant’s care, they arranged an appointment and approved treatment as recommended 
by Dr. Bollier. Dr. Bollier is far more qualified as an authorized treating physician than the 
claimant’s requested authorizing treating provider, as Dr. Bollier is an orthopedic doctor. 
The claimant’s requested authorized treating provider is a physician assistant with an 
unclear background.   
 
 
The claimant is clearly displeased with the speed of which the defendants are 
authorizing certain treatments. The defendants would do well to move in a more timely 
manner in continuing their handling of this claim. However, the defendants authorized 
care with Dr. Bollier. Dr. Bollier recommended injections for the claimant. These injections 
have been authorized. A follow-up appointment after the injections has also been 
authorized. All indications are that the defendants intend to continue with Dr. Bollier as 
the treating physician for the claimant.  
  
 
It is the claimant’s burden to prove that the care authorized has been 
unreasonable. The claimant’s own primary care provider, Physician Assistant Sharma, 

TOWNS V. SILVER OAKS NURSING AND REHABILITATION CENTER 
Page 6 
 
ordered a visit with an orthopedic physician. The claimant has already been seen by an 
orthopedic physician, who has provided care recommendations, including injections.  
Ordering that Ms. Sharma be considered the claimant’s treating provider seems absurd 
when Dr. Bollier, an orthopedic physician, has already undertaken care as an authorized 
treating physician for the claimant.   
 
 
Finally, the claimant desires to have an EMG and/or a nerve conduction study 
performed. There is no indication in the record that Dr. Bollier has ruled these items out 
as possibilities. As an orthopedic physician, he is in a much stronger position to make 
these judgments than Ms. Sharma. The treatment provided by the defendants through 
Dr. Bollier is reasonable. The claimant has not proven that the care offered through Dr. 
Bollier is unreasonable. This seems more like a case where the claimant is merely 
dissatisfied with the care offered, and cannot prove that the current care being offered is 
unreasonable. Dr. Bollier has ordered injections “to decrease inflammation and improve 
her pain.”   
 
 
When taking into consideration the claimant’s failure to provide the defendants with 
a notice of dissatisfaction, along with her failure to prove that the care authorized was 
unreasonable, I find that the claimant’s petition for alternate care should be denied in its 
entirety.   
 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
 
 
The claimant’s petition for alternate care is denied. 
 
 
Signed and filed this    20th    day of September, 2023. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dennis Currell (via WCES) 
Tyler C. Block (via WCES) 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
