Case Number: 24008201.01
Case Title:  COFFMAN, JOSHUA V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Coffman Joshua-24008201.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOSHUA COFFMAN, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
   File No. 24008201.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
OPERATIONS, LLC, 
  : 
     
 
 
  :                      
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
    Headnote Nos.:  1402.50; 1403.30; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
                               1402.20 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Joshua Coffman, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Bridgestone Americas Tire Operations, LLC, employer, 
and Old Republic Insurance Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants.  
This case was heard on June 24, 2025, and considered fully submitted on July 
15, 2025, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4, Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-F, and testimony of claimant, Thomas Cox, and Pete Goshorn.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment on January 19, 2024; 
 
2. Whether timely notice was given pursuant to Iowa Code Section 85.23; 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from January 25, 2024, 
through May 27, 2024;  
 
4. Whether claimant sustained a permanent disability; and if so, the extent of 
such disability;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Sep-08  13:14:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses itemized 
in Exhibit 4; 
 
7. Taxation of costs.  
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The parties stipulate that at all times material hereto, an employee-employer 
relationship existed between the claimant and defendant employer.  
At the time of the alleged injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $1,906.08 per 
week. He was married and entitled to four exemptions. Based on the foregoing, his 
weekly benefit rate is $1,233.59.  
Prior to the hearing, claimant was paid $12,709.28 in the form of sick pay or 
disability income to which defendants are entitled to a credit.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Joshua Coffman, was a 37-year-old person at the time of the hearing. 
His past education included high school graduation with an electrical mechanical 
technologies certificate from DMACC. (Hearing Transcript, page 12; Defendants’ Exhibit 
B, page 24)  His work history includes work at a bottling plant, movie theater, counselor 
for adults with MR, but his primary place of employment has been with defendant 
employer. (Tr., pp. 37-38)  
Claimant began working for defendant employer on February 27, 2008, in the 
Service and Tire room. (Tr., p. 13) From there he transferred to a forklift operator 
position. (Id.) Claimant was then offered and accepted a position as a curing mechanic. 
Part of his duties included changing valves, replacing center mechs and bagless 
cylinders, and things of that nature. (Tr., p. 14) Physically, he had to kneel, crawl, and 
reach overhead. (Tr., p. 16) He was required to lift heavy tools and equipment from up 
to fifty pounds, if not heavier. (Tr., p.16)  He was working this position at the time of his 
injuries.  
On August 25, 2023, while claimant was carrying a dryer up the stairs at his 
home, he started having sharp pain in the neck and the upper right shoulder. (Joint 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 3 
 
Exhibit 3, pages 19-20) He began to seek adjustments from a chiropractor, Dallas 
Menke, D.C., for “frequent sharp discomfort” in the upper back and neck. (See e.g. JE 
3) Claimant also began experiencing neck pain while doing daily activities.  
On December 17, 2023, claimant experienced back, shoulder and neck strain. 
There is a debate over the source of these pains. Claimant asserts that it stemmed from 
replacing a hydraulic cylinder at work and pulling on a hoist. (DE B:27) Defendants 
assert that it was not a work injury, but do not know where it occurred and suggest that 
it stems from his underlying spinal condition that was aggravated over the summer 
through activities at home.  
Claimant’s work schedule is from Monday through Friday but he does work 
overtime. His time punches do not corroborate that he worked on December 17, 2023, a 
Sunday. Instead, the claimant’s time punches show he worked from 6:00 am to 2:00 pm 
on December 15, 2023, and returned to work on Monday, December 18, 2023, at 6:00 
am. (DE C:32)  
Claimant testified in his deposition as well as at hearing that he reported the 
injury to his immediate supervisor the following day. (DE B) Claimant further testified 
that he was not advised to seek medical care despite sharing with his immediate 
supervisor over a half dozen times that he was hurt. (DE B) Claimant also testified that 
during the Christmas shutdown he had to leave early from overtime due to pain. (Tr., p. 
25) On January 3, 2024, claimant brought a medical note to HR, Samantha Peterson, 
that he had to take a day off of work because of a rotator cuff issue. (Tr., p. 27)  
Thomas Cox, plant engineer, testified at hearing. (Tr., p. 66) Claimant’s 
supervisors report to Mr. Cox. (Tr., p. 67) According to company procedures, Mr. Cox 
would be notified of any injury whether it is an accident or near miss. (Tr., p. 68) Mr. Cox 
testified that he was unaware of any injury claimant sustained in December 2023. (Tr., 
p. 68) However on January 18, 2024, he observed claimant using his cell phone on the 
plant floor. (Tr., p. 70) Cell phone use was prohibited due to safety concerns. (Tr., p. 70) 
When claimant was confronted over the use of the phone, claimant reported he was in 
severe pain and was waiting for a return call from his neurologist. (Tr., p. 70) Mr. Cox 
did not make any inquiries as to the cause of claimant’s pain. (Tr., p. 72)  
Pete Goshorn, the medical department manager, also testified at hearing. He is 
an employee of Concentra, a medical management firm, and has been stationed with 
defendant employer for the past seventeen years. (Tr., p. 76) Mr. Goshorn completes all 
the first reports of injury but was not aware of the December 2023 injury. (Tr., p. 78) 
Claimant did report that he fell in the parking lot on January 19, 2024, but did not relay 
to Mr. Goshorn that he sustained any head, right shoulder, left shoulder, neck, low back, 
arms, or leg injuries. (Tr., pp. 78-79) Mr. Goshorn did not perform any examination of 
claimant on January 19, 2024, and documented only that a fall occurred without any 
medical concerns regarding the fall. (Tr., p. 80) When asked about the lack of notations 
regarding any physical injury related to the fall, Mr. Goshorn said that claimant did not 
complain of any injuries. (Tr., p. 80) Claimant affirmed this stating that he was 
embarrassed and reported: 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 4 
 
I was okay, I wasn’t bleeding, I didn’t have any lacerations or any open 
wounds or anything like that. I did not go into what we were–what I was 
dealing with, you know. I was already seeing doctors for that. I just got in, 
reported it, and went back to work.  
(Tr., p. 23) 
Claimant was in Dr. Menke’s office on December 18, 2023, for treatment. (JE 
3:27) The following is the history for the December 18, 2023, visit.  
Josh sought treatment today, complaining of continuous sharp and shooting 
discomfort in the upper back.  He describes that the discomfort increases 
with movement.  On a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the most severe, he, 
using a VAS, describes the intensity as a 7 and indicated that the discomfort 
occurs approximately 70% of the time.  He states the discomfort is the same 
since his last visit, 
(JE 3:27) There is no mention of a December 18, 2023, work injury, but instead Dr. 
Menke planned to continue the treatment plan from 9/8/23. (JE 3:27) Claimant also 
referenced the dryer incident when he saw Kevin Smith, D,O., a primary care physician 
at UnityPoint, on December 28, 2023. (JE 4:32) Claimant’s history as recorded by Dr. 
Smith’s office is as follows: “Josh is here today for upper back pain. He has been going 
to the chiropractor and it has not helped. It hurts to sit and it her [sic] to turn his neck. It 
has been on going [sic] for awhile.” [sic] (JE 4:32)  
Claimant testified that his pain kept getting worse, moving down the right elbow 
and then over to the left side of his ribs and then down the left leg. (Tr., p. 20) He also 
stated that he did not go through official channels for medical care, first seeking out 
assistance from his chiropractor. but when he was not sensing improvement, he 
switched to Leah Haubrich, Nurse Practitioner. (Tr., p. 20, JE 4:34) The history given to 
NP Haubrich is as follows:  
Josh is here for evaluation of neck and back pain that has been present 
since around August after moving a dryer up some stairs. Chiropractor 
initially helped with symptoms. But now he reports legs are going numb. 
Reports right leg started to go numb yesterday and then the left leg today. 
Declines any relief from steroid or muscle relaxer. Reports he has been up 
since midnight due to the pain. Reports it feels like a charlie horse but in his 
neck. Reports spreading across his back. Reports ice helped with pain 
today. No pain in lower back. Denies weakness. 
Patient’s problem list, medications, allergies, past medical, surgical, 
social and family histories were reviewed and updated as appropriate. 
(JE 4:34)  

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 5 
 
NP Haubrich prescribed Flexeril, referred him for MRIs, and recommended 
physical therapy, which he began on January 9, 2024. (JE 4:32-35, JE 5)  
On January 3, 2024, he took himself to the emergency room at Iowa Methodist 
for neck pain, but left without being seen after triage.  He then went to Des Moines 
Orthopaedic Surgeons and was seen by Kara Buckingham, PA-C. (JE 1:1, 2:6) He 
reported neck pain with numbness into the right arm and left leg. (JE 2:6) He had full 
strength in his bilateral hip flexors but diminished sensation at L4 and L5 compared to 
the right. (JE 2:7) In this visit, he stated that his pain had been “ongoing since 
December 17.” (JE 2:6)   
Joshua is a 35-year-old male here with concerns of right posterior 
shoulder and neck pain has been ongoing since December 17. He denies 
specific injury. He states that certain movements increased pain. He has 
tried the chiropractor to help with symptom relief, however, pain has 
persisted. He states he had a similar episode in August in which she seen 
a chiropractor and symptoms resolved. He did go to Unity point emergency 
department on December 28 in which x-rays of his neck and thoracic were 
obtained. He was given a steroid pack and a muscle relaxer. He states that 
yesterday he went to his family doctor’s office for evaluation. He was given 
a physical therapy order and MRI of his cervical spine was ordered. He 
states that he is now getting numbness into his right arm and also 
intermittent numbness into his left leg. He states the symptoms are new. He 
does feel weak to his right arm. He also feels unstable. He denies fevers, 
chills.  He denies bowel or bladder changes or saddle anesthesia. 
(JE 2:6) (errors in original) 
PA-C Buckingham diagnosed claimant with cervical and lumbar nerve irritation 
and recommended he undergo an MRI as soon as possible. (JE 2:7-8)   
An MRI was conducted on January 17, 2024, which showed:  
C4-C5: Moderate central stenosis. C5-C6: Large right central disc extrusion 
measuring 7 x 12 mm contributing to severe central canal stenosis with 
compression of the spinal cord. C6-C7: Moderate central to right-sided disc 
extrusion contributing to cord compression with severe central canal 
stenosis and probably cord signal changes.  
(JE 2:11-12, JE 2:14) Based on the clinical complaints as well as the MRI, Zachary 
Ries, M.D., diagnosed claimant with early myelopathic symptoms requiring surgery. (JE 
2:14) A referral for a CT scan was made. (JE 2:14) The CT showed severe spinal canal 
stenosis and myelopathy due to large disc osteophyte complexes partially due to OPLL 
from C5-C7. (JE 2:17) Dr. Ries recommended surgery but wanted a second opinion. 
(Id.)  Claimant was sent to UIHC for the second opinion.  

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 6 
 
On or about January 19, 2024, claimant was walking into the defendant 
employer’s building when he slipped on ice and fell onto his upper back and neck. He 
reported this incident to his supervisors who transferred him to the company medical 
staff. He was released from the company nurse to return to work and he did so, finishing 
out his day. He made no mention of the December 2023 work injury.  
It is found that claimant did not sustain a work injury on December 17, 2023. The 
greater weight of the evidence supports that he did not work on December 17, 2023, 
and he made no mention of a December work injury to any of his medical providers 
from December 17, 2023, through January 17, 2024, despite seeing several medical 
providers for increasing neck pain radiating down to the arms and legs.  
Following the slip and fall, claimant took leave as of January 24, 2024, and did 
not return to work until May 28, 2024. (Tr., p. 63)  
Claimant was seen by Jangbo Lee, M.D., on January 30, 2024, who 
recommended claimant for a C6 corpectomy and C5-C7 anterior fusion to which 
claimant agreed. (JE 6:51) Historically, Dr. Lee recorded that claimant’s right arm pain 
and right hand weakness spontaneously resolved in December 2023, but the left torso 
and left leg numbness with worsening balance persisted. (JE 6:51) Surgery took place 
on March 22, 2024. (JE 6:57) Claimant remained in the hospital for post-surgical care 
and was discharged on the fourth day. (JE 6:60)  
On May 13, 2024, claimant was seen by Matthew A. Howard, M.D., in 
neurosurgery for follow-up. (JE 6:65) At that time, claimant had no neck pain but 
persistent left leg numbness with instability in the left lower extremity and right-sided 
hand weakness. (JE 6:65) A lumbar spine MRI was ordered. (JE 6:66) He was kept off 
work until May 27, 2024. (JE 6:64) The lumbar spine MRI showed multilevel 
degenerative changes with L5-S1 lateral recess stenosis. (JE 6:73)  
A July 30, 2024, EMG study was conducted at the recommendation of his 
physical therapist. The EMG showed right C8 radiculopathy, bilateral median 
neuropathy at the wrists, worse on the left than the right, and possible mild length-
dependent axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. (JE 6:69)  
Claimant was seen by Dr. Howard on August 12, 2024, for follow-up of the March 
2024 surgery and for the right hand weakness. (JE 6:74) He reported significant left leg 
pain that was burning in nature and radiated to the foot. With respect to the right hand, 
he reported weakness of the hand muscle but no weakness in the forearm or arm. (Id.) 
Dr. Howard felt that the C8 radiculopathy was the reason for the persistent right hand 
weakness and recommended an additional MRI and CT of the cervical spine. (JE 6:76)  
After the new MRI and CT were taken, claimant returned to Dr. Lee for review of 
those tests. (JE 6:78) At the October 14, 2024, visit, claimant reported feeling unsteady 
on his feet, fatigue in the left leg with burning pain. (Id.)  His right hand still felt weak and 
his neck was tender throughout the day. (Id.) On examination, it appeared there was 
some improvement in the right hand. (JE 6:79) Dr. Lee informed claimant that posterior 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 7 
 
decompression via laminoplasty was an option but claimant chose a more conservative 
route. (JE 6:79)  
On April 17, 2025, claimant returned for consult with Dr. Lee with left hand 
weakness and numbness, right hand tremors, persistent lower left extremity radicular 
pain into the toes. (JE 6:80) He had reduced range of motion in this left toes and right 
hand and in the neck, greater on the left than the right, along with dizziness. (Id.)   
At both the October 2024 visit and April 17, 2025, visit, claimant stated he could 
only alleviate symptoms by laying down and resting. (JE 6:78, 6:80) 
At the time of the hearing, claimant was still opting for conservative treatment 
through medications. The surgery helped his neck pain, but his leg still hurts and his 
hand is still weak. (Tr., p. 30) He testified that he tires easily and relies on the 
assistance of his coworkers and that he limits his overtime work to avoid worsening his 
condition.  (Tr., pp. 30, 37) 
He makes less money today because of economic issues at the company 
unrelated to the work injury. (Tr., p. 36)  
The medical experts in this case all agree claimant suffers from a serious spine 
condition. Joseph Chen, M.D., stated:  
Unfortunately, Mr. Coffman continues to have persistent symptoms of 
cervical myelopathy and/or cervical radiculopathy manifest as weakness 
and atrophy in his right-hand muscles. From my experience as a board-
certified physical medicine and rehabilitation physician who has treated 
many other similar patients with cervical myelopathy, it is quite likely that 
his condition will continue to progress over time due to the progressive 
nature of cervical myelopathy, initial presentation with waxing and waning 
signs of weakness, and his relatively young age of presentation.  
(DE A:12-13)  
Robert Rondinelli, M.D., opined: 
[I]n terms of his estimated disability because of same, he now perceives the 
following: His incident of injury and surgeries have directly resulted in the 
perception that he is 59% disabled with respect to upper extremity 
functioning for the purposes of ADLs, work, and recreational activities and 
similarly 69% disabled with respect to lower extremity functioning in relation 
to his work, recreational, and self-care activities.  These perceptions are 
proximately and directly causally associated with his incident of injury on 
January 19, 2024, and ultimately associated with and aggravated by his 
heavy material handling as a pipe fitter for the last 7 years of employment 
with Bridgestone Americas Tire Operations, LLC. 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 8 
 
(CE 1:10) (emphasis in original) 
Dr. Howard, Dr. Rondinelli, and Dr. Ries all agreed that claimant’s work 
exacerbated his underlying spinal condition leading to the need for surgery and post-
surgical problems. (CE 1:10-11, 3:48, 2:47)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Claimant seeks a finding that he is entitled to industrial disability benefits due to 
work injuries which aggravated a pre-existing condition to his spine.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The stipulated work injury in this case is January 19, 2024, when claimant 
slipped and fell on the ice. Defendants argue that the claimant is precluded from arguing 
a cumulative injury.  
Claimant’s petition alleged “personal injury resulting from work related activities.” 
(See Petition) Interrogatory No. 5 asked: 
In your Petition, you allege a January 19, 2024, injury to your right 
shoulder, neck and back.  Please specify (a) what area(s) of your body 
were injured in the accident, (b) what injuries you sustained, (c) what work 
task you were performing/doing when you were injured, and (d) how you 
sustained your injuries.  
The answer was:  
I was reporting to work and walking through the parking lot, when I hit ice, 
fell and landed on my upper back, shoulders, and neck. Also, my left leg 
did not want to work. I had a hard time getting up. There was no salt or 
sand on the ground.  
Additionally, my right shoulder, neck and back have worsened over time 
as I have performed work activities.  
(Ex. F:39) 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 9 
 
At hearing, the parties went over the hearing report and it was agreed that the 
parties disputed both the nature and the extent of the injury. Therefore, while the parties 
agree that a work injury occurred on January 19, 2024, the claimant’s statements prior 
to and during the hearing do not limit claimant to only a January 19, 2024, traumatic 
insult. In his petition he alleged personal injury resulting from work-related activities, and 
in his answers to interrogatories he specifically stated that his condition worsened over 
time.  
Iowa is a notice pleading state.  Defendants are still only entitled to fair notice of 
the nature of the claim against them.  Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.402(2)(a), 
applicable to this agency under 876 IAC 4.35, states as follows:  “Each averment of a 
pleading shall be simple, concise, and direct.  No technical forms of pleading are 
required.”  Iowa R. Civ. Proc 1.402(2)(a). Despite claimant not using “cumulative injury” 
in any of his pleadings, the words “worsened over time” are substantially the same. 
Further, claimant’s timely shared expert opinions both refer to injuries over time, and 
defendants were aware of this as their retained expert also addressed the cumulative 
injury theory.  
Therefore, it is found that claimant’s injury claim encompasses a cumulative 
injury allegation.  
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287-88 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-30 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985).  
While it was previously found that the December 17, 2023, work injury did not 
happen, the testimony surrounding that event is illuminating. Claimant believed that 
around December 2023, he knew his back, shoulder, and neck pain were related to 
work and purportedly related that to his supervisor a half dozen times. Accordingly, 
claimant knew or should have known that his cumulative injury was serious enough to 
have a permanent, adverse impact on his employment on or about December 17, 2023. 
While a work injury could not have happened on December 17, 2023, given that 
claimant was not working that date, he knew or should have known as of that date that 
he had a work injury serious enough to impact his employment. The manifestation date 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 10 
 
in this matter is December 17, 2023. The latest date upon which the manifestation of the 
injury occurred would have been January 24, 2024, when claimant took leave from 
work.  
The next issue is whether proper notice was given. Defendants aver that they did 
not have notice claimant sustained a cumulative work-related injury or a work injury to 
the head, right shoulder, left shoulder, neck, low back, arms, or leg injuries.  
Notice is an affirmative defense which places the burden of proof on defendants 
to prove claimant did not provide notice to the defendant employer within the ninety-day 
period allotted by Iowa Code section 85.23.  
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980).   
Claimant testified that he gave notice to his direct supervisor both the day 
following the December 17, 2023, work incident as well as after the January 19, 2024, 
incident. There was a factual dispute over whether the December 17, 2023, incident at 
work occurred and it was resolved against claimant. However, defendants were on 
notice as of January 18, 2024, that claimant had a serious back condition according to 
the testimony of Thomas Cox, a supervisor of claimant’s supervisors. Mr. Cox observed 
claimant using his telephone on the plant floor. This was forbidden, and when Mr. Cox 
inquired from claimant as to the reason for this violation, Mr. Cox was informed that 
claimant was in severe pain and was waiting for a return call from his neurologist. 
Further, claimant reported a slip and fall on January 19, 2024, to Mr. Goshorn, the 
defendants’ agent responsible for defendant employer’s medical department. Mr. 
Goshorn did not examine claimant nor send claimant for medical care; however, 
claimant admitted that he did not report any injuries. Mr. Goshorn did not inquire as to 
the source of claimant’s pain either.  
Mr. Cox was aware claimant suffered an injury, but undertook no investigation as 
to whether the injuries were work related. Mr. Goshorn was aware an incident took 
place but made no inquiry as to whether the incident led to a work-related injury. 
Claimant left overtime early during the holidays due to pain. He brought a medical 
excuse to HR in January 2024, and relayed to the HR person that he had a rotator cuff 
injury.  
Claimant himself did not know the cause of his body pains, particularly in his 
shoulder, neck, and back. (Tr., p. 57)  He did not attribute it to his work, nor did he alert 
his employer that he was injured at work. 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 11 
 
However, claimant went on leave as of January 24, 2024, and did not return until 
May 28, 2024. At no time did the defendants make an inquiry as to whether claimant 
was off work due to a work-related injury.  
Claimant argues that a reasonable person in a supervisory role would likely 
understand that an individual who is having conversations with their neurologist about 
their spine, then a few days later is no longer present at work for several months, is 
suffering with a significant injury. Claimant cites University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
v. Waters, 674 N.W.2d 92 (Iowa 2004) in support of this where the Supreme Court 
found that discovery should have informed the defendant employer’s attorneys that a 
cumulative injury was a possibility. University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics v. Waters, 
674 N.W.2d at 98. The present case is factually distinct from Waters. No discovery had 
taken place prior to the expiration of the notice period nor had claimant requested to be 
placed in a different kind of work to avoid injury as the worker did in Waters. (Id.)   
Defendants knew or should have known claimant was seeing a neurologist for 
severe pain. Defendants knew or should have known claimant sustained a slip and fall 
at work but had no injuries. They knew or should have known he was absent from work 
for months at a time. Together, these three factual elements do not provide defendants 
with sufficient information upon which to impose a notice obligation. A reasonable 
manager in defendants’ position is not required to assume that every extended medical 
absence is due to a work-related injury, particularly when the employee denied any 
injuries just days before.  
The defendants did not receive formal notice of a work-related injury until May 
2024 when claimant filed his petition, which is beyond the 90 days from the date of 
manifestation whether the date was December 17, 2023 or January 24, 2024.  
Because defendants met their burden of proof regarding lack of notice, claimant’s 
claim must fail.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing.  
All parties shall bear their own costs with the hearing transcript to be apportioned 
one-half to claimant and one-half to defendant employer and insurer.  
Signed and filed this __8th __ day of September, 2025. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

COFFMAN V. BRIDGESTONE AMERICAS TIRE OPERATIONS, LLC 
Page 12 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nathaniel Boulton (via WCES) 
 
Bryan Hatch (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
