Case Number: 20001051.08
Case Title:  DENEMARK, BRIAN V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Denemark Brian-20001051.08dJRD.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
BRIAN DENEMARK, 
  : 
 
 
  :                   File No. 20001051.08 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :             ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
 
  :                         DECISION 
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
  :                          
COMPANY, 
  :  
 
 
  : 
 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :                     Head Note: 2701 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
On April 22, 2025, the claimant filed a petition for alternate medical care pursuant 
to Iowa Code 85.27(4) and 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48. The defendant filed an 
answer admitting liability for injuries to the claimant’s left arm and the claimant’s mental 
health sequela.   
 
The undersigned presided over the hearing held electronically and recorded 
digitally on May 1, 2025. That recording constitutes the official record of the proceeding 
pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.48(12). The claimant participated 
personally and through his attorney, Dennis Currell. The defendant participated through 
their attorney, Peter Thill. Also present was Julie Schindler, a nurse case manager 
(“NCM”) from Genex.     
 
Prior to the hearing, the claimant submitted ten pages of exhibits, marked as 
Exhibits 1-6. The defendant submitted ten pages of exhibits, marked as Exhibits A-B.  
All of the exhibits were admitted with no objection. The undersigned also took 
administrative notice of an arbitration decision and subsequent appeal decision in File 
No’s. 20001051.05 and 22701085.01.    
 
 
On July 21, 2023, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, this decision constitutes final agency action, and there is no appeal to 
the commissioner. Judicial review in a district court pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 17A 
is the avenue for an appeal. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The issues under consideration were: 
 
1. Whether the defendant abandoned care;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-05  13:09:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether the claimant should be allowed to self-direct care for his  
 
psychological injury; and, 
 
3. Whether the defendants should be ordered to provide care by a self-selected  
 
provider. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 
Brian Denemark is the claimant in this matter. (Testimony). An arbitration hearing 
took place in this matter in December of 2023. Sometime after the arbitration hearing 
and prior to the issuance of the arbitration decision, Mr. Denemark moved from the 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa, area to the Omaha, Nebraska, area. (Testimony). He considered 
himself a permanent resident of Nebraska around March of 2024. (Testimony). He 
moved there to take a job. (Testimony).   
 
 
At two points in 2024, Mr. Denemark sought pain management care at St. Luke’s 
in the Cedar Rapids, Iowa, area. (Testimony). There are no records from these visits in 
the record for this alternate care proceeding.   
 
On May 31, 2024, the undersigned issued an arbitration decision. In that 
decision, the parties stipulated that the claimant’s left upper extremity TFCC tear arose 
out of, and in the course of his employment on December 16, 2019. The decision found 
that Mr. Denemark also sustained a mental health sequela injury that arose out of, and 
in the course of, his employment due to his left wrist TFCC injury. The decision also 
found that the defendant had not abandoned the claimant’s medical care regarding his 
left wrist, and that the defendant should provide the claimant with certain psychiatric 
care.   
 
 
On June 17, 2024, the defendant filed a notice of intra-agency appeal, appealing 
the decision that the claimant sustained a permanent and material aggravation of his 
mental health condition, among other issues. The claimant appealed whether a specific 
medical provider should be an authorized provider for purposes of care for his left wrist.  
  
 
In July of 2024, Mr. Denemark sought care on his own volition with a “Dr. 
Franco.” (Testimony). Dr. Franco provided him with a referral to Zachary Gustin, M.D. 
for treatment of his left wrist complaints. (Testimony).   
 
 
Claimant’s counsel sent defendant’s counsel a letter on September 6, 2024. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1). In the letter, claimant’s counsel indicated that Mr. Denemark 
continued to experience pain limiting his ability to work. (CE 1:1). Counsel noted that no 
treatment was offered since the entry of the arbitration decision. (CE 1:1). Claimant’s 
counsel indicated that the letter represented “our dissatisfaction with ADM/ESIS’s 
refusal to monitor his condition and/or to offer any care for his injury. He is presently in 
Omaha, Nebraska.” (CE 1:1). Claimant’s counsel demanded that defendant outline their 
position “prior to the end of business today…” in order to avoid their filing an alternate 
medical care petition. (CE 1:1).   

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 3 
 
 
At 1:55 p.m. on September 6, 2024, defendant’s counsel emailed claimant’s 
counsel acknowledging receipt of his letter. (Defendant’s Exhibit A:2). Defendant’s 
counsel inquired, “[i]s Brian looking for ADM to establish a new authorized provider for 
his left wrist injury of 12/16/19?” (DE A:2).   
 
 
At 2:01 p.m. on September 6, 2024, claimant’s counsel replied to defendant’s 
counsel indicating that Mr. Denemark was in need of medical care “for the on-going 
neuropathy he’s continued to experience since his third unsuccessful surgery at UIHC 
for his TFCC tear.” (DE A:2). Claimant’s counsel then asked “[w]hat care, if any, has the 
adjuster arranged in that regard since the decision?” (DE A:2).   
 
 
Defendant’s counsel replied to claimant’s counsel on September 6, 2024, at 2:06 
p.m., indicating that he would review the situation with his client and provide options for 
care near Mr. Denemark’s new residence in Omaha, Nebraska. (DE A:1). Defendant’s 
counsel then asked five questions: 
 
(1) Notwithstanding your letter received today, when did you or Mr. Denemark 
last request authorized medical care for his 12/16/19 injury from me, ADM 
or ESIS? 
(2) When did he move to Nebraska? 
(3) What is his current address? 
(4) Where has he been employed since our arbitration hearing? 
(5) Where has he sought treatment since our arbitration hearing? 
 
(DE A:1) 
 
 
Defendant’s counsel emailed claimant’s counsel at 1:16 p.m. on September 12, 
2024, noting, “I have learned that your client did not reach out to ESIS directly to either 
advise of his move to NE or to request medical care.” (DE A:3). Defendant’s counsel 
then reiterated four of his five questions from his September 6, 2024, email to claimant’s 
counsel. (DE A:3). It is unclear as to claimant’s counsel’s response to these questions.   
 
On September 12, 2024, at 1:50 p.m., defendant’s counsel emailed claimant’s 
counsel asking: “[w]hat medical care was there to be monitored?” (CE 2:2). Claimant’s 
counsel responded at 2:15 p.m., indicating: 
 
I agree that we may have a disconnect here. I understood that ADM/ESIS 
accepted Mr. Denemark’s TFCC tear as work-related.  
 
Is there a determination in the Arbitration decision saying that it was not work 
related? 
 
Take a look at page 68 in the attached Arb Decision. 
 
As such ADM/ESIS are responsible for continued care for that injury and its 
sequela for Mr. Denemark’s life.   

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 4 
 
 
If you’ve authority stating otherwise please share it for my review.  
 
I will certainly review it. 
 
In the meantime please confirm whether or not the adjuster is furnishing medical 
care for Mr. Denemark’s TFCC tear and its sequela. 
 
(CE 2:2) 
 
 
At some time in 2024, Mr. Denemark used his personal health insurance in order 
to obtain an appointment for psychiatric care. (Testimony). He had one visit with a 
psychiatric provider, but has not sought care for that condition since that visit. 
(Testimony). He had not tried to schedule another appointment with that provider as of 
the alternate care hearing. (Testimony).   
 
 
Defendant’s counsel sent a letter to claimant’s counsel on January 10, 2025, 
noting that Mr. Denemark was scheduled for a telehealth visit with Dr. Shirley Pospisil 
on January 27, 2025, at 1:30 p.m., in response to a request for medical care. (DE A:4).  
Defendant’s counsel noted that the examination would focus on the left wrist and arm 
condition related to the December 16, 2019, work injury. (DE A:4).   
 
 
On January 27, 2025, Mr. Denemark visited with Shirley Pospisil, M.D., at St. 
Luke’s Work Well Solutions via TeleHealth. (CE 3:3-4). She noted some diagnoses from 
an independent medical examination from “Dr. Stoken.” (CE 3:3). Dr. Pospisil found that 
Mr. Denemark was appropriately taking Naltraxone and “appropriate pain meds.” (CE 
3:3). Mr. Denemark was to have a Ketamine infusion and a spinal cord stimulator, but 
both of these were not completed. (CE 3:3). Mr. Denemark indicated that he remained 
in a great deal of pain, and that he was previously referred to a pain program in Cedar 
Rapids, but that he “did not pass to get into the group program.” (CE 3:3). Dr. Pospisil 
made passing mention of a diagnosis of chronic regional pain syndrome (“CRPS”). (CE 
3:3). Dr. Pospisil diagnosed Mr. Denemark with pain and effusion in his left wrist. (CE 
3:3). The doctor discussed physical or occupational therapy as well as pain programs 
with psychologists. (CE 3:4). Mr. Denemark told Dr. Pospisil that he had an appointment 
with someone “local” to Omaha, Nebraska, but that he did not know for sure when that 
was or the nature of the doctor’s specialty. (CE 3:4). Mr. Denemark indicated that, since 
this visit was conducted via TeleHealth, Dr. Pospisil was unable to conduct a physical 
examination of his condition. (Testimony).   
 
 
Mr. Denemark visited Zachary Gustin, M.D., on February 6, 2025. (CE 4:6; DE 
B:1-2). Dr. Gustin reviewed Mr. Denemark’s substantial medical history, noting his 
several surgeries through his discharge from care on January 31, 2023. (DE B:1-2). He 
also noted that Mr. Denemark was a candidate for a spinal cord stimulator and an 
outpatient pain management program, but that he was discharged from this due to not 
being an appropriate candidate. (DE B:2). Mr. Denemark complained of left wrist pain 
with crackling, pressure and crepitus. (DE B:2). He noted some benefit from his 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 5 
 
prescribed medications. (DE B:2). Dr. Gustin measured the range of motion in Mr. 
Denemark’s left wrist. (CE 4:6). Dr. Gustin also documented that there was no change 
to the coloration of Mr. Denemark’s skin in his left wrist, nor was there obvious swelling. 
(CE 4:6). Dr. Gustin documented Mr. Denemark to have a positive TFCC grind test and 
excessive laxity in the DRUJ. (CE 4:6). Dr. Gustin diagnosed Mr. Denemark with a 
TFCC tear of the left wrist, noting his chronic left wrist pain, numbness, and tingling.  
(CE 4:6). He noted “[c]ould be ongoing chronic left TFCC tear.” (CE 4:6). He ordered left 
wrist x-rays and an updated left wrist MRI. (CE 4:6). He also referred Mr. Denemark to 
occupational therapy for “hand intrinsic strengthening, skin desensitization therapy 
including fluidotherapy, as well as evaluation for custom fitted wrist splint.” (CE 4:6). Mr. 
Denemark was pleased with the care offered by Dr. Gustin, and felt that it was more 
beneficial than that offered by Dr. Pospisil. (Testimony).   
 
 
An MRI of Mr. Denemark’s left wrist was performed on February 19, 2025. (CE 
5:7). The MRI resulted in the following impression: 
 
1. No appreciable tear of the triangular fibrocartilage. 
2. Mild distal extensor carpi ulnaris tendinopathy. T1 hypointense tissue is also 
notes surrounding the extensor carpi ulnaris at the level of the distal ulna 
concerning for fibrosis. 
3. Small central perforation of the scapholunate ligament. 
 
(CE 5:7) 
 
Defendant’s counsel wrote a letter to claimant’s counsel on February 27, 2025, 
inquiring as to where Mr. Denemark sought treatment on February 6, 2025, as the visit 
was not authorized by the defendant. (DE A:5). Defendant’s counsel reiterated that Dr. 
Pospisil was Mr. Denemark’s authorized treating provider at the time, and that Mr. 
Denemark was free to call Dr. Pospisil’s clinic in order to arrange an appointment if he 
needed care. (DE A:5).   
 
 
On February 27, 2025, Dr. Pospisil drafted a letter to defendant’s counsel 
following their review of the arbitration decision issued on May 31, 2024. (CE 3:5). Dr. 
Pospisil noted that she assumed that Mr. Denemark received an accurate diagnosis of 
CRPS, and was not aware of my arbitration decision indicating that he failed to prove 
that he suffered from CRPS. (CE 3:5). Since it was determined that he did not have 
CRPS, Dr. Pospisil rescinded her recommendation of a ketamine infusion, a topical 
ketamine compound, or physical therapy or occupational therapy to treat CRPS. (CE 
3:5). Thus, Dr. Pospisil recommended unsupervised treatment, such as a home 
exercise program or stretching for “neurogenic left upper extremity pain.” (CE 3:5).   
 
 
On March 5, 2025, Mr. Denemark visited with Bridget Frazer, PA-C, for his 
ongoing complaints of left wrist pain. (DE B:3-5). Mr. Denemark continued to stretch 
before work, but still experienced some aggravation of his pain. (DE B:3). He rated his 
pain between 4 and 9 out of 10. (DE B:3). Ms. Frazer noted that Mr. Denemark had a 
positive TFCC grind test with “a little excessive laxity in the DRUJ.” (DE B:4). Ms. Frazer 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 6 
 
reviewed the results of the MRI. (DE B:4). She noted the same diagnosis as Dr. Gustin. 
(DE B:4). She opined that Mr. Denemark located some of his pain in the area of the 
perforated scapholunate ligament seen on the MRI, as well as the area of his tendinitis 
in his extensor carpi ulnaris. (DE B:4). Ms. Frazer made no changes to the previously 
prescribed pain medications, and prescribed occupational therapy and a fitted wrist 
splint. (DE B:5). She also recommended a referral to Dr. Izadi for evaluation of the 
central perforation of the scapholunate ligament. (DE B:5).   
 
 
Mr. Denemark had an occupational therapy evaluation on March 17, 2025. (CE 
6:8-10). Mr. Denemark told the therapist that he avoided certain activities due to his left 
wrist pain. (CE 6:8). He continued to describe numbness and tingling in his left upper 
extremity. (CE 6:8). His wrist pain caused him significant difficulties with sleeping. (CE 
6:8). He wore a wrist widget to help support his wrist. (CE 6:8). Dr. Gustin again 
documented range of motion measurements and strength measurements. (CE 6:8-9).  
Occupational therapy was provided. (CE 6:9-10). Mr. Denemark was set to continue 
occupational therapy one to two times per week for eight weeks. (CE 6:10). As of the 
time of the alternate care hearing, Mr. Denemark attended about six sessions of 
occupational therapy. (Testimony). He had one or two more sessions of occupational 
therapy, and wished to continue. (Testimony).   
 
On April 16, 2025, the Commissioner issued an appeal decision. The 
Commissioner affirmed portions of the arbitration decision, including that the claimant 
sustained a permanent and material aggravation of his mental health condition. The 
Commissioner also noted that, “[d]efendant provided reasonable and appropriate 
medical care for claimant’s left wrist. If additional treatment is needed for the left wrist, 
defendant must provide that related medical treatment but retains the right to select the 
authorized medical provider.”   
 
In late April of 2025, the defendant retained Julie Schindler, a NCM employed by 
Genex. (Testimony). Ms. Schindler immediately began attempting to organize care for 
Mr. Denemark. (Testimony). It was also around this time that Dr. Gustin, Dr. Izadi and 
occupational therapy ordered by Dr. Gustin, was determined to be authorized treatment.  
(Testimony). Ms. Schindler also identified several psychiatric providers for Mr. 
Denemark. (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Denemark testified that he was not offered any care by the defendant 
between the arbitration hearing and the issuance of the arbitration decision. 
(Testimony). He was not provided a phone number to request care, nor was he issued 
an insurance card to seek care. (Testimony). However, he testified that he also never 
reached out to the defendant to request additional medical care until claimant’s 
counsel’s letter in September of 2024. (Testimony).   
 
 
At the outset of the alternate care hearing, counsel for the defendant confirmed 
that Dr. Gustin was now an authorized treating provider. They further affirmed that Dr. 
Izali is also an authorized provider. However, they noted that Dr. Izadi wished to review 
certain records prior to seeing Mr. Denemark. (Testimony). Ms. Schindler was in the 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 7 
 
process of retrieving records to send to Dr. Izadi. (Testimony). It was noted that, if Dr. 
Izadi was unwilling to see Mr. Denemark, the defendant would find an alternative 
provider. Additionally, the defendant indicated that they no longer contested whether the 
claimant’s mental health sequela was a disputed issue. Since the filing of the alternate 
care petition, the defendant identified two possible providers to treat Mr. Denemark for 
his mental health needs. Mr. Denemark was willing to accept in person care from one of 
the providers identified by the defendant. (Testimony). However, Mr. Denemark still 
requested an order to self-direct his care, as he felt that the defendant took no action to 
organize medical care for him until he filed an alternate care petition. (Testimony).   
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obligated to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
Iowa Code 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 
1997).   
 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.”  Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)).  “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), 
our legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the 
competing interests of their employers.”  Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing Bell 
Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 202, 207; IBP, Inc. v. Harker, 633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 
2001)).   
 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27; Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975). An employer’s right to select 
the provider of medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to 
determine how an injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other 
matters of professional medical judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 8 
 
866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 19, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary 
to diagnose the condition, and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical 
judgment of its own treating physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-
Reopening Decision, June 17, 1986).   
 
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.” Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) (emphasis in original). Such 
employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  
More specifically in Long, the court noted that “the employer’s obligation under the 
statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.” Long v. Roberts 
Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 128 (Iowa 1995).   
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care - 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long, 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). More specifically in Long, 
the court noted that “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the question of 
reasonable necessity, not desirability.” Long, 528 N.W.2d at 128.   
 
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties 
cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application 
and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order the care.”  Id.  
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long, 528 
N.W.2d at 123; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436. As the party seeking 
relief in the form of alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the 
authorized care is unreasonable. Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Pirelli-
Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436. Because “the employer’s obligation under the 
statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured 
employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough 
to find such care unreasonable. Id. However, if substantial evidence exists that the care 
authorized by the employer was ineffective, it may be found that the care was not 
reasonable. Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 437.   
 
The claimant argues that the defendant failed to offer care, thus effectively 
abandoning the claimant’s care. The defendant argues that they did not abandon the 
claimant’s care. 
 
This is a difficult question to assess in this case. It appears that both parties bear 
fault for the claimant not receiving care during the period in question. The defendant did 
not affirmatively offer care in this case following the arbitration decision. However, the 
claimant also did not request care from the defendant until September of 2024, when 
claimant’s counsel reached out to the defendant making such a request. During the 
intervening time period, the claimant moved from Iowa to Nebraska and never informed 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 9 
 
the defendant. There is also no evidence that he informed any of his providers in Iowa.  
During this time, claimant was represented by counsel. While he testified that he was 
provided with no number to call or contact from the defendant, there is no evidence that 
claimant reached out to his own counsel to apprise him of his ongoing situation, or that 
his counsel reached out to the defendant to request care until September of 2024.  
However, I am concerned by the actions of the defendant following the September of 
2024 letter from claimant’s counsel. The defendant attempted to gather information as 
to what care the claimant requested; however, it was not until January of 2025 that an 
appointment was arranged for Mr. Denemark. This kind of delay is unacceptable, but I 
do not find that this rises to an abandonment of care. 
 
The claimant argues that the defendant has an affirmative duty to monitor the 
claimant’s care, and in failing to do so in this case abandoned the claimant’s care. The 
claimant cites to dicta from a 1994 alternate care decision, Mayes v. French & Hecht, 
1994 WL 16034874 (Alt. Care. 1994), and Thatcher v. Norrell Temporary Services, 
2003 WL 22470155 (Arb. 2003), in support of this notion. Neither of these cases are 
binding on this deputy, as they represent arbitration decisions. Both of these cases cite 
to Zimmerman v. L.L. Plumbing Co., 2 Iowa Indus. Comm. Rep. 462 (Iowa 1982).  
However, despite extensive research, the undersigned could not find this case in order 
to determine its current precedential value. The concept of a duty to monitor care is 
cited favorably in Ramirez-Trujillo, wherein the Iowa Supreme Court stated, “[w]ith the 
power to choose the care comes the responsibility to monitor the care for the purpose of 
determining when further care will no longer be authorized.” Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 
772.   
 
The problem with the claimant’s argument here is that it is unclear from the 
record precisely what care the claimant sought during the intervening time period from 
the conclusion of the arbitration hearing to the time claimant’s counsel sent a letter to 
the defendant in September of 2024 that the defendant was obligated to monitor. If 
there is no care for the defendant to monitor, or the defendant did not authorize care 
due to a denial in liability (i.e. in this case the defendants denied compensability for the 
claimant’s mental health issues), it is difficult for the undersigned to imagine a situation 
in which the defendant would be obligated to continually monitor the claimant’s care (or 
lack thereof) wherein the duty to monitor would attach. It is unreasonable for a 
defendant to be expected to be clairvoyant in knowing whether the claimant is seeking 
care. This is especially true in this case where the claimant has admitted to never 
requesting care until September of 2024, moving out of state without informing the 
defendant in March of 2024, and also has an admitted history of failing to forward mail 
or account for an address change.1  The record in this proceeding simply lacks the 
evidence to show that the defendant had any medical care to monitor to which to attach 
the duty to monitor.   
 
As to the defendant’s failure to offer care for the claimant’s psychiatric condition, I 
find that the defendant’s actions were reasonable. This issue was fairly debatable 
                                                 
1 See Arbitration Decision, pg. 74. 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 10 
 
through the filing of the Commissioner’s Appeal Decision. The defendant in this case 
was not obligated to provide care for a denied condition until exhausting their appeals.  
Additionally, during the time in question, the claimant attempted to establish care, which 
is allowed under the law. He did not fully establish a patient relationship with a provider, 
having only seen one provider on one occasion. He also never sought additional care.  
The defendant is currently seeking appointments for treatment of the claimant’s mental 
health condition. This is reasonable considering the circumstances of the case to date.  
The defendant shall continue to promptly undertake efforts to arrange for in-person 
mental health care treatment for the claimant pursuant to my order in the Arbitration 
Decision and the Commissioner’s order in the Appeal Decision. 
 
Filing of the alternate care petition in this matter seems to have finally awakened 
the defendant to provide care. In the future, this should not be the case, and I caution 
the defendant about failing to monitor Mr. Denemark’s medical care going forward. 
Failing to promptly authorize or monitor Mr. Denemark’s care in the future may result in 
a decision that the defendant abandoned his care, or further sanction pursuant to 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.36. The care sought by Mr. Denemark during the 
intervening periods of time discussed above was more beneficial than any care offered 
by the defendant, especially the care offered by Dr. Pospisil. Therefore, Drs. Gustin and 
Izadi are now deemed authorized providers. 
 
The defendant has acknowledged that Dr. Gustin is an authorized provider. They 
authorized occupational therapy, and shall continue to do so should Dr. Gustin or Dr. 
Izadi continue to recommend such treatment. They also have authorized a referral to 
Dr. Izadi, as recommended by Dr. Gustin’s office. Should Dr. Izadi refuse to take Mr. 
Denemark as a patient, the defendant shall find a provider of equivalent specialty to Dr. 
Iazdi in order to provide treatment to Mr. Denemark.   
 
The defendant should now understand their duty to monitor the claimant’s care 
with Drs. Gustin and Izadi, as well as any associated care recommended by these 
authorized providers. Finally, the defendant shall not return Mr. Denemark to Dr. 
Pospisil, unless Mr. Denemark again permanently resides in the Cedar Rapids, Iowa, 
area. Care shall be provided in the Omaha, Nebraska area, as it would be entirely 
unreasonable to return Mr. Denemark to the Cedar Rapids, Iowa area for treatment due 
to its distance from his current residence. 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
 
1. The claimant’s petition for alternate care is granted in part, and denied in part: 
  
a. Drs. Gustin and Izadi are deemed authorized treating providers. 
 
b. The defendant shall authorize care with Drs. Gustin and Izadi, including 
their recommendations for treatment for Mr. Denemark’s left wrist 
condition. 
 

DENEMARK V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO. 
Page 11 
 
c. Should Dr. Izadi decline to take Mr. Denemark as a patient, the defendant 
shall immediately identify and authorize care with an equivalent provider. 
 
d. The defendant shall promptly authorize in-person psychiatric care 
pursuant to the order in the Arbitration Decision and this order. 
 
e. The claimant shall not be permitted to self-direct their care. 
 
Signed and filed this    5th    day of May, 2025. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dennis Currell (via WCES) 
Peter J. Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
