Case Number: 20001364.01
Case Title:  HUNTER, LINDIE V. SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hunter Lindie-1656860.01d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LINDIE M. HUNTER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       File No. 1656860.01  
LAN SILVER PINES, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AMERICAN COMPENSATION 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
____________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LINDIE HUNTER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 File No. 20700082.01 
SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :          Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 1402.40  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
1803, 2501, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Claimant Lindie Hunter filed a petition in arbitration, File Number 1656860.01 on 
January 24, 2020, alleging she sustained injuries to her neck, back, right leg and body 
as a whole while working for Defendant Lan Silver Pines (“Silver Pines”) on July 18, 
2018.  Silver Pines, and its insurer, Defendant American Compensation Insurance 
Company (“American Compensation”) filed an answer on February 6, 2020, admitting 
Hunter sustained back injury, but denying she sustained any other injuries.  On January 
24, 2020, Hunter filed a second petition in arbitration, File Number 20700082.01, 
alleging she sustained an injury to her back and body as a whole while working for 
Defendant Senior Housing Management (“Senior Housing”) on October 15, 2018.  On  
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jul-07  12:46:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 2 
February 11, 2020, Senior Housing and its insurer, Defendant West Bend Mutual 
Insurance Company (“West Bend”), filed an answer denying Hunter sustained a work 
injury.     
An arbitration hearing was held via CourtCall video conference on January 14, 
2021.  Attorney Thomas Wertz represented Hunter.  Hunter appeared and testified.  
Attorney Jason Kidd represented Silver Pines and American Compensation.  Attorney 
James Ballard represented Senior Housing and West Bend.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 1 
through 9, and Exhibits 1 through 7, A through F, and AA were admitted into the record.  
The parties submitted hearing reports, listing stipulations and issues to be decided.  
Silver Pines, American Compensation, Senior Housing, and West Bend waived all 
affirmative defenses.   
The record was held open through February 22, 2021, for the receipt of post-
hearing briefs.  The briefs were received and the record was closed.  In her post-
hearing brief, Hunter withdrew her claims for temporary benefits and penalty benefits 
from Senior Housing and West Bend for File Number 20700082.01. 
FILE NUMBER 1656860.01 
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Silver Pines and 
Hunter at the time of the alleged injury.   
2. 
Hunter sustained an injury on July 18, 2018, which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment with Silver Pines.   
3. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute.   
4. 
If the alleged injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are awarded, is July 
23, 2019. 
5. 
At the time of the alleged injury, Hunter’s gross earnings were $961.54 per 
week, she was single and entitled to five exemptions, and the parties believe the weekly 
rate is $630.82.   
6. 
Prior to the hearing, Hunter was paid 3.57 weeks of temporary total 
disability benefits from October 15, 2018 through October 24, 2018 and January 13, 
2019 through January 27, 2019, at the rate of $592.85 per week, for a total of 
$2,117.33, and she was paid an additional 11.43 weeks of temporary partial disability 
benefits from October 25, 2018 through January 12, 2019, at various rates, for a total of 
$3,790.92. 
7. 
Costs have been paid. 
 
 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 3 
ISSUES 
1. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
2. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of permanent disability? 
3. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the nature 
of the disability? 
4. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the extent of 
disability? 
5. 
Is Hunter entitled to payment of medical expenses set forth in Exhibit 5? 
6. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FILE NUMBER 20700082.01 
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Silver Pines and 
Hunter at the time of the alleged injury.   
2. 
At the time of the alleged injury, Hunter’s gross earnings were $961.54 per 
week, she was single and entitled to five exemptions, and the parties believe the weekly 
rate is $630.82.   
3. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute. 
4. 
Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
1. 
Did Hunter sustain an injury, which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment with Silver Pines on October 15, 2018? 
2. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
3. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of permanent disability? 
4. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the nature 
of the disability? 
5. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the extent of 
disability? 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 4 
6. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits?   
7. 
Is Hunter entitled to payment of medical expenses set forth in Exhibit 5? 
8. 
Is Hunter entitled to costs related to the requests for admission? 
9. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Hunter lives in Cedar Rapids with her children.  (Exhibit D, page 10)  Hunter 
graduated from high school in 1993.  (Ex. D, p. 9)  In 1993, Hunter obtained a nursing 
assistant certification and earned an associate of science degree in 2001.  (Exs. D, p. 9; 
E, p. 29; Transcript, p. 12)  In 2011, Hunter completed a practical nursing program at a 
community college and became a licensed practical nurse (“LPN”).  (Exs. D, p. 9; E, p. 
29; Tr., p. 12)  At the time of the hearing Hunter was forty-six.  (Tr., p. 12)   
Hunter worked as a lead pharmacy technician from December 1997 through 
February 2002, a certified pharmacy technician from February 2003 through August 
2004, and as a pharmacy technician from October 2004 through September 2006.  (Ex. 
E, p. 29)  In 2004 she also worked as a pharmacy technician instructor.  (Ex. E, p. 29)  
Hunter worked as a sales agent from September 2007 through December 2009, and as 
an independent contractor/phone operator from May 2008 through December 2009.  
(Ex. E, p. 29)   
From 2012 through 2015, Hunter worked as a charge nurse and provided direct 
patient care.  (Ex. E, pp. 28-29)  As a nurse Hunter used Microsoft office products.  
Hunter used Microsoft office products for both employers.  (Ex. E, p. 29)   
Hunter worked as a Care Manager for BrightStar Care in Fayetteville, Arkansas, 
from May 2015 through November 2017, coordinating care, care plan management, and 
implementing strategies for clients with dementia, intellectual disabilities, and mental 
illness to maintain staying in their homes.  (Ex. E, p. 28)  Hunter used a desktop 
computer and Microsoft Office products.  (Ex. E, p. 28)   
While working as a nurse, Hunter also worked for Jackson-Hewitt preparing 
taxes from 2007 through 2019.  (Ex. E, p. 29)  From 2011 through April 2014, worked as 
a tax preparer and store supervisor, and as a multi-unit supervisor from December 14, 
2014 through April 2019.  (Ex. E, p. 29)   
Hunter has a history of headaches, neck pain, mid back pain, low back pain, and 
fibromyalgia preceding the alleged injuries in these cases.  Hunter testified she was 
diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 1994 and she continues to experience problems with it 
occasionally.  (Tr., pp. 39, 54)  Hunter reported her fibromyalgia feels like muscle 
tension throughout her body and causes her to be tired and changes her mood.  (Tr., 
pp. 39-40)  Hunter experiences occasional flare-ups of fibromyalgia and she seeks 
chiropractic treatment, takes Tylenol or ibuprofen, and uses Biofreeze to combat her 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 5 
flare-ups.  (Tr., p. 40)  At the time of the hearing she was not taking any prescription 
medication for fibromyalgia.  (Tr., p. 40)   
On May 14, 2015, Hunter attended a chiropractic appointment with David 
Strickler, D.C, reporting she had been diagnosed with fibromyalgia and complaining of 
headaches, neck pain, mid back pain, and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 1)  Hunter described 
she was experiencing stiffness, and dull, aching, burning, and periodic throbbing 
sensations in all regions, noting excessive motion, heat therapy, and caffeine tended to 
increase her discomfort.  (JE 1, p. 1)  On exam, Dr. Strickler noted Hunter had 
decreased range of motion at C6, T5, L5, and decreased fluid motion of the right SI joint 
and he performed a chiropractic manipulation.  (JE 1, pp. 1-2)  Hunter returned to Dr. 
Strickler on May 18, 2015 and May 21, 2015, reporting she was feeling much better 
after treatment both days.  (JE 1, pp. 3-4)    
During an appointment with Dr. Strickler on October 28, 2015, Hunter reported 
experiencing elevated lumbosacral pain and groin pain for the last 24 hours.  (JE 1, p. 
5)  During her next appointment, Hunter reported improvement in her low back pain.  
(JE 1, p. 6)  Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler on November 3, 2015, complaining of 
tenderness in the left SI joint, and hypersensitivity during the range of motion evaluation 
of the cervical region.  (JE 1, p. 7)  Hunter attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Strickler on November 10, 2015, complaining of lumbosacral pain, thoracic pain, and 
cervical discomfort.  (JE 1, p. 8)  On December 21, 2015, Hunter returned to Dr. 
Strickler complaining of elevated neck and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 9)  She returned on 
February 23, 2016, complaining of neck, mid back, and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 10)  
During an appointment on March 1, 2016, Hunter reported minimal complaints 
regarding her mid back and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 11)   
On May 20, 2016, Hunter was involved in an automobile accident when she was 
rear-ended at a stoplight when she was twenty-nine weeks pregnant.  (Ex. D, p. 20; Tr., 
p. 38)  Hunter sought emergency and chiropractic treatment and filed a lawsuit against 
the driver.  (Tr., pp. 28, 38-39)  Hunter complained of ongoing low back pain from her 
pregnancy with periodic radiation into her right gluteal and hamstring musculature 
following the motor vehicle accident during an appointment with Dr. Strickler on June 6, 
2016.  (JE 1, p. 12)  During an appointment on June 10, 2016, Hunter relayed her low 
back pain had improved and she had no radicular symptoms into her lower right 
extremity.  (JE 1, p. 14)  Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler on June 15, 2016, complaining 
of soreness and achiness in the cervical and upper dorsal regions, reporting her range 
of motion and ability to sleep had improved.  (JE 1, p. 15)  During an appointment on 
June 17, 2016, Hunter reported continued improvements in her back and low back pain.  
(JE 1, p. 15)   
On June 21, 2016, Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler, complaining of mildly 
elevated neck and low back pain upon waking, decreased range of motion in her 
cervical region with soreness and achiness.  (JE 1, p. 16)  During appointments on June 
23, 2016 and June 27, 2016, Hunter reported improvement with her neck and low back 
pain.  (JE 1, p. 17)  When she returned on June 30, 2016, she reported slightly elevated 
neck and mid back pain due to repetitive coughing.  (JE 1, p. 18)  On July 6, 2016, 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 6 
Hunter complained of slightly elevated neck pain.  (JE 1, p. 18)  During an appointment 
on July 11, 2016, she reported a reduction in her neck pain, but complained of elevated 
lumbar pelvic pain.  (JE 1, p. 19)  During appointments on June 13, 2016 and June 15, 
2016, Hunter complained of temporary flare ups of neck and low back pain, describing 
her discomfort as a deep ache and sensation with sharpness in her cervical segments.  
(JE 1, pp. 19-20)  Hunter relayed she believed her symptoms might be aggravated by 
her pregnancy and work-related obligations.  (JE 1, pp. 19-20)   
On August 1, 2016, Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler, reporting she was continuing 
to have right cervical pain since her motor vehicle accident.  (JE 1, p. 21)  During an 
appointment on August 31, 2016, Hunter complained of minor neck pain and 
lumbopelvic pain.  (JE 1, p. 22)  Dr. Strickler opined Hunter had mild dysfunction in the 
cervical and lumbosacral regions and that he believed she had reached maximum 
medical improvement from the motor vehicle accident and released her from care.  (JE 
1, pp. 22-23)   
Hunter’s care with Dr. Strickler became more sporadic.  On October 24, 2016, 
Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler, complaining of neck and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 24)  
On February 3, 2017, Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler complaining of elevated neck and 
low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 25)  During an appointment on April 25, 2017, Hunter 
complained of neck, mid back, and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 26)  She returned to Dr. 
Strickler on August 8, 2017, complaining of neck and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 27)  
During appointments on August 28, 2017, September 1, 2017, and September 5, 2017, 
Hunter reported her neck, mid back, and low back pain had improved.  (JE 1, pp. 28-30)  
On September 18, 2017, Hunter attended an appointment with Dr. Strickler, 
complaining of elevated right hip pain.  (JE 1, p. 31)  During appointments on October 
16, 2017, November 13, 2017, and January 12, 2018, she complained of neck and low 
back pain.  (JE 1, pp. 32-34)   
During an appointment with Dr. Strickler on March 7, 2018, Hunter complained of 
elevated left-sided neck, midback, and low back pain after falling out of a truck.  (JE 1, 
p. 35)  Hunter reported she was climbing down from a semi truck when she slipped and 
“fell directly on her left hand side.”  (JE 1, p.35)  On March 21, 2018, Hunter attended an 
appointment with Dr. Strickler complaining of continued lower back pain.  (JE 4, p. 1)  
Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler on April 20, 2018, complaining of elevated neck and 
upper back pain.  (JE 1, p. 36)   
In April 2018, Silver Pines hired Hunter as the director of nursing.  (Tr., pp. 16-17; 
Ex. E, p. 28)  Hunter was responsible for hiring staff, training staff, care plans, and 
working on the floor providing patient care, as needed.  (Tr., p. 17)  Hunter used a 
desktop computer and Microsoft Office products.  (Ex. E, p. 28)  Silver Pines paid 
Hunter a salary of $50,000.00 per year and she worked up to eighty hours per week.  
(Tr., p. 18)  When Silver Pines hired Hunter she was not working under any physical 
limitations or restrictions.  (Tr., p. 18) 
 
 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 7 
On July 18, 2018, Hunter reported: 
I was in the bathroom with a resident transferring from the toilet to her 
wheelchair.  And the resident had a walker in front of her, and stated that 
she was – felt like she was going to drop, gonna fall.  And we were trying 
to get her into her wheelchair, and her legs gave out.  And she was falling, 
she kicked my right leg out from underneath me. 
(Tr., pp. 18-19)  Hunter did not actually fall, but testified she experienced pain in her 
lower back and down her right leg, and then in her shoulders and neck after the 
incident.  (Tr., p. 19)  Hunter reported the incident to the administrator of Silver Pines 
and she worked the remainder of her shift.  (Tr., pp. 19-20)   
On July 19, 2018, Hunter attended an appointment with Cindy Hanawalt, M.D. 
with St. Luke’s Work Well Clinic (“Work Well”), reporting the day before a resident she 
was assisting started to fall and the resident’s legs came underneath her and hit her 
right ankle causing it to roll outward and she felt a strain in her low back.  (JE 8, p. 1)  
Hunter complained of ankle pain, tightness and stiffness in her back, numbness coming 
down her legs without weakness, and a headache “mainly at the base of her neck with 
some stiffness in her upper trapezium.”  (JE 8, pp. 1-2)  Hunter denied having any 
similar symptoms in the past.  (JE 8, p. 1)  Dr. Hanawalt documented Hunter was stiff 
and slow with standing, she needed to lean forward before rising, and she was limping.  
(JE 8, p. 2)  On exam, Dr. Hanawalt documented Hunter had a general tenderness to 
palpation in the lower occipital ridge down into the trapezius, stiffness with chin to chest 
with full range of motion, limited forward flexion due to stiffness in the paraspinal region 
underneath her shoulder blades down into her sacral region, discomfort with extension, 
and noted she favored the right foot while standing and could not lead with her right 
foot.  (JE 8, pp. 2-3)  Dr. Hanawalt assessed Hunter with a low back strain and sprain of 
the right foot, applied an air cast, recommended ice for her ankle three times per day, 
encouraged Hunter to engage in general mobility alternating walking, standing, and 
sitting, as tolerated, and ordered physical therapy.  (JE 8, pp. 3-4)   
Hunter returned to Dr. Hanawalt on July 26, 2018, reporting relief from her back 
symptoms when using a TENS unit during physical therapy.  (JE 8, p. 5)  Hunter 
reported her back is stiff and noted she wondered if her fibromyalgia had also flared.  
(JE 8, p. 5)  Hunter reported she was tight and stiff, but denied having numbness or 
pain in her legs.  (JE 8, p. 5)  Dr. Hanawalt assessed Hunter with neck stiffness, a low 
back strain, and right foot sprain, recommended she continue with physical therapy, 
discontinued the air cast, imposed restrictions of no stairs, ladders, bending, or 
squatting, and noted Hunter believed could modify her activities at work, as needed.  
(JE 8, pp. 6-7)   
On August 21, 2018, Hunter attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Hanawalt, 
reporting an improvement of forty percent with physical therapy.  (JE 8, p. 8)  Hunter 
complained of a significant amount of tightness in her low back and occasional sharp 
pain down her right hip into her leg without lower extremity weakness.  (JE 8, p. 8)  
Hunter reported her legs go numb when sitting too long and when moving from 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 8 
squatting to standing.  (JE 8, p. 8)  Dr. Hanawalt assessed Hunter with neck stiffness, 
upper trapezial tightness, generally poor posture with ongoing headaches, persistent 
low back pain, and a right ankle sprain, continued physical therapy, and ordered dry 
needling.  (JE 8, p. 9)  Dr. Hanawalt noted Hunter was working full-time and self-
modifying her activity, and imposed restrictions of occasional bending and squatting, 
and to sit, stand, and ambulate for comfort.  (JE 8, p. 9)   
Hunter attended an appointment with Dr. Hanawalt on August 29, 2018, 
complaining of increased pain after working long hours and performing more patient 
care.  (JE 8, pp. 10-11)  Hunter complained of increased pain in her thoracic spine down 
to her lumbar spine, radicular symptoms down her right leg with weakness and 
numbness, and increased migraine headaches.  (JE 8, p. 10)  Hunter reported her neck 
pain had not improved, she had a generalized tightness, she felt very stiff when lifting 
her arms overhead, and she believed her fibromyalgia pain was also worse.  (JE 8, p. 
10)  Dr. Hanawalt imposed restrictions of no lifting or carrying over fifteen pounds, to 
avoid bending, stooping, and prolonged standing and sitting, occasional kneeling and 
squatting, and to limit patient lifting and transfers, and she prescribed Flexeril.  (JE 8, 
pp. 10-11)   
Dr. Hanawalt ordered lumbosacral and thoracic spine x-rays.  (JE 5, pp. 2-3)  
The radiologist listed findings of “[m]oderate facet arthropathy lower lumbar spine.  Mild 
loss of disc interspace L5-S1.  Mild endplate degenerative changes lower thoracic 
spine.  No lumbar spine malalignment or vertebral compression fracture.”  (JE 5, p. 2)  
With respect to the thoracic spine, the radiologist listed findings of “[n]o thoracic spine 
malalignment or vertebral compression fracture.  Mild-to-moderate mid thoracic spine 
degenerative changes seen.”  (JE 5, p. 3)   
On September 18, 2018, Hunter attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Hanawalt, reporting her pain was worse, which she described as a constant aching to 
tightness/gripping to a burning that was worse with prolonged sitting and standing.  (JE 
8, p. 12)  Hunter reported she had not started taking Flexeril or using a TENS unit due 
to problems with workers’ compensation benefits and noted dry needling provided some 
relief.  (JE 8, p. 12)  Dr. Hanawalt assessed Hunter with low back pain with cervicalgia, 
neck strain, and ankle sprain, continued her physical therapy, and had her staff contact 
the workers’ compensation carrier regarding the Flexeril and TENS unit.  (JE 8, p. 13)   
On October 12, 2018, Hunter sought treatment at St. Luke’s Emergency 
Department, complaining of increasing back pain, right leg numbness, and a severe 
headache with blurred vision and feeling of fogginess and cloudiness.  (JE 5, p. 4)  
Hunter reported she could hardly feel her right leg, mostly in the thigh area, with a pins 
and needles sensation causing difficulty with standing.  (JE 5, p. 4)  Hunter denied right 
leg weakness and reported numbness in her left leg that was not as severe as the right, 
and reported problems with her bladder function.  (JE 5, p. 4)  Hospital staff 
documented Hunter complained of weakness, numbness and headaches and “[p]ositive 
for back pain and myalgias.  Negative for neck pain.”  (JE 5, p. 7)  On examination, 
hospital staff noted her neck had normal range of motion, and she exhibited tenderness 
and bony tenderness in her thoracic and lumbar spine.  (JE 5, p. 8)  Hospital staff 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 9 
discharged Hunter, listing an impression of acute midline low back pain with bilateral 
sciatica and acute nonintractable headache, unspecified headache, prescribed Valium 
and Percocet, and told her to follow up with her family medicine provider.  (JE 5, p. 12)   
Hunter testified on October 15, 2018, a resident jerked toward the bed when she 
was rolling the resident and she felt a pop in the middle of her back with discomfort and 
that she became short of breath.  (Tr., p. 22)  Hunter testified her condition was different 
from her condition after the July 2018 injury because she was experiencing sharp pain 
in her mid back and difficulty breathing and she was experiencing sharp pain in her mid 
back.  (Tr., pp. 22-23)   
After the July 2018 incident and before the October 2018 incident, Senior 
Housing purchased Silver Pines.  (Tr., pp. 24, 71)  Hunter’s position and salary 
remained the same.  (Tr., p. 25)  Hunter reported the October 15, 2018 work injury to 
the administrator and the administrator told her the incident was considered a 
continuation of the July 2018 injury and she was not going to file a claim.  (Tr., pp. 23-
24)    
Following the October 2018 incident, Work Well sent Hunter to the emergency 
room, where she was examined by Brian Shedek, D.O.  (Tr., p. 25; JE 5, p. 13)  Dr. 
Shedek documented Hunter reported she had a prior lower back injury and that her 
current pain was unrelated.  (JE 5, p. 13)   
On October 17, 2018, Hunter returned to Dr. Hanawalt, reporting acute 
worsening symptoms over the past week and that she had been evaluated in the 
emergency room twice since her last appointment.  (JE 8, p. 14)  Hunter relayed she 
had not been able to follow her work restrictions due to the workload and that she had 
been working extra hours with increased pain throughout her back, increased 
headaches, and increased general stress.  (JE 8, p. 14)  Hunter reported when she 
returned to work on October 14, 2018 “she was rolling a patient towards her and she 
heard felt a pop in her mid back” with immediate back pain and spasm, noting she could 
not catch her breath and she was experiencing a pleuritic type of pain component.  (JE 
8, p. 14)  Hunter complained of a significant discomfort in her neck and right upper 
trapezial area, pain through her mid thoracic area radiating around to her rib cage, 
increased pain in the low back limiting her ambulation, increased migraines, and 
reported she was not sleeping well due to stress.  (JE 8, p. 14)  Hunter also reported 
incontinence with difficulty getting to the commode and a general loss of control.  (JE 8, 
p. 14)   
Dr. Hanawalt ordered lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging.  (JE 5, p. 21)  
Dr. Hanawalt noted a prior head computerized tomography exam showed no acute 
intracranial abnormality and that Hunter’s lumbar spine imaging showed a minimal right 
posterior disc bulge at L1-L2, a broad-based posterior disc bulge with hypertrophy of the 
bilateral posterior facet joints with mild encroachment at the ventral thecal sac and mild 
to moderate narrowing in both neural foramen at L4-L5.  (JE 8, p. 14)  Dr. Hanawalt 
assessed Hunter with worsening back pain, including exacerbation of migraine 
headaches due to acute stress reaction and poor sleep, mid thoracic upper trapezial 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 10 
discomfort with myofascial component, and a “broad distal bulge and LE paresthesia 
and general poor ability to function due to pain and emotional distress.  Worsening 
urinary incontinence.”  (JE 8, p. 15)  Dr. Hanawalt restricted Hunter from working, 
directed her to sit, stand, and ambulate, as tolerated, referred her to a pain clinic to help 
with her disc and facet pathology, prescribed a Medrol dosepak and Skelaxin, and 
continued her physical therapy.  (JE 8, p. 16)   
On October 24, 2018, Hunter returned to Dr. Hanawalt regarding her back pain.  
(JE 8, p. 17)  Dr. Hanawalt again referred Hunter to a pain clinic, continued her physical 
therapy, and reordered the TENS unit.  (JE 8, p. 18)  Dr. Hanawalt imposed work 
restrictions of light duty, with no lifting over ten pounds, no sweeping, or mopping, no 
bending, squatting, or patient transfers, and found she could work four hours per shift, 
twenty hours per week.  (JE 8, p. 18)   
Hunter attended fifteen physical therapy visits between July 25, 2018 and 
November 18, 2018.  (JE 6)  On December 12, 2018, Hunter was discharged from 
physical therapy.  (JE 6, p. 19)  The physical therapist documented Hunter did not 
return after her last appointment and had not returned calls to schedule further visits.  
(JE 6, p. 19)   
On November 20, 2018, Hunter underwent a pain consultation with Mark Kline, 
M.D.  (JE 5, p. 23)  Dr. Kline documented: 
[s]he describes the pain as “constant ache, throbbing, pins/needles, at 
times worse than labor.”  She describes pain and muscle spasm in her 
neck, shoulders and upper back.  These symptoms worsen with use of her 
upper extremities.  She denies radicular-type symptoms in either upper 
extremity.  She does describe some mild generalized weakness in her 
upper extremities when the pain is severe.  Her low back pain worsens 
with bending, lifting, twisting.  The pain radiates across the low back and 
into the lateral aspect of her right thigh to the knee.  She also describes 
numbness in her right anterior thigh.  She was initially experiencing severe 
shooting-type of pain in her right anterior thigh.  However, she reports that 
this has improved significantly with physical therapy.  A course of oral 
steroids was also helpful. 
(JE 5, p. 23)  Hunter complained of difficulties with sleeping, performing her job, 
lifting her children, performing housework, and standing for prolonged periods.  
(JE 5, p. 23)  Hunter denied radiation of pain below her knees, reported some 
mild weakness with hip flexion on the right side, especially after sitting, 
numbness in her anterior high, and mild generalized weakness in her upper 
extremities.  (JE 5, pp. 23-24)  Dr. Kline listed an impression of low back pain 
radiating to the right lower extremity, myofascial pain in the trapezius muscles 
and thoracic paraspinous muscles, prescribed gabapentin for her low back pain, 
and opined Hunter may benefit from trigger point injections for her myofascial 
pain.  (JE 5, p. 25)   

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 11 
On November 28, 2018, Hunter returned to Dr. Hanawalt reporting she had 
returned to work four hours per day, her neck pain and shoulder range of motion had 
improved “tremendously,” her ankle pain had improved, but she was continuing to 
experience low back pain radiating down her thigh.  (JE 8, p. 19)  Dr. Hanawalt ordered 
Hunter continue physical therapy, imposed work restrictions of light duty with no lifting 
over ten pounds, no sweeping, mopping, bending, squatting, or patient transfers, and 
found she could work six hours per shift, thirty hours per week.  (JE 8, p. 19)   
On December 4, 2018, Hunter received a final warning counseling form from the 
Senior Housing Administrator.  (Tr., pp. 26-27)  Hunter testified she had not received 
any prior corrective action.  (Tr., p. 27) 
Hunter attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Hanawalt on December 12, 
2018, reporting she was attending physical therapy and she had received a TENS unit.  
(JE 8, p. 20)  Dr. Hanawalt encouraged Hunter to walk each day and to use the TENS 
unit, continued her physical therapy, and imposed work restrictions of no lifting over ten 
pounds, no patient transfers, occasional bending and squatting, and found Hunter could 
work eight hours shifts, forty hours per week.  (JE 8, p. 20) 
David Field, M.D., conducted an independent medical examination of Hunter for 
Silver Pines and American Compensation and issued his report on January 4, 2019.  
(JE 9)  Dr. Field examined Hunter and reviewed her medical records.  (JE 9)  Dr. Field 
noted Hunter had a history of fibromyalgia, obesity, peripheral neuropathy, an old neck 
injury caused by a motor vehicle accident, and documented she “denied any low back 
pain in the past.”  (JE 9, p. 3)  On examination, Dr. Field found Hunter had full range of 
motion in her right ankle without any swelling or instability.  (JE 9, p. 3)  Dr. Field 
documented Hunter had full functional range of motion of her shoulders with:  
some tightness of her neck in terms of flexion/extension, lateral bend and 
rotation, all restricted perhaps about 50 degrees.  She can stand erect.  
She can flex her fingertips to about 10 inches from the floor.  She can 
extend her lumbar spine well.  Lateral bend to the right is minimally 
restricted.  She can heel and toe-up.  There was no clinical deficit of the 
lower extremities noted on examination.   
(JE 9, p. 3)   
Dr. Field diagnosed Hunter with “a myofascial-type strain, mostly to her lumbar 
spine, possibly secondary thoracic area temporarily and ongoing complaints of neck 
pain with preexisting evidence of chronic fibromyalgia preexisting evidence of 
degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine.”  (JE 9, p. 4)  Dr. Field found many of 
Hunter’s symptoms were of a myofascial nature, which he noted Dr. Hanawalt also 
recognized were unrelated to the July 2018 incident, and he believed the intertwining of 
her symptoms from her fibromyalgia made it difficult to separate some of the issues in 
terms of treatment, recommendations, and therapies.  (JE 9, p. 4)   
 
 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 12 
Dr. Field opined:  
[i]t is possible doing the activity which she performed, trying to stabilize a 
patient in a flexed/stooping position to certainly flare up one’s back.  
Normally however, a ligamentous pattern of injury takes place at that time 
and is resolved with conservative treatment programs with modalities of 
physical therapy and appropriate anti-inflammatory medicines and muscle 
relaxants.  Usually a ligamentous injury can take place and heal within 
perhaps a 6-8 week pattern.  The longevity of the course of treatment, 
however, seems more atypical than most people would experience, and 
can well be perhaps in this case, associated with a diagnosis of chronic 
fibromyalgia as documented before. 
(JE 9, p. 4)  Dr. Field opined the work injury was temporary and resolved that the “work 
injury is probably more of a partial contributor to the patient’s current treatment plan” 
and that the work injury “most likely related to an aggravation or a ‘lighting up’ of her 
fibromyalgia.”  (JE 9, p. 4)  Dr. Field found Hunter’s treatment was reasonable and 
necessary for evaluation, but was prolonged relative to her complaints and that her 
treatment “should have reached a level of maximum healing at about 3 months post 
injury.”  (JE 9, pp. 4-5)  Dr. Field opined Hunter reached maximum medical 
improvement approximately at the end of October 2018, she should not be assigned a 
permanent impairment, she did not need any additional treatment, and she should not 
be assigned any restrictions.  (JE 9, p. 5)   
On January 4, 2019, Senior Housing demoted Hunter to a floor nurse position, 
stopped paying her a salary, and paid her $19.00 per hour.  (Ex. 1, p. 8; Tr., pp. 29-30)  
Hunter reported after the demotion she was earning $5.00 less per hour.  (Tr., p. 30)   
On January 8, 2019, Hunter went to urgent care, complaining of a headache in 
the back of her head, worsening neck and shoulder pain, and worsening low back pain 
with muscle spasms and tingling and numbness she attributed to the July 2018 work 
injury.  (JE 7, pp. 1-2)  Hunter reported Dr. Klein had offered her an epidural, which she 
refused because she was doing better at that time and going to physical therapy. (JE 7, 
p. 2)  Suzanne Baxter, PA-C, examined Hunter, assessed her with an occipital 
headache, acute right-sided low back pain with right-sided sciatica, and neck and 
shoulder pain, administered a Toradol injection, prescribed cyclobenzaprine, and 
scheduled an appointment for Hunter with Work Well.  (JE 7, pp. 3-5)   
On January 10, 2019, Hunter returned to Work Well and Ignatius Brady, M.D., 
examined her.  (JE 8, pp. 21-22)  Dr. Brady documented Hunter had complained of 
increasing pain throughout her back after her workload increased, causing “fairly severe 
upper back and neck pain,” she had missed three days of work due to the pain, and she 
had received a Toradal injection from urgent care.  (JE 8, p. 21)  Dr. Brady assessed 
Hunter with chronic neck and back pain with a recent aggravation of pain, continued her 
Flexeril and physical therapy, restricted Hunter from working for two days, ordered her 
to work four hours per day the next week, increasing to six hours and then eight hours 
per day as directed by Dr. Hanawalt, and imposed work restrictions of no lifting over ten 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 13 
pounds with no bending, stooping, squatting, kneeling, or patient transfers.  (JE 8, pp. 
21-23)  
During her appointment with Dr. Hanawalt on January 15, 2019, Hunter reported 
she was not working because the facility had refused to accommodate the four-hour 
shifts.  (JE 8, p. 24)  Dr. Hanawalt encouraged daily walking, continued Hunter’s 
physical therapy and TENS unit, found Hunter was capable of light-duty work 
transitioning from twenty hours per week to forty hours per week over the next two 
weeks while restricting activities that aggravate her neck and back.  (JE 8, p. 25)   
Hunter returned to Dr. Hanawalt on January 24, 2019, reporting she needed to 
be released without restrictions and that she was feeling better overall.  (JE 8, p. 27)  
Dr. Hanawalt noted progress in physical therapy work conditioning, recommended a 
functional capacity evaluation, and imposed a thirty-pound lifting restriction with no 
limitation of work hours.  (JE 8, p. 28)   
Hunter was off work from January 13, 2019 through January 27, 2019.  (Tr., p. 
31)  When Hunter returned to work on January 28, 2019 the Senior Housing 
Administrator terminated her employment for leaving insulin unrefrigerated.  (Ex. 1, p. 
16; Tr., p. 31)  Hunter denied the medication was spoiled, and applied for and received 
unemployment benefits following her termination.  (Tr., pp. 33-34)  After her termination, 
Hunter worked for Jackson Hewitt preparing taxes during tax season.  (Tr., pp. 34-35)   
On February 27, 2019, Hunter attended a functional capacity evaluation for Dr. 
Hanawalt with Melissa White, OTR/L.  (JE 2, p. 4)  White found Hunter gave maximum 
effort and found she was unable to safely maintain a crouch position secondary to trunk 
and lower extremity strength/endurance.  (JE 2, pp. 4-5)  White noted Hunter was 
deconditioned in her upper and lower quadrant, stated she believed Hunter could 
perform a fifty pound lift and/or move on an occasional basis after regaining activity 
tolerance and stamina, recommended frequent positional changes between sitting, 
standing, and bending, and rare crouching and forward bending, finding Hunter could 
perform work in the light to medium category of work.  (JE 2, pp. 7-8) 
On March 19, 2019, Hunter attended an appointment with Dr. Brady for an 
impairment rating.  (JE 8, pp. 29-30)  Dr. Brady reviewed Hunter’s Work Well clinic 
notes, an urgent care visit on January 8, 2019, a note from Dr. Kline, a magnetic 
resonance imaging report from October 17, 2018, and Dr. Field’s independent medical 
examination report.  (JE 8, p. 29)  Dr. Brady opined Hunter’s imaging showed changes 
consistent with age, with some foraminal narrowing due to facet hypertrophy at the L4-
L5 level, that “would not account for the low back pain which radiates toward the neck 
and trapezius area.”  (JE 8, p. 29)  Dr. Brady noted Hunter was much improved since he 
met with her in January, she was managing her pain with a TENS unit, Biofreeze and 
naproxen, she reported her last round of physical therapy was very helpful, and she had 
lost her job and was working as a tax preparer with light office physical demands.  (JE 
8, p. 29)  Dr. Brady assessed Hunter with a “[l]ow back strain secondary to a loading 
injury at work on [July 18, 2018].”  (JE 8, p. 30)   

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 14 
Using the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Press, 5th 
Ed. 2001) (“AMA Guides”), Dr. Brady assigned Hunter a zero percent permanent 
impairment rating, finding she has “no significant clinical findings, no observed muscle 
guarding or spasm, no documentable neurological impairment, no documented 
alteration in structural integrity,” and no acute findings on her magnetic resonance 
imaging.  (JE 8, p. 30)  Dr. Brady noted Hunter had a baseline diagnosis of fibromyalgia, 
indicating she is unlikely to ever be free of pain in her back, found she did not need any 
treatment, and opined while her functional capacity evaluation made some suggestions 
regarding her abilities going forward, he did not believe any of the limitations she may 
have were due to the July 2018 work injury.  (JE 8, p. 30)   
In March 2019, Hunter sought additional treatment with Dr. Strickler on her own, 
where she continued to report improvement and worsening of her neck, mid back, and 
low back pain.  (Tr., p. 77; JE 4, pp. 2-4; Ex. A, p. 1)  On April 17, 2019, Hunter returned 
to Dr. Strickler complaining of acute, elevated low back pain she described as a 
sharpness, and noting her symptoms increased with movement and decreased with 
rest.  (JE 4, p. 5)  Hunter returned to Dr. Strickler on May 7, 2019, complaining of acute, 
elevated neck pain and headaches.  (JE 4, p. 6)  Hunter relayed she has increased 
symptoms with sleeping and cervical motion.  (JE 4, p. 6)   
In May 2019, C and S Staffing hired Hunter as care manager coordinating care, 
performing care plan management, and implementing strategies for clients with 
dementia, intellectual disabilities, and mental illness to remain in their homes.  (Ex. E, p. 
28; Tr., pp. 34-35)  Hunter used a desktop computer and Microsoft Office products.  (Ex. 
E, p. 28)  Hunter worked for C and S Staffing through September 2019.  (Ex. E, p. 28)  
Hunter reported the position with C and S Staffing required her to do a lot of driving and 
sitting, which was difficult.  (Tr., p. 36)   
After workers’ compensation stopped paying for her medical care, Hunter sought 
treatment on her own from Cedar Rapids Pain Associates, which she testified was 
beneficial.  (Tr., pp. 48-49, 77)  Hunter attended her first appointment with Michelle 
Donohue, ARNP, on July 8, 2019, complaining of cervical, thoracic, and lumbar pain.  
(JE 3, p. 1)  Hunter described her low back and mid back pain as “right greater than left, 
deep achy pain with intermittent stabbing/throbbing/shooting pain of her right lateral hip 
that increases with position change” and reported her pain interrupts her sleep and 
work.  (JE 3, p. 1)  Donohue noted lumbar magnetic resonance imaging from October 
2018, provided an impression of “L5 is a transitional vertebra, Early degenerative 
arthritic change throughout and desiccated disc changes/degenerative disc disease at 
L4-5.  Constellations of finding L4-5 results in mild encroachment of the thecal sac and 
moderate narrowing of both neural foramen.”  (JE 3, pp. 1-2)  Donohue assessed 
Hunter with lumbago, lumbar disc degeneration L4-L5, bulging disc L1-L2 and L4-L5, 
lumbar radiculopathy, connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina of 
the lumbar region, pain in thoracic spine, and myofascial pain.  (JE 3, p. 3)  Donohue 
recommended thoracic and lumbar trigger point injections for myofascial pain, lumbar 
epidural steroid injections for radiculopathy, physical therapy, chiropractic care, and 
prescribed diclofenac and baclofen.  (JE 3, pp. 3-4)   

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 15 
Hunter attended two appointments with chiropractors associated with Cedar 
Rapids Pain Associates, but she did not return for treatment because she found Dr. 
Strickler’s treatment more beneficial.  (JE 3; JE 4)  She underwent thoracic and lumbar 
spine trigger point injections with Cedar Rapids Pain Associates and continued to 
complain of lumbar pain radiating into her right lateral thigh and intermittently down her 
left posterior thigh, exacerbated by activity.  (JE 3, pp. 11-14, 22, 24-25)  She reported 
relief from the injections, but also continued to experience pain and she received 
additional physical therapy.  (JE 3, pp. 28-32)  
John Kuhnlein, D.O., conducted an independent medical examination for Hunter 
on August 21, 2019, and issued his report on December 31, 2019.  (Ex. 1, pp. 8-28)  Dr. 
Kuhnlein reviewed Hunter’s medical records and examined her.  (Ex. 1, pp. 8-28)  
Hunter reported a preexisting history of fibromyalgia with some bilateral occasional neck 
pain, a neck injury from a motor vehicle accident, rare bitemporal headaches three 
times per year, periodic mid back pain when ill or stressed, occasional back pain, a prior 
episode of pain shooting down her right leg similar to her current pain, but not as 
severe, and intermittent problems with her right leg that did not limit her activities.  (Ex. 
1, pp. 9-10)  Hunter reported before the accident she was not taking any medication for 
fibromyalgia and her treatment included chiropractic care and stretching exercises.  (JE 
1, p. 10)   
Dr. Kuhnlein documented Hunter’s current symptoms include occipital 
headaches from cervical myofascial pain, bitemporal area headaches with aura 
representing and aggravation of her preexisting migraines, cervical myofascial pain, low 
back pain with radiculitic right leg symptoms, and very rare right ankle symptoms.  (Ex. 
1, p. 23)  Dr. Kuhnlein found Hunter’s right foot/ankle strain resolved with conservative 
treatment, but she had ongoing waxing and waning problems with headaches, neck, 
mid back and low back pain with intermittent right leg symptoms.  (Ex. 1, p. 23)  Dr. 
Kuhnlein noted her records indicated there were issues with her medical care after her 
work injury because the insurer was not paying her bills, including prescriptions.  (Ex. 1, 
p. 23).  He also noted Hunter’s overall symptom pattern changed and worsened after 
she returned to eight hour shifts and she was reassigned to working primarily as a floor 
nurse.  (Ex. 1, pp. 24-25)  Dr. Kuhnlein found: 
[t]hese symptoms are different than the previous fibromyalgia symptoms.  
While Dr. Hanawalt noted that Ms. Hunter felt that her fibromyalgia pain 
was worse on both July 26, 2018, and again on August 29, 2108, and Dr. 
Field felt that there was “certainly an overlying degree of myofascial pain 
which I do think is most likely related to an aggravation or ‘lighting up’ of 
her fibromyalgia,” Ms. Hunter does not really describe changes in the pre-
existing fibromyalgia type symptoms, she describes changes consistent 
with musculoskeletal injury, and the pattern of care for fibromyalgia did not 
change after this injury.  The pattern of care changed in response to the 
acute musculoskeletal injuries she sustained while at work on these two 
dates, based on the information currently available in the record.  It does 
not appear that either Dr. Field, or later Dr. Brady, asked Ms. Hunter how 
her symptoms before the injuries were different than after the injuries.  

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 16 
She states, and I have no reason to disbelieve her at this time, that the 
symptom patterns were different.  As a result, I believe that the 
fibromyalgia was an “innocent bystander” and unrelated to these 
musculoskeletal injuries. 
(Ex. 1, p. 24)  
Dr. Kuhnlein opined the July 2018 work injury caused Hunter to sustain a cervical 
strain, a low back strain with intermittent radiculitic symptoms, and a right ankle/foot 
strain.  (Ex. 1, p. 22)  Dr. Kuhnlein noted the day after the incident, Dr. Hanawalt 
documented Hunter exhibited tenderness to palpation from the lower occipital ridge 
extending into the trapezius and stiffness with cervical range of motion and objective 
findings in her ankle area, which ultimately resolved, and objective symptoms in her 
lumbar spine.  (Ex. 1, p. 23)  On examination, Dr. Kuhnlein noted tenderness to 
palpation in the right mid scapular area, the right occipital area, lumbar spine, 
paralumbar muscle areas, percussive tenderness with light touch in the lumbar area, 
positive piriformis palpation on the right with radiation into the right leg and negative in 
her left leg, and radiation into the right anterior thigh to the knee with right leg raising 
compared with no evidence or radiculopathy in the left leg.  (Ex. 1, pp. 21-22)  Dr. 
Kuhnlein noted the pattern of Hunter’s fibromyalgia symptoms before and after the 
injury did not change, but her pattern of care changed, noting it did not appear Dr. Field 
or Dr. Brady asked her how her symptoms before the injury were different from her 
symptoms after the injury.  (Ex. 1, p. 24)   
Dr. Kuhnlein recommended Hunter continue taking NSAIDs and Tylenol, use a 
TENS unit, continue trigger point and epidural injections on a repeated and intermittent 
basis if they provided long-lasting benefit, but not if they only provide short-term benefit.  
(Ex. 1, p. 24)  Dr. Kuhnlein did not recommend additional chiropractic care or use of a 
lumbar support brace, instead recommending Hunter work on core exercises for her low 
back pain.  (Ex. 1, p. 24)   
Dr. Kuhnlein opined Hunter reached maximum medical improvement for both 
injuries on July 23, 2019, when she underwent an epidural injection performed by Dr. 
Miller.  (Ex. 1, p. 24)  Using the AMA Guides, Dr. Kuhnlein assigned impairment, as 
follows: 
[t]he DRE method is indicated according to pages 379-380 for the cervical 
spine.  Turning to Table 15-5, page 392, I would place Ms. Hunter into 
DRE Cervical Category II and assign 5% whole person impairment.  This 
impairment would also cover the occipital headaches, as I believe they are 
related to the neck condition and are not a separate issue. 
The DRE method is indicated according to pages 379-380 for the 
lumbar spine.  Turning to Table 15-3, page 384, I would place Ms. Hunter 
into DRE Lumbar Category II and assign 7% whole person impairment.  
This impairment would also account for the radiculitic features noted on 
physical examination. 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 17 
There would be no impairment for the foot/ankle injury.  There will be 
no impairment related to this injury for the fibromyalgia.  I would not assign 
impairment for the migraine headaches at this time. 
Turning to the Combined Values Chart on Page 604, when these 
values are combined (7% x5%) this is a 12% whole person impairment.  
This impairment would apply to the July 18, 2018, injury. 
The DRE method is indicated according to pages 379-380 for the 
thoracic spine.  Turning to Table 15-4, page 389, I would place Ms. Hunter 
between DRE Thoracic Category I and II and assigned 3% whole person 
impairment.  This impairment would apply to the October 15, 2018, injury. 
(Ex. 1, p. 25) 
Dr. Kuhnlein disagreed with Dr. Field’s opinion Hunter was capable of working 
full-time and if she needed temporary work restrictions the restrictions would not be 
related to her work injury because Hunter was working without restrictions prior to the 
work injury, even with pre-existing fibromyalgia.  (Ex. 1, p. 25)  Dr. Kuhnlein found the 
functional capacity evaluation placed Hunter in the light-medium physical demand level, 
noting the functional capacity evaluation should have been conducted three months 
after her work conditioning program to more accurately reflect her overall long-term 
functional abilities.  (Ex. 1, p. 25)  Dr. Kuhnlein recommended material handling 
restrictions of occasionally lifting twenty pounds from floor to waist, twenty pounds from 
waist to shoulder, and ten pounds over the shoulder.  (Ex. 1, p. 26)  Dr. Kuhnlein 
recommended nonmaterial handling restrictions of sitting, standing, and walking 
occasionally with the ability to change positions for comfort, stooping, squatting, 
bending, crawling, and kneeling occasionally, occasionally work on ladders, frequently 
climb stairs, and work at or above shoulder height occasionally.  (Ex. 1, p. 26)   
On August 23, 2019, Hunter attended an appointment with Amy Freeman, DNP, 
ARNP, for her lumbar pain.  (JE 3, p. 36)  Freeman documented Hunter reported 
receiving seventy percent relief following her injections and following a hysterectomy, 
she resumed physical therapy and chiropractic treatment, which was helping.  (JE 3, pp. 
36-37)  Hunter relayed she was experiencing flares of pain, but was doing much better 
and that her neck was actually bothering her more.  (JE 3, p. 36)   
On September 9, 2019, Hunter commenced employment with RightDose 
Pharmacy, as an account manager, serving as a liaison between the pharmacy and 
facilities.  (Ex. E, p. 28; Tr., p. 36)  Hunter used a desktop computer and Microsoft 
Office products.  (Ex. E, p. 28)  Hunter worked for RightDose Pharmacy until January 
2020.  (Ex. E, p. 28)   
In October 2020, Higley Mansion, a residential care facility, hired Hunter as the 
director of nursing.  (Tr., pp. 13-14)  As the director of nursing, Hunter works forty to 
sixty hours per week and she supervises a staff of thirteen.  (Tr., p. 14)  Hunter is 
responsible for making sure the staff follow the schedule and oversees the 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 18 
documentation, care plans, staff training, and admissions and discharges of residents.  
(Tr., pp. 14-15)  Hunter testified the job involves a lot of moving around and she has to 
work on the floor occasionally, assisting residents with activities of daily living and 
passing medication.  (Tr., p. 15)  Hunter reported assisting some of the residents on the 
floor, getting down on the floor and standing back up, and pushing the medication cart is 
difficult, but the majority of her job is administrative.  (Tr., p. 36)  Higley Mansion pays 
Hunter a salary of $50,000.00 per year.  (Tr., p. 14) 
On September 20, 2019, Hunter returned to Freeman regarding her cervical and 
thoracic pain.  (JE 3, p. 46)  Freeman documented Hunter “presents today with a new 
complaint of cervical and thoracic pain,” noting she “has had this pain intermittently for 
over ten years without known injury.”  (JE 3, p. 46)  Freeman documented, 
over time her pain has worsened, especially with different injuries, 
including a MVA in 2016.  Most recently, she was helping a resident at 
work when they fell and she tried to catch them, exacerbating her pain.  
This was approximately May, 2018.  Since then her pain has been 
worsening.  She reports migraines in her temples about twice per week.  
She denies radiculopathy but feels her arms are weak.  Her pain is now 
constant and its worse with activity. 
(JE 3, p. 46)  Freeman assessed Hunter with cervical disc degeneration, cervical 
spondylosis, cervicalgia, pain in thoracic spine, and myofascial pain and recommended 
physical therapy and trigger point injections.  (JE 3, p. 48)  In the fall of 2019, Hunter 
continued to treat with Cedar Rapids Pain Associates, receiving additional injections 
and physical therapy, and with Dr. Strickler for her chronic neck pain, low back, mid 
back pain, and headaches, reporting improvement in her symptoms .  (JE 3, pp. 53-55, 
59-62, 66-69, 76-79, 84-85; JE 4, pp. 11-16)  
On January 20, 2020, Hunter was discharged from physical therapy because she 
was a no call, no show for her last two appointments.  (JE 3, p. 94)  Cedar Rapids Pain 
Associates noted Hunter had attended thirty-three of the forty-three scheduled physical 
therapy appointments.  (JE 3, p. 94)   
In response to a request from counsel for Senior Housing and West Bend, Dr. 
Brady reviewed his notes, Dr. Hanawalt’s notes, and an independent medical 
examination report performed by Dr. Kuhnlein.  (JE 8, p. 32)  In a letter dated April 21, 
2020, Dr. Brady opined while he believed Hunter had thoracic pain, he did not believe 
the thoracic pain represented an injury when he examined her and that he could not 
comment on what Dr. Kuhnlein saw after he last saw her.  (JE 8, p. 32)   
The attorney for Senior Housing and West Bend requested an opinion from Dr. 
Field, proving him with Hunter’s medical records, his independent medical examination 
report, and Dr. Kuhnlein’s report.  (JE 9, p. 6)  Dr. Field sent a response letter on April 
29, 2020, noting Hunter had preexisting lumbar disc disease and episodes of radicular 
pain or sciatica that went onto resolution.  (JE 9, p. 6)  With respect to her cervical 
spine, Dr. Field noted initial evaluations showed limited functional range of motion of her 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 19 
neck, which became more stiff with time, noted he had not received a prior cervical x-
ray or other imaging to rule out significant disc disease or spondylosis, noting at the 
time of her initial injury she had minimal complaints of her neck and therefore, the 
pattern of symptoms changed, including headache over time.  (JE 9, pp. 6-7)  With 
respect to her thoracic area, Dr. Field noted imaging showed mild degenerative 
changes, during an emergency room visit she complained of tenderness in the right 
lower rib cage, but there was nothing definitive from the examination she hurt a rib, a 
rib/spinal junction soreness or pattern, and not necessarily a definitive injury to the 
thoracic spine, noting not further studies were done.  (JE 9, p. 7)  Dr. Field opined, 
[i]n summary, it does not appear there was any definitive, objective 
evidence of injury to the thoracic spine through the course of evaluation, 
subsequent studies, and pattern of pain which has been described.  We 
evaluated her spine in terms of spinal range of motion.  She had no 
difficulty flexing her lumbar spine other than getting her fingers about 10 
inches from the floor.  She had good extension of her lumbar spine, and if 
she had problems with her thoracic spine, pain would have been evident 
on that examination as well. 
In summary, I do not think there is definitive clear evidence of injury 
to the thoracic spine based on the clinical evaluation which took place in 
the emergency room, follow-up evaluations by Dr. Hanawalt, and also the 
fact that no further definitive objective findings have been undertaken in 
the course of her management. 
(JE 9, p. 7)   
In late June Hunter was involved in another car accident when she was rear-
ended.  (Tr., pp. 41-42)  Hunter testified she did not go to the emergency room and she 
sought chiropractic care.  (Tr., p. 42)  She again complained of neck pain, mid back 
pain, and low back pain, and hip pain and received treatment from June through 
October 2020.  (JE 4, pp. 23-54)  At the time of the hearing Hunter was not receiving 
treatment from the car accident.  (Tr., p. 42)    
Hunter testified her fibromyalgia affects her whole body, causing her whole back 
to be tense, whereas the July and October 2018 work injuries affect “specific spots, like 
in my neck and my shoulders and my mid to lower back, and then the shooting pain 
down my right leg.”  (Tr., p. 41)   
Hunter testified since the July 2018 work injury her mobility has decreased and 
she has difficulty going up stairs, bending down, squatting, and bending forward.  (Tr., 
p. 45)  Hunter reported the July 2018 work injury effects her shoulders and neck and 
“causes some tension and the tightness, pain, and causes migraines,” noting she 
experiences intermittent burning pain in her neck that is sometimes sharp and that 
movement and tension causes her to experience migraines.  (Tr., p. 45)  Hunter 
reported she has constant pain in her low back with intermittent flares of shooting pain 
that are more associated with activity.  (Tr., p. 46)  Hunter relayed her back condition 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 20 
decreases mobility when she sits or stands too long and she starts having pain that is 
achy and sharp at times going down her legs.  (Tr., p. 47)   
Hunter testified the October 2018 work injury affected her mid back and still 
causes difficulty with breathing, causing a “wrapping around pain from the back to the 
front – to the rib area.”  (Tr., p. 48)  Hunter relayed when she works on the floor more 
she experiences more issues later in the evening and if she sits too long she 
experiences discomfort.  (Tr., p. 48)   
Hunter does not claim the July 2018 incident affected her mid back or thoracic 
spine.  (Tr., p. 68)  On cross-examination, Hunter acknowledged she reported she was 
experiencing mid back or thoracic pain to Work Well on July 19, 2018, August 29, 2018, 
and September 18, 2018.  (Tr., pp. 68-69)  Counsel for Senior Housing inquired and 
Hunter responded, as follows: 
Q.  So my question is, if you were experiencing mid back pain and 
thoracic pain to the degree that you felt it prudent to report it to your 
medical providers on those dates, and you didn’t sustain an injury to that 
part of your body in July of ’18, what are you attributing your back pain – 
mid back pain at that time to?  Was that due to the motor vehicle accident 
in ’16, the falling out of the semi in 2018, or is it your fibromyalgia, or a 
combination of the three? 
A.  I don’t - - I don’t know. 
(Tr., p. 69)  Hunter denied that Dr. Kuhnlein’s statement in his report that she only 
experienced periodic mid back pain is incorrect because her pain was periodic and not 
every day.  (Tr., p. 70)   
Hunter testified the July and October 2018 incidents have caused her to lose 
access to jobs in the nursing industry because “I’m not able to go into a full-blown long-
term care facility.  The best that I could do would be residential care or assisted living.”  
(Tr., p. 51)  Hunter reported because the incidents she is limited on the amount of lifting 
and movement she can do, and affects her ability to provide residents with assistance 
with all activities of daily living, which is an everyday occurrence in a long-term care 
facility.  (Tr., p. 51)   
Hunter acknowledged she works in the medical field and recognizes the history 
of a patient is significant in treating and diagnosing patients and if a physician does not 
have an accurate history, that could cause problems.  (Tr., p. 67)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Applicable Law 
These cases involve the issues of nature of disability, extent of disability, 
recovery of the cost of an independent medical examination, and recovery of costs 
under Iowa Code sections 85.34, 85.39, and 86.40.  In 2017, the Iowa Legislature 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 21 
enacted changes to Iowa Code chapters 85, 86, and 535 effecting workers’ 
compensation cases.  2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 (amending Iowa Code sections 85.16, 
85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 85.70, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, 86.42, and 
535.3).  Under 2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 section 24, the changes to Iowa Code 
sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, and 86.42 
apply to injuries occurring on or after the effective date of the Act.  This case involves 
alleged injuries occurring after July 1, 2017, therefore, the provisions of the new statute 
involving nature and extent of disability under Iowa Code section 85.34 and recovering 
the cost of an independent medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39 apply 
to this case.  
The calculation of interest is governed by Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 5052008 
(Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re: 
Interest Rate Issue), which holds interest for all weekly benefits payable and not paid 
when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, is payable at the rate of ten percent; all 
interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, is 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  Again, given this case concerns alleged injuries occurring after July 1, 
2017, the new provision on interest applies to this case. 
II. 
Nature of the Injury 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, the employee’s injuries arose out of and in the course 
of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 
552 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a 
hazard connected with the employment, and not merely incidental to the employment.  
Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held, an injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act 
which he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer. 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 22 
Farmers Elevator Co., Kingsley v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d at 156 (Iowa 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-
finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the claimant was 
injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, the 
expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which bear 
upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 
N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 
It is well-established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to 
finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment 
and the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the 
employment was a proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967). 
A. 
July 2018 Work Injury 
The parties stipulated Hunter sustained an injury while working for Silver Pines 
on July 18, 2018.  Hunter contends she sustained permanent impairments to her 
cervical and lumbar spine caused by the work injury.  Silver Pines and American 
Compensation deny Hunter sustained a temporary or permanent impairment.   
Hunter had a history of cervical pain with headaches and low back pain and 
sought treatment for her conditions before the July 2018 work injury.  Three physicians 
have given causation opinions in this case, Dr. Brady, an occupational medicine 
physician who provided minimal treatment to Hunter, Dr. Field, an orthopedic surgeon 
who conducted an independent medical examination for Silver Pines and American 
Compensation, and Dr. Kuhnlein, an occupational medicine physician who conducted 
an independent medical examination for Hunter.  I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion to be the 
most persuasive. 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 23 
Dr. Field examined Hunter and issued his report on January 4, 2019.  (JE 9)  Dr. 
Field diagnosed Hunter with “a myofascial-type strain, mostly to her lumbar spine, 
possibly secondary thoracic area temporarily and ongoing complaints of neck pain with 
preexisting evidence of chronic fibromyalgia preexisting evidence of degenerative disc 
disease of the lumbar spine.”  (JE 9, p. 4)  On exam, Dr. Field found Hunter had full 
functional range of motion of her shoulders with:  
some tightness of her neck in terms of flexion/extension, lateral bend and 
rotation, all restricted perhaps about 50 degrees.  She can stand erect.  
She can flex her fingertips to about 10 inches from the floor.  She can 
extend her lumbar spine well.  Lateral bend to the right is minimally 
restricted.  She can heel and toe-up.  There was no clinical deficit of the 
lower extremities noted on examination.”   
(JE 9, p. 3)   
Dr. Field opined trying to stabilize a patient in a flexed/stooping position could 
“flare up one’s back,” noting normally the injury would resolve with conservative 
treatment within six to eight weeks, and that Hunter’s longer course of treatment “seems 
more atypical than most people would experience, and can well be perhaps in this case, 
associated with a diagnostic chronic fibromyalgia as documented before.”  (JE 9, p. 4)  
Dr. Field opined the work injury was temporary and resolved and that the “work injury is 
probably more of a partial contributor to the patient’s current treatment plan” and that 
the work injury “most likely related to an aggravation or a ‘lighting up’ of her 
fibromyalgia.”  (JE 9, p. 4)  He then found Hunter reached maximum medical 
improvement approximately three months post-injury, or at the end of October 2018 and 
found she should not be assigned a permanent impairment, despite the fact that she 
continued to treat for the alleged work injury with Drs. Hanawalt and briefly, Dr. Brady.  
(JE 9, p. 5)  I find Dr. Field’s opinion equivocal.   
After Dr. Field issued his opinion, Dr. Brady treated Hunter on January 10, 2019.  
He assessed Hunter with chronic neck and back pain, modified her work restrictions, 
decreasing the hours she worked per day, to be increased later, at Dr. Hanawalt’s 
discretion, imposed work restrictions of no lifting over ten pounds with no bending, 
stooping, squatting, kneeling, or patient transfers, and continued her Flexeril at night 
and physical therapy.  (JE 8, pp. 21-23)  Hunter continued to treat with Dr. Hanawalt 
through February 27, 2019.   
On March 19, 2019, Dr. Brady examined Hunter for purposes of providing an 
impairment rating.  (JE 8, p. 9)  Dr. Brady assessed Hunter with a low back strain, noted 
her back pain had improved but was not “entirely resolved,” and assigned a zero 
percent permanent impairment rating, finding Hunter had “no significant clinical findings, 
no observed muscle guarding or spasm, no documentable neurological impairment, no 
documented alteration in structural integrity,” and no acute findings on her magnetic 
resonance imaging.  (JE 8, p. 30)  Dr. Brady documented Hunter’s neck pain, 
headaches, and left ankle “have all improved.”  (JE 8, p. 30)  His opinion does not 
record any findings on examination of her cervical spine.  (JE 8, pp. 30-31)  The record 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 24 
in this case does not support Hunter’s low back symptoms had fully resolved as of Dr. 
Brady’s examination.  I do not find his opinion persuasive. 
On August 21, 2019, Dr. Kuhnlein examined Hunter and diagnosed her with a 
neck strain with chronic myofascial neck pain, exacerbation of migraine headaches, 
occipital cervical myofascial headaches, thoracic strain with myofascial pain, low back 
strain related to facet hypertrophy and L4-L5 disc bulge, urinary insufficiency 
incontinence, right leg radiculitic pain, right ankle and foot strain, resolved, and 
fibromyalgia.  (Ex. 1, p. 22)  Dr. Kuhnlein documented Hunter had preexisting 
fibromyalgia with mild bilateral and occasional neck pain, rare headaches, intermittent 
right leg symptoms that did not limit her activities, and an episode of pain shooting into 
her right leg that was not severe.  (Ex. 1, pp. 22-23)   
Dr. Kuhnlein found the July 2018 work injury caused Hunter to sustain a cervical 
strain, a low back strain with intermittent radiculitic symptoms, and a right ankle/foot 
strain.  (Ex. 1, p. 22)  Dr. Kuhnlein noted the day after the incident, Dr. Hanawalt 
documented Hunter exhibited tenderness to palpation from the lower occipital ridge 
extending into the trapezius and stiffness with cervical range of motion and objective 
findings in her ankle area, which ultimately resolved, and objective symptoms in her 
lumbar spine.  (Ex. 1, p. 23)  On examination, Dr. Kuhnlein noted tenderness to 
palpation in the right mid scapular area, the right occipital area, lumbar spine, 
paralumbar muscle areas, percussive tenderness with light touch in the lumbar area, 
positive piriformis palpation on the right with radiation into the right leg and negative in 
her left leg, and radiation into the right anterior thigh to the knee with right leg raising 
compared with no evidence or radiculopathy in the left leg.  (Ex. 1, pp. 21-22)  Dr. 
Kuhnlein noted the pattern of Hunter’s fibromyalgia symptoms before and after the 
injury did not change, but her pattern of care changed, noting it did not appear Dr. Field 
or Dr. Brady asked her how her symptoms before the injury were different than her  
symptoms after her injury.  (Ex. 1, p. 24)  Dr. Kuhnlein found Hunter’s ankle/foot 
symptoms had resolved.  He assigned Hunter a five percent permanent impairment for 
her cervical strain, which included the headaches, a seven percent whole person 
impairment for her low back strain with intermittent radiculitic symptoms, for a combined 
twelve percent whole person impairment.  I also find Dr. Kuhnlein’s restrictions to be 
Hunter’s permanent restrictions. 
B. 
October 2018 Work Injury 
Hunter alleges she sustained a permanent impairment to her mid back or 
thoracic spine caused by a work injury on October 15, 2018, arising out of and in the 
course of her employment with Senior Housing.  Senior Housing and American 
Compensation deny Hunter she sustained an injury to her mid back or thoracic spine 
arising out of and in the course of her employment with Senior Housing that caused a 
temporary or permanent impairment.   
Dr. Kuhnlein opined Hunter sustained a thoracic strain when she felt a popping 
sensation in the thoracic spine and immediate thoracic pain.  (Ex. 1, p. 23)  Dr. Kuhnlein 
found Hunters’ pattern of care changed in response to acute musculoskeletal injuries 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 25 
she sustained in July 2018 and October 2018 “based on the information currently 
available in the record.”  (Ex. 1, p. 24)  Dr. Kuhnlein noted Hunter reported having 
periodic mid back pain when she was ill or in stressful situations, but denied having any 
routine mid-back pain prior to the July 2018 incident.  (Ex. 1, p. 10)  He also noted while 
Hunter had preexisting fibromyalgia, she only had “periodic” mid back pain and only 
required “occasional” chiropractic care and stretching exercises, noting “I could not find 
anything in the currently available record that would suggest otherwise.”  (Ex. 1, pp. 22-
23).  Dr. Kuhnlein’s independent medical examination report does not indicate he 
reviewed any of Hunter’s chiropractic or medical records from 2015 until the July 2018 
work injury.  (Ex. 1)  The letter sent to Dr. Kuhnlein by Hunter’s counsel does not 
provide that Dr. Strickler’s chiropractic records were provided to Dr. Kuhnlein.  (Ex. 1, 
pp. 5-7)   
Dr. Brady treated Hunter on one occasion, January 10, 2019, and he examined 
Hunter for purposes of providing an impairment rating on March 19, 2019.  In a letter 
dated April 21, 2020, in response to an inquiry from Senior Housing and West Bend, Dr. 
Brady opined he did not believe the thoracic pain Hunter had represented an injury 
when he examined her and he stated he could not comment on what Dr. Kuhnlein saw 
when he examined her.  (JE 8, p. 32)   
Dr. Field examined Hunter for purposes of an independent medical examination 
January 2019.  (JE 9)  At that time he did not provide an opinion concerning Hunter’s 
alleged thoracic spine or mid back injury.  (JE 9)  In a letter dated April 29, 2020, Dr. 
Field noted during an emergency room visit following the alleged work injury Hunter 
complained of tenderness in the right lower rib cage, but there was nothing definitive on 
examination showing she had a hurt rib or rib/spinal junction soreness, x-rays only 
showed mild degenerative changes, and no further studies were done.  (JE 9, p. 7)  Dr. 
Field opined: 
[i]n summary, it does not appear there was any definitive, objective 
evidence of injury to the thoracic spine through the course of evaluation, 
subsequent studies, and pattern of pain which has been described.  We 
evaluated her spine in terms of spinal range of motion.  She had no 
difficulty flexing her lumbar spine other than getting her fingers about 10 
inches from the floor.  She had good extension of her lumbar spine, and if 
she had problems with her thoracic spine, pain would have been evident 
on that examination as well. 
In summary, I do not think there is definitive clear evidence of injury to 
the thoracic spine based on the clinical evaluation which took place in the 
emergency room, follow-up evaluations by Dr. Hanawalt, and also the fact 
that no further definitive objective findings have been undertaken in the 
course of her management. 
(JE 9, p. 7)   

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 26 
The evidence shows Hunter complained of mid back or thoracic symptoms 
before she worked for Silver Pines and Senior Housing, and that she sought 
chiropractic care for her mid back or thoracic symptoms with Dr. Strickler.  Hunter 
complained of mid back pain and she received a chiropractic manipulation on May 14, 
2015, May 18, 2015, May 21, 2015, November 10, 2015, February 23, 2016, and March 
1, 2016.  (JE 1, pp. 1-4, 8, 10-11)  During an appointment on May 14, 2015, Dr. Strickler 
documented she had a decreased range of motion at T5.  (JE 1, p. 1)   
Following a car accident in May 2016, Hunter sought additional chiropractic care.  
(Ex. D, p. 20; Tr., pp. 28, 38)  During an appointment on June 8, 2016, she complained 
of neck pain, upper back pain, and low back pain.  (JE 1, p. 13)  During a follow-up 
appointment on June 13, 2016, Hunter complained of soreness and achiness in her 
“upper dorsal regions.”  (JE 1, p. 15)  She returned to Dr. Strickler on June 30, 2016, 
complaining of slightly elevated mid back pain.  (JE 1, p. 18)   
Hunter attended an appointment with Dr. Strickler on April 25, 2017, complaining 
of mid back pain.  (JE 1, p. 26)  During appointments on August 28, 2017 and 
September 1, 2017, she reported her mid back pain had improved.  (JE 1, pp. 28-29)  
During an appointment on March 7, 2018, Hunter complained of mid back pain after 
falling out of a truck.  (JE 1, p. 35)  Hunter attended a total of thirteen appointments with 
Dr. Strickler between May 2015 and March 7, 2018, where he treated her for mid back 
symptoms. 
Hunter sustained an injury while working for Silver Pines on July 18, 2018.  
Hunter alleges she sustained injuries to her neck with headaches and low back caused 
by the July 18, 2018 work injury.  At hearing Hunter denied she injured her mid back or 
thoracic spine at hearing.   
After treating with Dr. Hanawalt for just over a month, Hunter reported she was 
experiencing increased pain in her thoracic spine down to her lumbar spine on August 
29, 2018.  (JE 8, p. 10)  Dr. Hanawalt ordered thoracic spine imaging, which did not 
show a compression fracture, now showed mild-to-moderate mid thoracic spine 
degenerative changes.  (JE 5, p. 3)  During an appointment on September 18, 2018, 
Hunter relayed her mid to low back pain had worsened since her last visit.  (JE 8, p. 12)  
During a trip to the emergency room just days before the alleged October 15, 2018 work 
injury, on examination, Hunter exhibited tenderness and bony tenderness in both her 
thoracic and lumbar spine.  (JE 5, p. 8)     
While Dr. Kuhnlein received copies of Dr. Hanawalt’s records and the October 
12, 2018, emergency room visit, there is no evidence he received copies of Dr. 
Strickler’s records, to opine whether he believed the treatment was occasional, and 
whether the records changed his opinions in any way.  While Dr. Kuhnlein’s exam and 
report is thorough, it is based on an incomplete medical record.  I do not find his opinion 
persuasive that Hunter sustained an injury to her mid back or thoracic spine arising out 
of an in the course of her employment with Senior Housing and West Bend.  See 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995) (noting 
“[w]hen an expert’s opinion is based upon an incomplete history, the opinion is not 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 27 
necessarily binding on the commissioner”).  Based on this finding, the issues for File 
Number 20700082.01 are moot, with the exception of costs. 
III. 
Extent of Disability – July 2018 Work Injury 
Hunter alleges she sustained an industrial disability caused by the July 2018 
work injury.  Silver Pines and American Compensation deny Hunter sustained an 
industrial disability. 
“Industrial disability is determined by an evaluation of the employee’s earning 
capacity.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 852 (Iowa 2011).  
In considering the employee’s earning capacity, the deputy commissioner evaluates 
several factors, including “consideration of not only the claimant’s functional disability, 
but also [his] age, education, qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in similar 
employment.”  Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Deutmeyer, 789 N.W.2d 129, 137-38 (Iowa 2010).  
The inquiry focuses on the injured employee’s “ability to be gainfully employed.”  Id. at 
138.  
The determination of the extent of disability is a mixed issue of law and fact.  
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  Compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2).  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Id. § 85.34(2)(v).   
At the time of the hearing Hunter was forty-six.  (Tr., p. 12)  She has graduated 
from high school, completed an associate of degree and is an LPN.  (Exs. D, p. 9; E, p. 
29; Tr. p. 12)  I found her articulate at hearing and I believe she is capable of retraining.   
Hunter has experience working as a nurse, a pharmacy technician and instructor, 
account manager serving as a liaison between a pharmacy and facilities, and tax 
preparer.  (Ex. E, pp. 28-29)  She has worked with Microsoft office products while 
working as a nurse for multiple employers.  (Ex. E, pp. 28-29)  Following her 
termination, Hunter worked as a tax preparer and in the nursing field.  In October 2020, 
she secured a position as the director of nursing for Higley Mansion, where she 
performs many of the same duties she performed while working for Silver Pines and her 
salary is the same.  (Tr., pp. 13-15)  As discussed above, I adopted Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
restrictions as Hunter’s permanent restrictions.  Considering all of the factors of 
industrial disability, I find Hunter has sustained a forty percent industrial disability 
attributable to the July 2018 work injury, entitling her to 200 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated weekly rate of $630.82, commencing on the 
stipulated commencement date of July 23, 2019.   
IV. 
Medical Bills – July 2018 Work Injury 
Exhibit 5 documents unpaid medical bills for treatment Hunter received from 
WorkWell and for therapy.  Hunter also sought medical treatment on her own on 
January 8, 2019.  After Silver Pines and American Compensation discontinued her 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 28 
medical care after receiving Dr. Field’s opinion, Hunter sought treatment from Cedar 
Rapids Pain Associates and Dr. Strickler, which was paid by Medicaid.   
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  Id.  “The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id. § 85.27(4).  If the 
employee is dissatisfied with the care, the employee should communicate the basis for 
the dissatisfaction to the employer.  Id.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on 
alternate care, the commissioner “may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Id.  The statute requires the employer to 
furnish reasonable medical care.  Id. § 85.27(4); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (noting “[t]he employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability”).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
the employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer 
has denied liability for the injury, or has abandoned care.  Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).   
While the employer retains the right to choose the employee’s medical care 
under the statute, the employee is not prohibited from seeking her own care when the 
employer denies compensability for the injury or the employee “abandons the 
protections of section 85.27 or otherwise obtains his or her own medical care 
independent of the statutory scheme.”  Brewer Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 
248 (Iowa 2018) (quoting Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 204 (Iowa 2010).  In Brewer-Strong and Gwinn, the court held the employer’s duty 
to furnish reasonable medical care includes unauthorized care if the employee is able to 
prove “by a preponderance of the evidence that such care was reasonable and 
beneficial” under the totality of the circumstances.  Id. (quoting Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 
206).  The court further held “unauthorized medical care is beneficial if it provides a 
more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care 
authorized by the employer.”  Id.  I find the care Hunter sought on her own to be 
reasonable and beneficial.  Silver Pines and American Compensation are responsible 
for all of the medical bills set forth in Exhibit 5, causally connected to the work injury.  
Silver Pines and American Compensation are not responsible for the cost of any 
injections Hunter received to the thoracic spine. 
V. 
Costs Associated with the Responses to Requests for Admission from 
Senior Housing and West Bend 
On the hearing report, Hunter noted she was seeking the assessment of costs as 
a sanction for Senior Housing and West Bend’s denial of requests for admission.  
Hunter did not address the issue in her post-hearing brief.  

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 29 
Exhibit 3 includes responses to requests for admission and interrogatory answers 
from Senior Housing and West Bend.  As noted above, I did not find Hunter met her 
burden of proof in her case against Senior Housing and West Bend.  I do not perceive 
Defendants’ responses to requests for admission egregious.  I find Defendants had 
reasonable grounds and evidence upon which they relied on to believe they might 
prevail at hearing.  I further conclude Defendants had sufficient grounds and reasons for 
their denials in their response to the requests for admission.  Based on the foregoing, I 
conclude sanctions are not appropriate.  Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.517(3)b). 
VI. 
Costs 
Hunter seeks to recover costs in both cases.  Silver Pines, American 
Compensation, Senior Housing, and West Bend aver she should not be awarded costs 
in these cases. 
Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing before the 
commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33(86), permits the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner 
to assess:  (1) the cost of attendance of a certified shorthand report for hearings and 
depositions; (2) transcript costs; (3) the cost of service of the original notice and 
subpoenas; (4) witness fees and expenses in accord with Iowa Code sections 622.69 
and 622.72; (5) the cost of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony in accord 
with Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72; (6) the cost of obtaining no more than two 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees; and (8) costs of persons reviewing 
health service disputes.  
 
A. 
July 2018 Work Injury 
In File Number 1656860.01, Hunter seeks to recover the $100.00 filing fee and 
the $13.60 cost of service from Silver Pines and American Compensation.  (Ex. 6, p. 1)  
The administrative rule expressly allows for the recovery of these costs, which I find 
should be assessed to Silver Pines and American Compensation. 
B. 
October 2018 Work Injury 
In File Number 20700082.01, Hunter seeks to recover the $2,078.75 cost of Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s independent medical examination, the $100.00 filing fee, and the $13.60 cost 
of service from Senior Housing and West Bend set forth in Exhibit 7.  Senior Housing 
and West Bend contend Hunter is not entitled to recover costs in this case. 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2), provides, in part,  
[i]f an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 30 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  The physician chosen by the employee has the right to 
confer with and obtain from the employer-retained physician sufficient 
history of the injury to make a proper examination.  An employer is only 
liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an examination conducted 
pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee is being 
examined is determined to be compensable under this chapter or chapter 
85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of such an examination 
if the injury for which the employee is being examined is determined not to 
be a compensable injury.  A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination made pursuant to this subsection, shall be based on 
the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment 
rating in the local area where the examination is conducted. 
Under the express terms of the statute Hunter is not entitled to recover the cost of Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s independent medical examination from Senior Housing and West Bend 
because he performed his independent medical examination for the October 2018 work 
injury before Senior Housing and West Bend sought opinions from Drs. Brady and Field 
regarding the October 2018 work injury and because she was not successful in proving 
her claim against Senior Housing and West Bend. 
The administrative rule affords the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner 
the discretion to award costs, including the cost of medical reports and other costs.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s bill is itemized.  He charged $703.75 for the examination and $1,375.00 for 
the report.  However, given Hunter was not successful in her claim against Senior 
Housing and West Bend, I find the parties should bear their own costs. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
For File Number 1656860.01: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant two hundred (200) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated weekly rate of six hundred thirty and 82/100 dollars 
($630.82) per week, commencing on the stipulated commencement date of July 23, 
2019. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for all benefits paid to date.  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants are responsible for all causally related medical bills as directed in this 
decision.   

HUNTER V. LAN SILVER PINES, LLC & SENIOR HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
Page 31 
Defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred and 00/100 dollars 
($100.00) for the filing fee and thirteen and 60/100 dollars ($13.60), for the cost of 
service. 
For File Number 20700082.01: 
Claimant shall take nothing. 
For Both Files: 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _7th _ day of July, 2021. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas Wertz (via WCES) 
Jason Kidd (via WCES) 
James Ballard (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the 
next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
