Case Number: 23010422.01
Case Title:  FLAHERTY, TIMOTHY (DEC) V. HY-VEE, INC. AND HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Flaherty Timothy-23010422.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JODI FLAHERTY, Surviving Spouse and  : 
Dependent of TIMOTHY FLAHERTY 
  : 
(DEC), and his Dependent Children 
  : 
 
  File No. 23010422.01 
SHANNON FLAHERTY, SEAN  
  : 
FLAHERTY, KATIE FLAHERTY, and 
  : 
MAGGIE FLAHERTY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
              
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :              
HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD 
  : 
STORES, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :            
 
Employer, 
  :  
 
 
  :  
  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
UNION INS. CO. OF PROVIDENCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
      Head Notes:  1108.10; 1108.50; 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
       1402.40 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Jodi Flaherty, surviving spouse and dependent of Timothy Flaherty 
(deceased) and his dependent children, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Hy-Vee, Inc. and Hy-Vee Food Stores, Inc., employer, and 
Union Insurance Company of Providence, insurer, both as defendants.  This matter was 
heard on September 25, 2024, with a final submission date of October 23, 2024. 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-25, 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-F, and the testimony of claimant and Kunal Patra, M.D. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Feb-24  10:33:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
employment. 
 
2. Whether claimant’s claim for benefits is barred by application of Iowa Code 
section 85.23. 
 
3. Whether the injury is a cause of permanent disability; and if so, 
 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
5. Whether there is a causal connection between the injury and the claimed 
medical expenses. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The deceased, Timothy Flaherty (Tim), was 50 years old at the time of his death.  
Tim graduated from high school.  He graduated from Creighton University with a degree 
in business marketing and management.  (Hearing Transcript, page 16) 
Tim was married in 1996.  He had four children with his wife, Jodi, when he died.  
(Tr., pp. 14-15) 
Jodi Flaherty testified Tim began working part-time at Hy-Vee while in high 
school.  She said that in 2020 Tim’s duties with Hy-Vee included management of the 
Hy-Vee grocery store, pharmacy and a wine and spirits store in Fort Dodge.  He also 
managed a pharmacy in Manson, IA.  (Tr., pp. 19-20) 
Tim was promoted to district store director in April of 2021.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 4, 
page 15)  Ms. Flaherty testified that in that position, Tim was assigned stores in 
Webster City, Eldora, and Iowa Falls.  Tim still had retained his management duties that 
he had in 2020.  (Tr., p. 20)   
Ms. Flaherty testified that Tim was paid based on profitability of the stores he 
managed.  (Tr., pp. 25-26)  She said that Tim was worried about the addition of the 
stores in Webster City, Eldora and Iowa Falls to his managerial duties as these stores 
had a history of not being profitable.  She said Tim was also concerned that the addition 
of the three stores would affect his ability to manage the Fort Dodge and Manson 
locations.  (Tr., pp. 26-29) 
Ms. Flaherty testified that after Tim was assigned the additional stores to 
manage, he was on his computer and phone when he got home from work.  (Tr., pp. 30-
31)  Ms. Flaherty testified that, in addition, the extra stores added a few hours to his 
workday.  (Tr., p. 32) 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Ms. Flaherty said that she and her husband talked about the stress that he had 
managing multiple stores.  She said that his job stress was heavy and nonstop.  (Tr., p. 
22) 
Ms. Flaherty testified that in approximately July of 2021, Tim talked to her about 
his job stress.  Tim told Ms. Flaherty that he was going to work another 4 years instead 
of 10 due to job stress.  (Tr., pp. 37-38) 
Texts from Tim’s phone indicated that he was concerned about his work taking 
time from his family.  One text indicated, “Office sucks the life out of you.”  These texts 
are undated.  (Ex. 15, pp. 44-45; Tr., p. 7) 
Ms. Flaherty testified that claimant was stressed during the inventory process of 
the stores.  She said Tim was unable to sleep during this time and had fatigue and 
experienced physical symptoms.  (Tr., p. 40) 
Ms. Flaherty said that the Hy-Vee stores were scheduling to have an inventory 
on August 30, 2021.  She said Tim was especially stressed because the inventory 
involved three new stores that Tim had no control over.  (Tr., pp. 38-39) 
Tim’s prior medical history is relevant.  In 2017 he was diagnosed with having an 
allergic reaction to an insect sting.  (Joint Exhibit 2, pages 17-18) 
In 2019, Tim was seen in an emergency department for heart palpitations.  (JE 3, 
p. 24)  Tim indicated at that time he had woke up in the night a few times with his heart 
racing.  He also indicated, at that time, his job as a manager at a local Hy-Vee store 
caused stress.  Tim’s x-rays and EKGs were found to be normal.  Tim was 
recommended to have a Holter monitor and a sleep study, but declined those 
recommendations at that time.  (JE 3, pp. 24-29) 
In November of 2020, Tim underwent a routine physical.  He was assessed as 
having GERD, hypercholesterolemia, overnight fatigue, snoring, and elevated blood 
pressure.  A sleep study was again recommended.  (JE 4, p. 104) 
In December of 2020, Tim underwent a sleep study.  The results of the sleep 
study qualified him for nocturnal oxygen under Medicare guidelines.  (JE 5, p. 117) 
On January 7, 2021, Tim was evaluated by Mark Berry, D.O., a cardiologist.  Tim 
reported profound snoring and waking up gasping for air.  Tim’s wife indicated that Tim 
had stopped breathing during sleep.  Dr. Berry recommended diagnostic testing and 
opined “. . . these abnormalities give the patient a high pre-test probability of having 
obstructive sleep apnea.”  (Ex. 24, pp. 1-3) 
Tim did a home sleep study on January 20, 2021.  Based on the sleep study, it 
was recommended Tim use an AutoPAP machine.  Tim was also recommended to be 
evaluated by an ENT specialist for the site of anatomic obstruction, mandibular 
advancement devices, or an airway enlargement procedure.  (Ex. 25, pp. 1-4)  Tim was 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
also told to use caution when driving and to avoid sedatives and alcohol before bed.  
(Ex. 25, pp. 1-4) 
In August of 2021, claimant took a vacation with his family and had difficulty 
breathing while in Colorado.  Tim believed his breathing problems were due to altitude 
sickness.  (JE 3, p. 91)  Tim also had swelling of his right elbow due to a bug bite.  (JE 
4, p. 112) 
On August 30, 2021, Fort Dodge Fire and Rescue were dispatched to Ms. 
Flaherty’s home responding to a 911 call that Tim was unresponsive and not breathing.  
(JE 1, p. 1)  Tim was found in his bedroom.  Technicians attempted to shock Tim with 
an AED defibrillator and performed chest compressions.  Fire and Rescue’s notes 
indicate, “law enforcement state the patient’s wife informed them that she woke up to 
the sound of the patient’s CPAP machine alarming.  She noticed the patient was not 
breathing and that the hose was not connected to the CPAP mask, and immediately 
called 911.”  (JE 1, p. 1) 
Ms. Flaherty testified at hearing that she woke up hearing the alarm of the CPAP 
machine on August 30, 2021.  She said Tim’s mask was on his face and the hose was 
connected.  (Tr., p. 45) 
Tim was sent to Trinity Regional Medical Center on August 30, 2021.  (JE 3, p. 
40)  Records indicate, “Per EMS, the patient was discovered by his wife unresponsive 
with the CPAP mask partially off.”  (JE 3, p. 40)  Ms. Flaherty indicated that Tim had 
increased stress at work and had experienced epigastric and abdominal pain.  (JE 3, p. 
53)  Because Tim still showed signs of a bug bite on his right elbow, he was tested for 
Lyme disease.  (JE 3, pp. 53, 68) 
Records indicate that Ms. Flaherty was told that Tim’s prognosis was poor.  
However, Tim was intubated and a cardiac catheterization was performed.  (Ex. 1, p. 4; 
JE 3, p. 83)  Records indicate Ms. Flaherty was informed by healthcare providers that 
Tim had a cardiac arrest, pulmonary edema, acute respiratory failure, and cerebral 
edema.  (Ex. 1, p. 4; JE 3, p. 52) 
On August 30, 2021, Joseph Cookman, D.O., did a cardiac consultation.  Ms. 
Flaherty had found Tim unresponsive with the CPAP mask off his face.  (JE 3, p. 69)  
Tim was assessed, in part, as having cardiac arrest with unclear etiology.  He was also 
diagnosed with cardiomyopathy of an uncertain etiology and hypotension.  (JE 3, p. 84) 
A cardiology evaluation was performed on September 3, 2021, by John Justice, 
M.D.  Dr. Justice’s notes indicate “. . . 50-year-old man with obstructive sleep apnea and 
gastroesophageal reflux disease admitted on 8/30/2021 with an out of hospital cardiac 
arrest.  The patient was found by his wife unresponsive in bed postured with his CPAP 
machine off his face; it was unclear how long the patient was unconscious.”  (JE 3, p. 
103) 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Dr. Justice noted that the etiology of Tim’s cardiac arrest remained unclear.  Tim 
was diagnosed, in part, with cardiomyopathy, etiology unclear.  (JE 3, pp. 101-103)  A 
progress note from September 2, 2021, reiterates the history and diagnoses provided 
by Dr. Justice.  (JE 3, p. 87) 
Tim was unconscious during his stay at the hospital.  Due to the severity of his 
anoxic brain injury, healthcare providers believed Tim was not likely to have any 
neurological recovery.  (JE 3, p. 52)  On September 6, 2021, Tim was extubated and 
pronounced dead.  A death certificate was filed on Tim on September 14, 2021.  The 
death certificate indicates that the cause of death was acute respiratory failure.  Other 
significant conditions causing death included acute renal failure and anoxia.  (Ex. 9, p. 
36) 
In a July 8, 2024 report, John Cimino, M.D., gave his opinions of the cause of 
Tim’s death following a records review.  Dr. Cimino is a board-certified cardiologist.  Dr. 
Cimino noted that on September 13, 2019, Tim was having significant symptoms of 
sleep apnea.  Tim was prescribed a CPAP machine.  One month before his cardiac 
arrest, Tim went back on his CPAP machine because he was having difficulty breathing 
and shortness of breath and abdominal discomfort.  (Ex. A, p. 1) 
Dr. Cimino noted that at the time of Tim’s cardiac arrest, his wife did find the 
CPAP off, which could have left claimant with hypoxia.  Dr. Cimino indicated that stress 
does not cause nonischemic cardiomyopathy.  (Ex. A, p. 2) 
In conclusion, Dr. Cimino indicated:  
The patient did have multiple risk factors for cardiomyopathy, including 
obstructive sleep apnea first and foremost.  He also had hypertension and 
hyperlipidemia.  He was obese.  His untreated obstructive sleep apnea 
could be a large contributor to his non-ischemic cardiomyopathy.  
Importantly, stress does not cause non-ischemic cardiomyopathy.  
Certainly, if he was not compliant with his CPAP mask, and if had been on 
it for years, perhaps this event may not have happened. Most concerning 
is that his mask was off and alarming when his wife found him hypoxic; 
hypoxia could have led to his cardiac arrest and subsequent demise.  
(Ex. A, p. 2) 
Dr. Cimino opined that claimant’s cardiac arrest was not caused by stress, 
fatigue and exhaustion from the workplace, but was rather caused by his underlying 
cardiomyopathy, which could have been caused by sleep apnea.  He opined claimant’s 
workplace stress, fatigue or exhaustion did not permanently or materially aggravate his 
underlying pre-existing medical conditions.  He indicated claimant’s pre-existing medical 
conditions were a material and substantial factor in causing his cardiac arrest and 
death.  (Ex. A, p. 2) 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
In an August 26, 2024 report, Kunal Patra, M.D., gave his opinions regarding 
causation of Tim’s death.  Dr. Patra is board certified in psychiatry.  (Ex. 2)  Dr. Patra 
reviewed Tim’s medical records and spoke with Ms. Flaherty.   
Ms. Flaherty indicated that when Tim took on managerial duties for additional 
stores, he suffered exhaustion and poor sleep.  She said her late husband routinely 
voiced concern regarding work-related stress.  She said that leading up to the August 
30, 2021, incident, Tim was extremely stressed due to issues with store inventory.  This 
was because if the inventory numbers were bad, this would negatively affect Tim’s 
income.  (Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Dr. Patra opined that, but for the stress that Tim had as a store manager, he 
would not have suffered a cardiac arrest on August 30, 2021.  (Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Dr. Patra testified the excessive stress Tim had would have contributed to a 
cardiac event and would cause an arrhythmic event that eventually caused Tim’s death 
due to a cardiac arrest.  (Tr., pp. 78-79)  Dr. Patra testified his opinions are based upon, 
in part, Ms. Flaherty’s narrative that she provided.  (Tr., p. 80)  Dr. Patra also testified 
that he disagreed with Dr. Cimino’s opinion as it did not have information regarding the 
level of stress that Tim had prior to his cardiac arrest.  (Tr., p. 79) 
In an August 21, 2024 affidavit, Shawn Brown indicated that he is the district 
director for Hy-Vee.  Mr. Brown said that he worked with the decedent for approximately 
2-3 years.  Mr. Brown indicated that Tim never reported any work-related fatigue or 
exhaustion to him.  He testified that he was unaware of Tim reporting to anyone at Hy-
Vee regarding work-related stress or fatigue.  He noted Tim never reported any work-
related health issues to him.  (Ex. C)  Ms. Flaherty testified at hearing that Tim never 
complained about his job stress to Hy-Vee as he believed it would get him demoted and 
it would put his job at risk.  (Tr., p. 41) 
Ms. Flaherty testified at hearing that from February 2021 to the date of death, 
Tim wore the CPAP machine every night.  (Tr., pp. 25, 49)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Iowa claimants with preexisting circulatory or heart conditions are permitted, 
upon proper medical proof, to recover workers' compensation benefits where the 
employment contributes something substantial to increase the risk of injury or death. 
The employment contribution must take the form of an exertion greater than 
nonemployment life.  Sondag v. Ferris Hardware, 220 N.W.2d 903 (Iowa 1974).  The 
comparison, however, is not with the employee's usual exertion in employment, but with 
exertions of normal nonemployment life of this or any other person.  Id., at 905.  These 
exertions may be physical or emotional.  Swalwell v. William Knudson & Son, Inc., II 
Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 385 (App. Dec. 1982).  The Sondag rule is 
favored by Professor Larson in his treatise on workers' compensation.  See 2-46 
Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law, Section 46.03.  According to Professor Larson, 
the causation test is a two-part analysis.  First, medical causation must be established. 
That is, medical experts must causally relate the alleged stress, whether emotional or 
physical, to the heart injury.  Second, legal causation must be established.  That is, the 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
fact-finder must determine whether the medically-related stress is more than the stress 
of everyday nonemployment life.      
In Iowa, the legal causation component of the analysis is satisfied under one of 
three circumstances.  The first situation is when heavy exertion, ordinarily required by 
the work, is superimposed on a defective heart, aggravating the preexisting condition. 
The second situation involves instances of unusual strenuous employment exertion 
imposed on a pre-existing diseased condition.  The final situation supporting 
compensation is when damage results from continued exertion required by the 
employment after the onset of the heart attack.  P.D.S.I. v. Peterson, 685 N.W.2d 627, 
630 (Iowa 2004)(citations omitted); Riley v. Oscar Mayer Foods Corp., 532 N.W.2d 489, 
492 (Iowa Ct. App 1995).  
The record indicates Tim suffered from sleep apnea.  At the time of his cardiac 
arrest, Tim was on a CPAP machine.  The record suggests claimant may have been off 
his CPAP machine at least a month prior to the cardiac arrest.  Ms. Flaherty testified 
that Tim had been using his CPAP machine from approximately February 2021 until the 
time of death.   
The record indicates Tim had stress from his job as a Hy-Vee store manager in 
Fort Dodge.  The record indicates that when Tim was named as a manager for three 
other locations that were less productive Hy-Vee stores, Tim’s stress increased.  Tim 
was also performing inventory for all the stores, which increased his job stress even 
more. 
The record indicates that several physicians, Drs. Cookman, Justus, Elizabeth 
Day, D.O., and Megan McNeil, M.D., who treated claimant after his cardiac arrest, all 
indicate that his cardiac arrest was of an uncertain etiology.  (JE 3, p. 88; JE 3, p. 103)  
Dr. Cookman and Dr. Justus are cardiologists.  The record indicates healthcare 
providers who treated Tim after his cardiac arrest were aware of his stress at work.  (JE 
3, p. 53) 
Dr. Cimino is a board-certified cardiologist. He opined that Tim’s cardiac arrest 
was not caused by his stress, fatigue, or exhaustion from work.  He opined that the 
underling cardiomyopathy, which could have been caused by sleep apnea, was the 
probable cause of Tim’s cardiac arrest.  (Ex. A, p. 2)  Dr. Cimino also indicated that 
Tim’s CPAP mask was off when found by Ms. Flaherty and the hypoxia could have led 
to cardiac arrest.  (Ex. A, p. 2) 
Dr. Patra is a board-certified psychiatrist.  Dr. Patra opined that, but for the stress 
Tim had as a manager, he would not have suffered a cardiac arrest on August 30, 2021.  
(Ex. 1, p. 4)   
Dr. Patra’s opinions regarding causation are problematic for a number of 
reasons.   

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
First, Dr. Patra’s report and his testimony at hearing indicated that he relied on   
“. . . collateral information obtained from Jodi Flaherty . . .”  (Ex. 1, p. 4)  As noted in the 
Findings of Fact, Ms. Flaherty testified at hearing that Tim’s CPAP mask was on his 
face and that the hose was connected to the machine when she awoke to the CPAP 
alarm.  (Tr., p. 45)  Medical records repeatedly indicate that Ms. Flaherty told 
emergency medical staff and hospital staff that either Tim’s CPAP mask was off his face 
or the CPAP hose was disconnected.  (JE 1, p. 1; JE 3, pp. 69, 87, 101) 
Ms. Flaherty’s contradictory testimony at hearing compromises her credibility.  As 
Dr. Patra relied on Ms. Flaherty’s history to reach his causation opinion, Dr. Patra’s 
opinions are also suspect.  It should be noted that in Dr. Patra’s report there is no 
reference to Tim’s CPAP mask being off his face or the CPAP hose being disconnected.   
Second, as noted, at least two cardiologists opined that the etiology of Tim’s 
cardiac arrest was unknown.  Dr. Cimino also opined that Tim’s workplace stress did not 
cause or materially aggravate his cardiac arrest.  As noted, Dr. Patra is a psychiatrist; 
he is not a board-certified cardiologist.   
Third, claimant’s cause of death was assessed as acute respiratory failure, which 
supports Dr. Cimino’s opinions.  There is nothing in the death certificate indicating that 
Tim’s death was caused by stress.   
Dr. Patra bases his opinions of causation on Ms. Flaherty’s history of events.  
Ms. Flaherty’s testimony regarding the CPAP mask and hose is questionable.  Dr. Patra 
did not review all of claimant’s medical records in this case.  (Tr., p. 80)  Dr. Patra’s 
opinions that stress was a cause of the cardiac arrest are not supported by the medical 
records or the death certificate.  Dr. Patra’s causation opinion is contrary to the opinions 
of at least three cardiologists.  Arguably, Dr. Patra lacks the qualifications to offer an 
opinion regarding the cause of Tim’s cardiac arrest.  Given this record, it is found that 
the opinions of Dr. Patra regarding causation are not convincing.   
The testimony of Ms. Flaherty regarding Tim’s CPAP mask and the connection of 
the CPAP hose is questionable.  Two cardiologists opined that the cause of Tim’s 
cardiac arrest was unknown.  Dr. Cimino opined that Tim’s stress at work was not the 
cause of his cardiac arrest and did not materially aggravate pre-existing conditions to 
cause a cardiac arrest.  The opinions of Dr. Patra regarding causation are found not 
convincing.  Given this record, it is found claimant has failed to carry the burden of proof 
that the cardiac arrest arose out of and in the course of employment. 
As claimant failed to carry the burden of proof that the cardiac arrest arose out of 
and in the course of employment, all other issues are moot. 
I am empathetic to Ms. Flaherty and her family.  The record indicates that 
Timothy Flaherty had traits which many of us aspire to.  He was a good father and 
husband.  He valued time with his family.  He worked hard at a stressful job to provide 
for his family.  He was a good employee for Hy-Vee.  However, because claimant failed 

FLAHERTY, et al. V. HY-VEE, INC. and HY-VEE FOOD STORES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
to carry the burden of proof to prove medical causation, claimant has failed to carry the 
burden of proof that the cardiac arrest arose out of and in the course of employment. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
That each party shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this __24TH __ day of February, 2025. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Neven Mulholland (via WCES) 
 
Brian Yung (via WCES) 
Lindsey Mills (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
       JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
