Case Number: 5066611
Case Title:  AHRENS, PHILLIP V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ahrens Phillip-5066611d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PHILLIP AHRENS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                     File No. 5066611 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC,: 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
UNINSURED, 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1100, 1402.10, 1800,  
 
 
  : 
 
                  1801.1, 1803, 2500 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Phillip Ahrens, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Earwood Family Properties, Inc., employer. It is 
defendant’s position that it is not required to have workers’ compensation insurance.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on September 8, 2020, and considered fully submitted on September 
29, 2020.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 3 and Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5 , 
Defendants Exhibit  A, B, and D. Exhibit C was excluded. Testimony was received from 
claimant, Ben Earwood, Jose Arroyo, Marlin Mann, and Eli Shetler.  
On September 4, 2020, claimant filed a motion to amend the petition to add a 
claim for penalty benefits. On September 8, 2020, defendant filed a resistance arguing 
that they would be prejudiced by the late amendment. Defendants further asserted that 
a bifurcation of the issue would not be appropriate. The case had no written discovery 
and no depositions were taken.  
The issue of penalty was not considered during the hearing as it was deemed 
unfairly prejudicial to the defendant who had not prepared for the late pled claim.  
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876 IAC 4.35 makes Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 
1.402(4) applicable to amendments of pleadings before this agency.   
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Feb-25  12:28:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
Rule 1.402(4) of the Iowa R. Civ. P. provides:   
1.402(4) Amendments. A party may amend a pleading once as a matter of 
course at any time before a responsive pleading is served or, if the 
pleading is one to which no responsive pleading is required and the action 
has not been placed upon the trial calendar, the party may so amend it at 
any time within 20 days after it is served. Otherwise, a party may amend a 
pleading only by leave of court or by written consent of the adverse party. 
Leave to amend, including leave to amend to conform to the proof, shall 
be freely given when justice so requires.   
The Iowa Supreme Court repeatedly has held that allowing an amendment to a 
pleading is the rule; denial is the exception.  Galbraith v. George, 217 N.W.2d 598 (Iowa 
1974).  Considerable discretion is allowed in determining whether or not leave to amend 
should be granted.  Ackerman v. Lauver, 242 N.W.2d 342 (Iowa 1976).   
Ultimately the question is whether the allowance of a late pled penalty claim is 
unduly prejudicial to the defendant. In this case, it is not. Penalty claims are often 
bifurcated from the initial hearing and discovery pertaining to penalty is not allowed until 
the underlying matters are decided. See IAC 876-4.2(86) 
Defendants argue that Thomas-Wilson v. UFP Technologies, Inc., File No. 
5057149 (Arb. January 26, 2018) precludes allowance of bifurcation in the case at 
hand. However, this matter is factually different. In Thomas-Wilson, the claimant did not 
include penalty as an issue in the original petition and it was not raised until the post-
hearing brief after the close of evidence. In this case, the claimant moved to add penalty 
before the hearing.  
While the claimant or petitioner may only bifurcate before the case is assigned 
for hearing, the agency holds the right to bifurcate matters at any time. The first 
sentence of IAC 876-4.2(86) states, “A person presiding over a contested case 
proceeding in a workers' compensation matter may conduct a separate evidentiary 
hearing for determination of any issue in the contested case proceeding which goes to 
the whole or any material part of the case.”  
In Keiper v. Quaker Oats Company, File No. 5060842 (Ruling File No. 5060842), 
the claimant was permitted to file an amendment to the petition to add penalty on 
January 7, 2019, before a January 14, 2019, hearing. The penalty issue was bifurcated 
and set for hearing at a later date.  
In keeping with the Supreme Court’s directive to allow amendments when 
possible, the claimant’s motion to amend the petition to add penalty is granted. The 
penalty claim shall be heard at a later date in front of the undersigned.  
 
 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant was an employee at the time of his alleged injury;  
2. Whether he sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment, and if so, the nature and extent of that injury; 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary or healing period benefits; (October 
31, 2018, to December 6, 2018) 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent benefits;  
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses itemized 
in Claimant’s Exhibit 2; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to an assessment of costs.  
STIPULATIONS  
The parties agree that if the injury is found to be the cause of a permanent 
disability, the disability is a scheduled member disability limited to the little finger and 
compensable under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(d). The commencement date for 
permanent partial disability benefits, if any are awarded, is December 7, 2018.  
At the time of the alleged injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were $492.00 per 
week. He was single and entitled to two exemptions. Based on the foregoing, the 
weekly benefit rate is $328.94. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
At the time of the hearing, claimant, Philip Ahrens, was a 30-year-old person. He 
graduated from high school in 2008 and had some postsecondary education with no 
degree. Claimant’s past work history includes construction and mixed martial arts 
coaching and competition.  
At one point he worked for a gentleman by the name of Les Simmons doing 
roofing work. He did not keep track of his hours but was paid by the job for the work 
completed.  The major dispute in this case is whether claimant was an employee of the 
defendant.   The questions asked of the claimant pertaining to his past work history 
included questions about whether he considered himself self-employed at various times 
or an employee of a particular employer. For instance, when asked about his kickboxing 
or jujitsu classes, claimant testified that he did not consider himself to be self-employed 
but was paid by the class he conducted. However, he identified himself as self-
employed on his Facebook page.  
Defendant Earwood Family Properties is a real estate holding company owned 
by Ben Earwood and his brother, Chad, who lives in Kansas City.  Ben Earwood is the 
manager and has day to day control over its operations.  The business was started in 
2013 to own and renovate real estate properties.  In management terms, the company 
refers to its assets as doors to identify the number of properties it manages.  For 
instance, an apartment complex may have 12 doors. At the time of the hearing, 
defendant owned approximately 60 doors or around 20 properties with 63 tenants. 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 4 
 
 
Defendant retains the services of a property manager who lives on site. She is paid a 
percentage of the rental income once a month after the rents are collected. Part of her 
duties include contracting with the tenants. Mr. Earwood testified that every person who 
works for the company is a 1099 contractor. The majority of the people whose services 
he uses are paid by the hour although some contractors are paid by square foot of 
siding or roofing. 
These workers are tracked via timesheets and are given two days of paid 
holidays which Mr. Earwood refers to as “God” and “country.”  Workers are paid for July 
4th, and Christmas Day despite not working on those days. Defendant has never paid 
employment tax or unemployment on the six to ten workers paid on an hourly rate. Ben 
Earwood claims, not credibly, that this is not a cost saving technique. (Tr. p. 101) He 
even claimed that if he paid wages with appropriate deductions for taxes, the workers 
would take home less but they would still work for him. (Tr. p. 101) He sets defendant 
forth solely as a real estate holding company rather than a company that is actively 
involved in the acquisition, renovation, and management of several properties. There 
were no contracts in place prior to the claimant’s work for defendant employer. Those 
were instituted a few months before trial.  
In regards to the defendant, claimant had been introduced to Ben Earwood by a 
worker named Matt Wadlow. Claimant was hired on a trial basis to determine how much 
he would be paid. Initially he was paid $10.00 per hour, but after the first week his pay 
was increased to $14.00 per hour. In the defendant’s brief, it was argued that claimant 
was paid time and material; however, the testimony does not support this. Claimant did 
not have the money to pay for materials. He did not have the money to pay for tools. He 
testified that he owned a tool belt, a hammer and some other tools that had been gifted 
to him over the years. None of the pages in the transcript to which defendant cites (Tr. 
pp. 26, 93-94, 98) state that claimant paid for materials. Ben Earwood testified that “all 
of our contractors are time and material” but goes on to admit that Earwood maintains 
accounts at Lowe’s and K&K which the employees use to charge materials and tools 
against. “I’ve always purchased the material for the contractors,” Mr. Earwood stated. 
(Tr. p. 98) He also goes on to state that if the employee cannot afford a $200 set of 
tools when his breaks or maybe he can’t afford $50,000.00 in decking material, Mr. 
Earwood would then “loan that money.” (Tr. p. 98) It is not credible to believe that a 
sophisticated businessman such as Mr. Earwood would lend $50,000.00 to a person he 
hired at $10.00 an hour. Claimant did not testify that he was paid time and material. It is 
found claimant was paid an hourly wage that started at $10.00 and was increased after 
claimant’s trial period.  
When it came to the jobs, client was directed to the property by either Mr. 
Earwood or a representative of his.  Claimant used an application to clock in and out 
and  his pay was based upon the hours that he logged. (Ex 3:10-17) The form denoted 
claimant as an employee. (Ex 3:10)  It was typical for the claimant to move from 
property to property as projects were completed or materials had yet to arrive. He would 
move to different properties based upon the direction of Ben. In regards to the “God and 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 5 
 
 
country” pay, claimant received a check for but was not working during the Christmas 
season. 
He averaged between 30 to 50 hours per week. At a minimum, he would work 25 
hours per week. He was told that he could work as many hours as he wanted or as few.  
Defendant also had company T-shirts given to each worker. Mr. Earwood testified that 
these were promotional items. 
There was some dispute between the claimant and the defendant as to who 
owned the tools claimant used while working for the defendant. I find the more credible 
testimony comes from the claimant. Both the defendant and the claimant testified that  
claimant purchased a DeWalt cordless power toolkit using the defendant’s money.  
Later, there was some confusion as to whether claimant would repay the defendant for 
the purchase of the power tools but ultimately no repayment was required of him. 
Claimant testified that there were tools at the job site that were engraved or marked with 
the defendant’s initials on it.  Initially, Mr. Earwood claimed that it was Matt Wadlow that 
bought an engraver but didn’t know “if he took it out of the box.” (Tr. p. 97) However, 
earlier, he let slip that “I had Earwood on a bunch of them for sure, because they were 
my personal tools.” (Tr. p. 96)  
Claimant testified that the tools were stored in a property on 13th Street, a 
specific location which the defendant agreed he owned.  Defendant denied storing tools, 
however, but admitted that Earwood did have a pick, a drywall lift, and ladders. (Tr. p. 
96) These factors support the claimant’s testimony that the tools that he used were 
supplied by the defendant including ladders, drills, hammers, and other power tools. 
This particular exchange was one of the reasons Ben Earwood is deemed to 
have low credibility.  He started out disclaiming owning any tools “So I don’t currently 
own any personal tools, any company tools… He talked about 13th Street.  Phil was 
spot on. We’d have—not tools. He’s incorrect there. It’s more scaffolds we would keep 
at 13th Street. But products that we might use somewhere, but not tools really. There 
might be something in there, but not—we’re not storing tools anywhere, because we 
don’t own any.” (Tr. p. 96) He then further testified, “We—we would own a scaffold 
probably. And we probably maybe had something, a drywall lift, a pick. He’s probably 
correct. We probably had a pick. Probably still have the pick. Ladders. I’m guessing we 
have ladders, I’m guessing.” (Tr. p. 96-97) When asked whether the hourly workers 
would use the equipment, he stated, “Maybe. I don’t think so. They do sometimes. They 
do what’s in 13th. But I don’t think there’s any ladders at 13th. They’ve all got their own 
vehicles, ladder racks. So, yeah, there are tools down there.” (Tr. p. 97)  
During testimony, particularly cross examination, he was evasive, parsing 
language and nitpicking words, and then later shifting and changing testimony.  Mr. 
Earwood is not an unsophisticated individual but a businessman who owns and 
manages over twenty properties. The above quoted testimony is but a sampling of his 
evasive, shifting answers. It is found Mr. Earwood is not credible.  

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 6 
 
 
Claimant worked at the direction of the defendant, using the materials that were 
on site.  He often worked with Matt Wadlow, the person who introduced him to Mr. 
Earwood. Claimant was paid one holiday. If the work he performed did not meet 
Earwood’s approval, the work would need to be redone and he would be paid for that 
additional work as well. (Tr. p. 95) 
Claimant did not hire any assistants and did not believe that that was an option. 
However, José Arroyo testified that he would retain the services of an assistant from 
time to time and pay that assistant out of  the monies he would receive from the 
defendant. Ben Earwood testified that claimant could have hired an assistant to perform 
the work if claimant desired, however, the payroll would go through him. “Like, I’d have 
to pay them, which is the agreement I have with the guy that paints and another 
gentleman.” (Trans p. 114) The painter, Jose Arroyo, testified to the contrary. Mr. Arroyo 
testified on behalf of the defendant. He testified he has one employee and that he pays 
that employee from the funds that Mr. Earwood remits to Mr. Arroyo. Mr. Arroyo is paid 
by the job and he pays his employee $10.00 per hour. He does not require his assistant 
to clock in and out or use a timesheet.  
Marlin Mann is a laborer who works on projects such as siding, flooring and 
remodel for defendant. He testified he is paid by the job. Specifically, he submits bids 
and when the bids are accepted, he is paid for that bid.  When he first started working, 
he was paid time and material. He does not believe he is an employee of defendant. He 
pays taxes on his income and has brought in his own employees to work on a job with 
him. These employees were not approved by Mr. Earwood and were not paid by Mr. 
Earwood. Mr. Mann would compensate those individuals directly.  
Stefan Shuttler also testified on behalf of the defendant. He was paid for his time 
and the material that he used. Mr. Shuttler would buy all the materials necessary for a 
job, report his time, and file his own taxes. He set his own hours and would take 
vacations when he wanted. No one was in charge of his progress or oversaw his work. 
He had all his own tools. He understood that if someone needed a tool, they could 
purchase it with defendant’s money and then would need to repay them. Mr. Shuttler is 
now paid $100.00 per job regardless of the work he performs or how many hours he 
works.  
Mr. Earwood agreed that he makes all the major project plans, that he has the 
final say in the work performed, has the right to reject the work performed, maintains the 
schedule of the work performed, requires timesheets to be filled out and was critical of 
claimant for possibly fudging the time where claimant clocked in and out.  
The 1099 that is included in Exhibit D was never provided to the claimant prior to 
his injury but was sent out on January 8, 2019, after claimant’s injury.  Mr. Earwood 
testified that he had discussion with claimant about setting up an LLC so claimant could 
write off the miles that he drove to and from projects. No overtime was paid. Claimant 
agreed that the two had a discussion about claimant becoming an independent 
contractor. According to the claimant, one of the other employees brought up that Mr. 
Earwood was going to starting issuing 1099s because he had “too many properties to 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 7 
 
 
stay under the radar” but that he promised to provide insurance to the workers. Workers 
objected because they had been evading taxes as well. 
On October 31, 2018, claimant was finishing a deck by himself. He was ripping 
the boards longitudinally when he hit a knot in the wood. The saw blade jumped and 
traveled up his hand. According to the medical records he suffered a large laceration 
between the fourth and fifth digits extending into the dorsal hand. (Joint Exhibit 1:4) X-
rays revealed an oblique comminuted fracture through the mid and distal portions of the 
little finger proximal phalanx, with significant displacement and rotation of several 
fracture fragments. (JE 1:7) Surgery was performed on October 31, 2018 with an 
attempt to repair the fractures.  (JE 1:11; JE 2:27) On November 8, 2018, claimant 
presented to the ER for dressing change of the hand laceration and a request for pain 
medications. (JE 1:20) His bandages were removed and he was given a soft cast with 
instructions to follow up with orthopedics. (JE 1:23)  
On November 9, 2018, claimant was seen at ORA Orthopedics for further care 
and treatment following the surgery. (JE 2:31) Claimant had pain in the left small finger 
which he rated six to seven on a ten scale. Id. He had sensation to light touch on the 
small finger, no DIP joint active flexion and some limited PIP joint motion. He was 
tender to palpation over the small finger proximal phalanx and the PIP joint of the small 
finger was unstable and very tender. (JE 2:33) Claimant and Tobia Mann, M.D., 
discussed either reconstruction of the joint or amputation. (JE 2:34) Together they 
agreed that amputation was the best course of action despite the fact that claimant 
would lose significant grip strength in his left hand. (JE 2:32, 36; 1:10) In the meantime, 
claimant went through therapy for desensitization and range of motion. (Ex 3: 40-53) 
By December 6, 2020, claimant had returned to sparring and working out with no 
concerns other than the occasional phantom pain and slight hypersensitivity over the tip 
of the small finger stump. (JE 2:35) He was released to his regular activities as tolerated 
and advised to buddy tape his small finger stump to his ring finger. (JE 2:35) Claimant 
was also encouraged to do desensitization exercises. Id.  
Claimant testified that typically the pinky supplies 30-75 percent of the grip in the 
hand and thus he has lost a significant amount of strength in the left hand. All the 
medical bills in evidence pertain to treatment related to the injury. No evidence was 
provided to the contrary.  
Currently he has soreness and cramping in the wrist, less grip abilities in both 
duration and strength. He has some phantom pain but not significant. All activities from 
work to play are impaired.  
He is working for East Moline Glass doing general laborer work including 
finishing work, caulking, installing angle iron, and other similar jobs. It is a 9-5 job and 
he is supposed to work eight hours a day. The company is lenient about the start and 
end time. He sets those hours himself. He uses some of his own tools on his current 
job.  

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 8 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The threshold question here is whether claimant is an employee of defendant or 
an independent contractor.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6). 
Section 85.61(11) provides in part: 
"Worker" or "employee" means a person who has entered into 
employment of, or works under contract of service, express or implied, or 
apprenticeship, for an employer. . . . 
It is claimant's duty to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that claimant 
or claimant's decedent was an employee within the meaning of the law.  Where claimant 
establishes a prima facie case, defendants then have the burden of going forward with 
the evidence which rebuts claimant's case.  The defendants must establish, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, any pleaded affirmative defense or bar to 
compensation.  Nelson v. Cities Service Oil Co., 259 Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261 
(1967). 
Factors to be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists are:  (1) the right of selection, or to employ at will, (2) responsibility 
for payment of wages by the employer, (3) the right to discharge or terminate the 
relationship, (4) the right to control the work, and (5) identity of the employer as the 
authority in charge of the work or for whose benefit it is performed.  The overriding issue 
is the intention of the parties.  Where both parties by agreement state they intend to 
form an independent contractor relationship, their stated intent is ignored if the 
agreement exists to avoid the workers' compensation laws, however.  Likewise, the test 
of control is not the actual exercise of the power of control over the details and methods 
to be followed in the performance of the work, but the right to exercise such control.  
Also, the general belief or custom of the community that a particular kind of work is 
performed by employees can be considered in determining whether an employer-
employee relationship exists.  Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Shook, 313 N.W.2d 503 (Iowa 
1981); McClure v. Union et al.,Counties, 188 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa 1971); Nelson, 259 
Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261; Lembke v. Fritz, 223 Iowa 261, 272 N.W. 300 (1937); Funk 
v. Bekins Van Lines Co., I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 82 (App. December 
1980). 
Defendant includes a citation to Martin v. Prestige Properties, LLC, File No. 
5048828 (Appeal, October 31, 2018) wherein:  
While no one factor by itself is controlling or determinative, one of the 
most persuasive factors--if not the most persuasive factor--in determining 
whether an individual is an employee or independent contractor is ‘the 
right to control the physical conduct of the person giving service.’" 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 9 
 
 
Martin v. Prestige Properties, LLC, File No. 5048828 (Appeal, October 31, 2018) 
(citing Nelson, 146 N.W.2d at 265.) 
The multi factorial test includes the following: 
A) The existence of a contract for the performance by a person of a certain piece 
or kind of work at a fixed price.  
There was no formal written contract for the claimant. He was brought to Ben 
Earwood’s attention by another contractor, Mark Wadlow. Claimant signed no papers 
but was issued a 1099 at the end of the year. Claimant was required to clock in and out 
using an app. Claimant was hired to do general laborer work in the construction field 
and was not paid for a certain piece or kind of work at a fixed price. Thus, this factor 
weighs in favor of an employer / employee relationship.  
B) Independent nature of his business or his distinct calling.  
Claimant has been in the construction business for over a decade, working off 
and on for a man by the name of Les Simmons. It does not appear that he has held a 
regular employee position in the construction industry prior to working for defendant 
employer. The other individuals who testified and were involved in the construction field 
testified that they were independent contractors who were paid by the job or for time 
and material. This factor weighs in favor of an independent contractor relationship.  
C) His employment of assistants with the right to supervise their activities.  
Claimant testified he did not hire assistants and was not aware that he could do 
this. Ben Earwood testified that he allowed this and would pay the assistant directly. 
There was a conflict between Ben Earwood’s testimony and the way in which his other 
contracted workers would operate. Jose Arroyo employed an assistant and paid that 
employee out of his own remuneration from defendant. Marlin Mann also testified he 
paid assistants out of his own pocket. While defendant claims these other worker 
activities is proof of the independent nature of claimant’s position within the defendant’s 
company, it actually shows how different claimant was from the other independent 
contractors. Ben Earwood testified that he would pay claimant’s assistant directly which 
would not make that new worker claimant’s employee, but another worker employed by 
defendant. Claimant did not hire an assistant nor did he have the means to pay that 
individual as claimant was paid by the hour unlike the other three who testified. 
Claimant had a different payment structure and was required to clock in and out using 
an app. This factor weighs in favor of an employer/employee relationship as claimant’s 
circumstances were different than the others.  
D) His obligation to furnish necessary tools, supplies, and materials.  
Ben Earwood’s testimony contradicted and supported claimant’s testimony in 
this. Mr. Earwood non credibly testified that he would loan a worker like claimant the 
money to pay for decking material so that the worker could be classified as a “time and 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 10 
 
 
material” worker. He testified initially that he did not provide tools, but then a page later 
agreed that he did provide tools such as a pick or a ladder. Claimant did not have the 
funds to provide the tools, supplies or materials and used tools engraved with 
defendant’s name on it. This factor weighs heavily in favor of the employer/employee 
relationship and also goes to show the extent by which Mr. Earwood was attempting to 
evade any employer responsibilities by not truthfully presenting the way in which he 
conducted his business.  
Defendant argues that it was claimant who testified unpersuasively that there 
was a space located at 13th street that stored extra materials, a table saw, and ladders. 
However, based on the varying testimony of Mr. Earwood, it was claimant’s testimony 
that was adopted rather than that of Mr. Earwood.  Other than his tool belt and hammer, 
claimant used tools provided by defendant and used the materials provided by 
defendant. This factor weighs in favor of the employer/employee relationship.  
E) His right to control the progress of the work, except as to final results.  
Claimant was allowed to work at his own pace, clocking in and out each day. He 
did not have a supervisor but someone did check his work. He could take vacation 
when he wanted, show up to whatever project he wanted, and leave when he wanted. 
However, Mr. Earwood admitted that if the work was not up to his standard, he would 
have the work redone at the defendant’s own cost. This factor is evenly weighted 
between the two possible employment scenarios.  
F) The time for which the workman is employed.  
Claimant’s hours varied but he generally worked during the day between the 
hours of eight and five. He was required to keep track of his time by clocking in and out 
using a mobile app. These hours were monitored by the defendant who would contact 
claimant if Mr. Earwood believed claimant’s logged hours were not an accurate 
representation of hours worked. This factor weighs in favor of an employee / employer 
relationship.  
G) The method of payment, whether by time or by job.  
Claimant was paid by the hour. Defendant has argued that claimant was paid by 
the project or by time and material but the evidence supports the previously made 
finding that claimant was an hourly employee. He was required to clock in and out using 
an app. He did not pay for any materials and could not even afford his own tools. He 
bought a set using the account of the defendant employer which claimant first 
understood he was to pay back but eventually did not have to. Other workers were paid 
by the job such as Jose Arroyo and Marlin Mann. Mr. Shetler was paid time and 
material and even had an agreement wherein he would be paid a set amount no matter 
what hours he worked, much like a retainer. None of these were the arrangement with 
the claimant.  

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 11 
 
 
Defendant included a definition of time and material in a footnote on page fifteen 
of the brief. According to the definition provided by defendant, time and material 
includes the actual cost of direct labor paid at a specified hourly rate, the actual cost of 
materials and equipment used, and an agreed upon fixed add-on to cover the 
contractor’s overheads and profit. Claimant did not receive remuneration for the 
equipment he used nor did he receive a fixed add-on payment. Claimant’s payments did 
not meet even defendant’s own definition for time and material. Claimant was an hourly 
wage earner.  Defendant also paid two holidays.  
Thus, this factor weighs in favor of an employer / employee relationship.  
H) Whether the work is the part of the regular business of the employer.  
Defendant argues that Earwood Family Properties is a real estate holding 
company and not in the business of providing services for outside clients and thus 
cannot be said to be providing construction to third-party homeowners. This argument is 
not convincing. Defendant is the business of acquiring, renovating, renting and 
managing properties. The work claimant performed was part of the regular business of 
the employer. This factor weighs in favor of an employer/employee relationship.  
I) Intent of the parties.  
It is the intention of defendant to avoid employment obligations. It is true that the 
three individuals selected by defendant testified to their belief that they were 
independent contractors; however, the way in which defendant paid and treated those 
workers was different than how claimant was paid and treated. Claimant was paid by 
the hour. He had no assistants. He used tools and materials provided by defendant. He 
clocked in and out using an app which designated him as an employee.  
He also worked as a part-time martial arts instructor although during the time he 
worked for defendant, he did work for no other company. Claimant choose self-
employed as the status for his Facebook page. Mr. Earwood testified that he had a 
conversation with claimant regarding setting up an LLC to deduct his own expenses.   
This weighs slightly in favor of the independent contractor status.  
The above analysis provides a picture of a worker who used the defendant’s 
tools, worked at the command of the defendant, stayed home on days that the 
defendant did not believe individuals should be working, reported his hours to the 
defendant daily via a mobile app, used the materials provided by the defendant, and 
was paid by the hour.  Thus it is found claimant was an employee of the defendant at 
the time of his injury and entitled to workers’ compensation benefits for medical 
expenses and disability causally connected to the work injury.  
Claimant seeks temporary benefits from the date of his injury on October 31, 
2018, to December 6, 2018. Defendant argues that there is no doctor who said claimant 
was not capable of working during that period of time. However, claimant had his small 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 12 
 
 
finger sliced off and ultimately it was amputated. He had a cast and then underwent 
therapy. During that period of time, no work was offered to claimant from defendant and 
it is not likely claimant could have done laborer work with his small finger healing from 
this injury.  
Iowa Code section 85.33 governs temporary disability benefits, and Iowa Code 
section 85.34 governs healing period and permanent disability benefits.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).     
An employee has a temporary partial disability when because of the employee’s 
medical condition, “it is medically indicated that the employee is not capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee’s disability.”  Iowa Code § 85.33(2).  Temporary partial disability benefits are 
payable, in lieu of temporary total disability and healing period benefits, due to the 
reduction in earning ability as a result of the employee’s temporary partial disability, and 
“shall not be considered benefits payable to an employee, upon termination of 
temporary partial or temporary total disability, the healing period, or permanent partial 
disability, because the employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings 
equal to the employee’s weekly earnings at the time of injury.”  Id.     
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Restaurants, 
Inc., 696 N.W.2d 596, 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability 
benefits and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss 
of earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefit depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap, 
824 N.W.2d at 556. 
The evidence supports a finding claimant was not capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the construction or general laborer work until he was 
released on December 6, 2018. Thus, claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from 
October 31, 2018 through December 6, 2018.  
Permanent Partial Disability 
Permanent partial disabilities are divided into scheduled and unscheduled 
losses.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2) (2016).  If the claimant’s injury is listed in the specific 
losses found in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(t), the injury is a scheduled injury and is 
compensated by the number of weeks provided for the injury in the statute.  Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 547 (Iowa 1995).     
“The compensation allowed for a scheduled injury ‘is definitely fixed according to 
the loss of use of the particular member.’”  Id.  (quoting Graves v. Eagle Iron Works, 331 
N.W.2d 116, 118 (Iowa 1983)).  If the claimant’s injury is not listed in the specific losses 
in the statute, compensation is paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to 
the body as a whole.  Id.; Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(u).  “Functional disability is used to 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 13 
 
 
determine a specific scheduled disability; industrial disability is used to determine an 
unscheduled injury.”  Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d at 547.   
Claimant’s injury is to his hand. Dr. Mann noted that with the amputation claimant 
would lose significant grip and grip strength which is consistent with claimant’s 
testimony. Thus, the injury extends from the small finger to the hand with the loss of grip 
and grip strength. 
The schedule provides a maximum award of 190 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits for an injury to the hand.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(e).  No physician 
provided an impairment rating under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.   
According to Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x), “when determining functional disability 
and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of 
permanent impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted by 
the workers' compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay 
testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when 
determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity.” 
Defendant argues that the preceding statute requires a physician to provide an 
impairment because agency expertise is not to be utilized. However, there is no such 
language in the statute that requires a medical provider to set impairment. The statute 
requires that the permanent impairment shall be determined by utilizing the guides 
published by the AMA which is essentially a fact based assessment.  
Claimant’s finger was amputated above the carpometacarpal joint. He has some 
phantom pain and tenderness, loss of grip and grip strength but no measured loss of 
range of motion to the hand. An amputation of the little finger is a 10 percent impairment 
of the hand. Thus, claimant is entitled to nineteen weeks of permanent partial disability.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, it is ordered: 
That defendant is to pay unto claimant nineteen (19) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of three hundred sixty-eight and 35/100 dollars ($328.94) 
per week from December 7, 2018. 
That defendant is to pay unto claimant temporary benefits from October 31, 
2018, through December 6, 2018. 
That defendant shall pay medical expenses itemized in Exhibit 2.  
That defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 

AHRENS V. EARWOOD FAMILY PROPERTIES, LLC 
Page 14 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
That defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.   
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33. 
That the parties shall contact the hearing administrator within ten (10) business 
days of this ruling and schedule a hearing before the undersigned to take place within 
the next six months regarding the right of penalty benefits.  
A copy of this decision is being provided to the workers’ compensation 
commissioner to determine whether further action should take place under Iowa Code 
section 87.19 for failure to have workers’ compensation insurance.   
Signed and filed this __25th ___ day of February, 2021. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE 
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Michelle Schneiderheinze (via WCES) 
Michael Galvin (via WCES) 
Paul Powers (via WCES) 
Lori Scardina Utsinger (via WCES) 
