Case Number: 21006052.03
Case Title:  KAIN, JARED V. JEO CONSULTING GROUP INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Kain Jared- 21006052.03M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
JARED KAIN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
    File No. 21006052.03 
 
 
  :                  
 
 
  :   
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
JEO CONSULTING GROUP INC., 
  :             ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  :                           DECISION  
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
THE PHOENIX INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                       Headnote: 2701  
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Jared Kain. Claimant 
appeared telephonically and through his attorney, Joseph Powell. Defendants appeared 
through attorney Julie Burger. 
Claimant’s application for alternate medical care was filed on October 11, 2023. 
Claimant alleges bilateral arm injuries occurring on August 5, 2020. He seeks 
authorization to be seen at Mayo Clinic, pursuant to the referral of Patricia Kallemeier, 
M.D., the authorized treating physician. Defendants filed an answer on October 19, 
2023, and admitted liability for the injury alleged. Defendants’ answer states that 
medical care has been directed to Joseph Buckwalter, M.D., at the University of Iowa 
Hospital and Clinics (UIHC).  
The claim came on for hearing on October 23, 2023. The proceedings were 
digitally recorded. That recording constitutes the official record of this proceeding. 
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023 Order, the undersigned has been 
delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Oct-24  09:38:30     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KAIN V. JEO CONSULTING GROUP INC.  
Page 2 
 
 
The record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1 and 2, consisting of 10 pages; 
Defendants’ Exhibit A, consisting of 2 pages, and claimant’s sworn testimony. 1 Both 
attorneys also presented arguments regarding their clients’ positions. 
ISSUE 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care consisting of authorization for claimant to seek treatment at the Mayo 
Clinic, pursuant to the referral of Patricia Kallemeier, M.D. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned having considered all of the testimony and evidence in the 
record finds: 
Claimant sustained bilateral upper extremity injuries while working for defendant 
employer on August 5, 2020. Shortly after the injury, claimant began authorized 
treatment with Dr. Kallemeier at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons (DMOS). 
(Claimant’s Testimony) Claimant testified that he trusts Dr. Kallemeier and they have a 
good relationship. 
At his July 20, 2023 appointment with Dr. Kallemeier, claimant reported 
continuing bilateral elbow pain, and continuing bilateral ring and small finger numbness 
and tingling with nocturnal waking. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 1) After examination and 
discussion with claimant, Dr. Kallemeier noted that she had no additional surgical 
treatments to offer, as she does not think a tennis elbow surgery will be helpful. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 2) However, due to claimant’s ongoing symptoms, Dr. Kallemeier recommended a 
second opinion evaluation at the Mayo Clinic with Shawn O’Driscoll, M.D. Claimant 
testified that Dr. Kallemeier told him that the remaining treatment for his elbow condition 
is something she does not do, so he asked for a referral because he trusts Dr. 
Kallemeier. 
Dr. Kallemeier provided a patient status report that day indicating claimant had 
no work restrictions, and recommending a second opinion at Mayo Clinic with Dr. 
O’Driscoll. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) On July 24, 2023, Dr. Kallemeier sent a “test order form” to 
the insurance carrier, containing the specific referral to “Mayo Clinic – Dr. Shawn 
O’Driscoll.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) On July 25, 2023, the insurance carrier provided a letter 
indicating that the referral to “Mayo Clinic – Dr. Shawn O’Driscoll” was determined to be 
medically necessary, and was therefore approved. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 8)  
Claimant testified that within a couple of weeks, as he was preparing for his 
appointment at Mayo Clinic, he learned that Dr. O’Driscoll had recently retired. Upon 
learning this news, he called Dr. Kallemeier to let her know. Claimant testified that Dr. 
Kallemeier then recommended he see Sanjeev Kakar, M.D., also at Mayo Clinic. 
                                                 
1 Claimant’s exhibit list includes an exhibit 3; however, at hearing claimant’s attorney clarified there are 
only 2 exhibits. 

KAIN V. JEO CONSULTING GROUP INC.  
Page 3 
 
 
Claimant testified that Dr. Kallemeier told him she has seen Dr. Kakar give 
presentations and believes he is a good choice. Claimant testified that sometime in 
August he learned that Dr. Kakar had agreed to see him. The Mayo Clinic wanted an 
updated MRI of the elbow, and Dr. Kallemeier ordered the MRI on August 9, 2023. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, pp. 6-7) However, since that time claimant has learned that the Mayo Clinic 
physicians prefer to order the MRI on their own, so the doctor can specify the order. 
On August 16, 2023, claimant’s attorney emailed defense counsel regarding the 
Mayo Clinic referral. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 9-10) Defense counsel replied that the referral to 
Mayo had not been authorized, and defendants had a request in to Dr. Buckwalter at 
UIHC and were waiting to hear back. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 9) Claimant’s attorney replied, 
requesting Dr. Kallemeier’s referral to Mayo Clinic be authorized, and noting his client’s 
dissatisfaction with treatment. 
On September 26, 2023, defense counsel advised claimant’s attorney that an 
appointment had been scheduled for claimant with Dr. Buckwalter, to take place on 
November 14, 2023. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, page 2) On September 28, 2023, the 
attorneys clarified via email that the appointment with Dr. Buckwalter was an 
appointment for medical treatment pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27, as opposed to 
an independent medical evaluation under section 85.39. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) 
Claimant testified that he wants to follow Dr. Kallemeier’s treatment 
recommendations, as he trusts her “one hundred percent.” Claimant acknowledged that 
there is no written documentation regarding Dr. Kallemeier’s referral to Dr. Kakar after 
learning of Dr. O’Driscoll’s retirement. He denies that he provided a name to Dr. 
Kallemeier or specifically asked her to refer him to the Mayo Clinic for treatment. 
Claimant also testified that he has reviewed Dr. Buckwalter’s biography online, and did 
not see any references to Dr. Buckwalter having clinical expertise with respect to elbow 
conditions. I find claimant to be a credible witness. 
I find that Dr. Kallemeier, the authorized treating physician, made a specific 
referral to Dr. O’Driscoll at the Mayo Clinic. Upon learning of the doctor’s recent 
retirement, she made a specific referral to Dr. Kakar, another physician at the same 
clinic. Dr. Kakar is ready, willing, and able to treat claimant. A specific referral for 
treatment purposes, even for a second opinion, is generally considered a treatment 
recommendation, and defendants are not entitled to substitute their judgment for that of 
the authorized treating physician. Therefore, claimant is entitled to alternate medical 
care. 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 

KAIN V. JEO CONSULTING GROUP INC.  
Page 4 
 
 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id. 
Similarly, an application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained 
because claimant is dissatisfied with the care she has been receiving. Mere 
dissatisfaction with the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for 
alternate medical care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered 
promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly 
inconvenient for the claimant. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Thus, by challenging the 
employer’s choice of treatment and seeking alternate care, claimant assumes the 
burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 14(f)(5); 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.   
An employer’s right to select the provider of medical treatment to an injured 
worker does not include the right to determine how an injured worker should be 
diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional medical judgment.  
Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 18, 1988).  
Defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of their own treating 
physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, June 17, 1986). 
The right to choose the care means the right to choose the provider, not the 
treatment modalities recommended by the provider. The employer must provide the 
treatment, testing, imaging or other treatment modalities recommended by its own 
authorized treating physician, even if another consulting physician disagrees with those 
recommendations. Haack v. Von Hoffman Graphics, File No. 1268172, p. 9 (App. July 
31, 2002) [MRI and x-rays]; Cahill v. S & H Fabricating & Engineering, (Alt Care, File 
No. 1138063, May 30, 1997) (work hardening program); Hawxby v. Hallett Materials, 
File No. 1112821, (Alt Care, February 20, 1996); Leitzen v. Collis, Inc. File No. 
1084677, (Alt Care, September 9, 1996). The right to choose the care does not 
authorize the employer to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Boggs v Cargill, Inc. File No. 1050396, (Alt Care, January 31, 1994). 
Ultimately, determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. In this case, the authorized treating 
physician, Dr. Kallemeier, has made a specific referral to the Mayo Clinic, first to Dr. 

KAIN V. JEO CONSULTING GROUP INC.  
Page 5 
 
 
O’Driscoll and then to Dr. Kakar upon learning of Dr. O’Driscoll’s retirement. A specific 
referral for treatment purposes, even for a second opinion, is generally considered a 
treatment recommendation and can be ordered through alternate care. Dr. Kallemeier is 
intimately familiar with claimant’s condition and has the medical expertise to refer 
claimant for appropriate treatment. Defendants cannot interfere with the medical 
judgement of their own authorized physician. The failure to follow medical 
recommendations for treatment is the failure to provide reasonable care. As such, 
claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant's petition for alternate medical care is granted. 
Defendants will immediately authorize claimant for treatment at the Mayo Clinic 
with Dr. Kakar, as recommended by Dr. Kallemeier. 
Signed and filed this ____24th ___ day of October, 2023. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Joseph Powell (via WCES) 
 
Julie Burger (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
