Case Number: 22012051.01
Case Title:  HARMS, FARON A/K/A MEL V. MARCUS LUMBER COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Harms Faron-22012051.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
FARON (MEL) HARMS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 22012051.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
MARCUS LUMBER CO., 
  : 
          ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                       
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
REDWOOD FIRE & CASUALTY 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :               Head Note Nos.: 1108, 1803 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
On February 13, 2024, the claimant, Faron Harms, filed a petition for arbitration 
and seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Marcus Lumber Company, employer, 
and Redwood Fire & Casualty Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant 
was represented by Laura Pattermann.  The defendants were represented by Robert 
Gainer. 
The matter came on for hearing on May 7, 2025, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh via Zoom videoconference originating in Des 
Moines, Iowa.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 10; Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 11; and defense exhibits A through J.  The claimant testified at 
hearing, in addition to Elaine Harms.  Kira Stover served as the court reporter.  The 
matter was fully submitted on June 16, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained any temporary or permanent disability as a result 
of his stipulated work injury. 
2. The nature and extent of claimant’s temporary and permanent disability (if 
any), including the commencement date for PPD. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Nov-13  07:11:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 2 
 
 
3. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for benefits previously paid. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to past medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 8. 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to future medical care. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to IME expenses and other costs. 
7. Penalty. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on February 23, 2022. 
3. The weekly rate of compensation is $733.81. 
4. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Faron “Mel” Harms was 62 years old as of the date of hearing.  He 
resides in Cleghorn, Iowa, with his wife Elaine.  He graduated from LeMars Community 
High School in 1980. He has no further education.  Mr. Harms testified live and under 
oath at the video hearing and his testimony is generally credible.  Mr. Harms was not an 
outstanding historian; however, his testimony generally matches other credible portions 
of the record of evidence.  Mr. Harms was not a particularly sophisticated witness. The 
defendants attacked his credibility, particularly his testimony regarding his preexisting 
medical conditions.  This specific issue will be discussed in greater detail below. 
Mr. Harms has been a hard worker his whole life.  I find he was highly motivated.  
He worked on his family farm as soon as he was old enough to help, before working as 
a farmhand for a neighbor.  He briefly worked as a mechanic before starting for K-
Products, where he worked for about 14 years in a variety of positions, including 
supervisor where he supervised up to 27 employees.  After his position at K-Products 
ended, he went to Wells Dairy where he worked for 25 years in receiving, maintenance 
and welding.  He next became employed by Marcus Lumber in approximately July 
2021.  He was hired to deliver lumber to customers.  His job involved driving, delivering 
and unloading the product, including structural lumber, cabinets, bathroom supplies, 
windows, doors and decking.  He regularly lifted more than 35 pounds.  He testified he 
was earning approximately $23 per hour, working 50 or more hours per week. 
On or about February 23, 2022, Mr. Harms sustained an injury which arose out of 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 3 
 
 
and in the course of his employment with Marcus Lumber.  The parties have stipulated 
to this fact in the Hearing Report.  Mr. Harms testified that he fell on that date injuring 
his low back.  There is no question Mr. Harms had some back issues prior to his 
stipulated work injury at Marcus Lumber.  The fighting issue in this case is whether the 
stipulated work injury is a cause of his low back disability.  For this reason, a careful 
review of his medical history is required. 
Prior to working at Marcus Lumber, Mr. Harms had undergone quite a bit of 
treatment on his low back.  Mr. Harms conceded this at hearing.  He downplayed the 
extent of his previous treatment, as well as the overall condition of his lower back.  He 
testified that he had seen his chiropractor and a physical therapist for back pain 
previously, but he could not recall ever seeing an actual physician.  (Transcript, page 
33)  In July 2017, Mr. Harms was evaluated by chiropractor Jeremy Bollin, D.C.  Dr. 
Bollin ordered an MRI due to persistent low back and right leg pain which had not 
improved with conservative treatment. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1)  Dr. Bollin documented 
his 2016 x-rays which demonstrated degenerative disc disease in his lumbar spine.  
(Id.)  He underwent the MRI on July 25, 2017.  Mr. Harms documented his symptoms at 
that time as pain in his low back and into his right leg.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 2)  The MRI itself 
demonstrated the following: 
1.  Moderate bilateral facet arthropathy L4-5. Mild facet degenerative 
changes bilaterally L3-4, L5-S1. 
2.  At L4-5 there is mild broad-based bulging of the annulus posteriorly, 
extending laterally.  This contacts the right L4 nerve root in the neural 
foramen however no evidence for compression or displacement. 
3.  At L3-4 mild bulging of the annulus posteriorly, laterally.  Slight 
flattening deformity anterior thecal sac.  Mild ligamentum flavum 
hypertrophy. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) 
He underwent physical therapy in August and September 2017, which was not 
particularly effective.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 5-17)  He described fairly significant symptoms 
including radiculopathy.  The therapist documented a chronic history of low back pain.  
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 5)  Some of his symptoms actually worsened during this time and he 
developed pain in his left leg as well, although he had some improvement with other 
symptoms.  Ultimately the therapist recommended a referral to a neurosurgeon for 
further evaluation.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 12)  The therapist again discussed surgical consultation 
with Mr. Harms in October 2017.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14)  The therapy notes document that Mr. 
Harms discharged himself from physical therapy with goals partially met.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
17) 
In July 2020, Mr. Harms underwent new x-rays from his primary care physician 
for complaints of right-sided low back pain.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 23)  He testified, however, that 
his symptoms following his treatment in 2017 ultimately resolved his condition.  (Tr., p. 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 4 
 
 
73)  While this testimony is a little vague and lacked detail, I find that it is likely that Mr. 
Harms was downplaying his symptoms during this timeframe.  I also suspect that he is 
simply not a very good historian.  In any event, Mr. Harms was functional and highly 
productive during this time period (from his 2017 low back treatment through the time he 
started at Marcus Lumber).  He worked at Wells Dairy without any restrictions.  There is 
no evidence that his condition impacted his ability to work at all.  Mr. Harms testified that 
he had no medical treatment of any kind for his low back after his x-rays in July 2020, 
up through his work injury in February 2022.  (Tr., p. 73) 
On February 23, 2022, Mr. Harms sustained his work injury.  Again, this fact is 
undisputed.  He testified he was walking down a snow-covered incline when he slipped, 
landing on his back or right side.  (Tr., pp. 36-37)  He testified that he laid on the ground 
for a moment while two co-workers notified the dispatcher.  At his deposition, Mr. Harms 
testified that he “didn’t think it was going to be anything serious.”  (Defendants’ Exhibit 
D, Harms Depo, p. 30)  Following the incident, he continued to work full-duty for Marcus 
Lumber for several weeks.  In fact, records demonstrate he continued to work up to 50 
hours per week. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 48-50)  While this certainly demonstrates that Mr. 
Harms was able to continue working in spite of symptoms he was having, it also 
undoubtedly demonstrates his high motivation and solid work ethic. 
He first sought medical treatment with a chiropractor after the accident on March 
4, 2022. 
Lumbar/Sacral/Pelvis:  Patient comes in today.  He says the last snow we 
had he fell on his left side.  He explains he hasn’t been to a chiropractor 
for a while and he is sore throughout.  He notes the fall is “just one more 
thing.”  … He has been taking a couple Tylenol and ibuprofen a week and 
says sitting down can give him some relief.  Standing makes the pain 
worse.  He gets headaches a couple times a week.  He says he drives for 
Marcus Lumber and has pain in his low back with driving.  He notes there 
is a lot of lifting involved.  He had physical therapy on the low back before 
and it helped.  He had Xrays, an MRI and a CT scan of his lumbar 
vertebrae. He says “they tell me I had ruptured discs.”  He has no leg pain 
at this point. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68)  Mr. Harms testified that this provider was suggested by the dispatcher 
at Marcus Lumber.   
Over the next several weeks, his symptoms actually worsened.  He returned to 
the chiropractor on April 14, 2022.  By this point, Mr. Harms reported back pain that was 
going down his left leg that began the previous week when he was lifting something 
heavy at work.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 69)  He started physical therapy on April 19, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 18)  Those notes document his complaint of another work injury where he was 
lifting a cabinet at work on or about April 8, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 18)  He ultimately 
underwent approximately 12 physical therapy sessions.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 18-22)  He was 
examined by a different chiropractor on the following day, April 19, 2022, who also 
noted the April 8, 2022 work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 71) 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 5 
 
 
At some point, Mr. Harms stopped working for Marcus Lumber.  The only 
evidence regarding the separation is the testimony of Mr. Harms which is vague.  His 
last pay record in evidence indicates he worked through approximately April 21, 2022.  
(Def. Ex. E, p. 51)  Mr. Harms testified that he stopped working in April and then his 
employer asked him to make a run to Carroll in the first part of May.  “I came back, and 
they said to go on home – because I – that was all I could – that was it.”  (Tr., pp. 74-75)  
He testified he was never formally terminated but they told him to go home because he 
could not do what he was hired to do.  (Tr., p. 75)  There are no employment records in 
evidence to clarify what actually happened with his employment at this time. 
Mr. Harms finally saw a physician for his condition on May 4, 2022.  He was seen 
at his primary care clinic by Tyler Faber, D.O.  Dr. Faber documented the following: 
Patient is a 59-year-old male with back pain for 3 months now.  Patient fell 
back in February and does heavy lifting for his job as a truck driver.  
Patient’s been seeing a chiropractor as well as physical therapy now for 2 
weeks.  Patient has difficulty with ambulation and was having some 
sciatic-like symptoms but now is primarily confined to his back with 
occasional radiation to his left posterior thigh and knee. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 24-25)  He prescribed a number of medications and told Mr. Harms to 
continue physical therapy. 
Thus, the evidence is that his symptoms waxed and waned to some degree, 
especially early on after the injury.  (Tr., p. 103)  Based upon the medical notes, it 
appears his symptoms decreased some after he stopped working at Marcus Lumber.  
He returned to the same clinic on June 20, 2022, and saw John Weber, M.D., who 
documented the following: 
A 60-year-old male comes in with low back pain.  He has had this for 
approximately about 4 months.  He had slipped on the ice back in 
February and fell down.  Did not have immediate pain with that, but over 
the next several days to weeks pain gradually increased.  He saw Dr. 
Faber about 6 weeks ago.  He was prescribed Flexeril and meloxicam.  
He states that really did not help much.  He has pain in the bilateral low 
back.  He will have radiation going into the bilateral legs.  Standing is 
worse than sitting, which is worse on lying down.  The radiation can go 
into either leg.  It is typically in the thighs.  It does not go past the knees.  
He denies paresthesias or weakness of the lower extremities.  He has 
also gone to physical therapy.  He has gone to chiropractic several times 
also. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 26)  Dr. Weber diagnosed “low back pain with bilateral leg radiation, failed 
conservative treatments.”  He prescribed a prednisone burst and an MRI.  The MRI was 
performed on June 22, 2022.  The MRI was interpreted as showing (1) multilevel 
degenerative lumbar spondylosis, (2) no significant spinal canal stenosis, and (3) 
multilevel neuroforaminal stenosis, most significant on the left at L3-L4 and on the right 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 6 
 
 
at L4-L5, where it was moderate.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 31)  Dr. Weber referred Mr. Harms to 
James Jeltema, D.O. 
On June 28, 2022, Dr. Jeltema documented the following history: 
Faron W. Harms is a 60yr old male who presents for initial evaluation at 
the pain clinic on 6/28/2022.  He is referred from his PCP Dr. Weber for 
low back and leg pain.  Patient states this has been bothering him ever 
since he had a fall in April.  Initially he just had back pain but the leg pain 
has been increasing over the past few weeks.  Pain is mostly across his 
low back and made worse with activity.  Patient states the pain will travel 
down his legs to his knees occasionally be sharp and shooting.  Pain 
made worse with any sort of standing or activity causing him to lean over 
or sit down and rest.  States standing up in church is problematic for him.  
Patient is somewhat of a difficult historian but sounds like he does have 
some occasional numbness and tingling sensation to the upper outer 
portion of his bilateral legs.  He denies any weakness to his lower 
extremities.  He states he has been doing some physical therapy but that 
they were finished with him.  He also has done some chiropractic care.  
The past 24 hours he rates his pain at worst an 8 out of 10, at best a 3 out 
of 10, and on average a 5 out of 10.  He has not had any surgery for his 
low back.  He has not had any injections for his low back. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29)  Following examination and review of the MRI, Dr. Jeltema diagnosed 
lumbar radiculopathy and lumbar spondylosis.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 32)  He adjusted his 
medications and recommended further physical therapy.  He also recommended 
bilateral lumbar transforaminal epidural steroid injections which were performed in July 
2022.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 33-34; Jt. Ex. 7, p. 85)  Mr. Harms testified that this procedure was 
not particularly helpful.  He was prescribed gabapentin and a surgical consultation was 
arranged.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 36)  He followed up with Dr. Jeltema and underwent another 
procedure in September which also did not help. 
For his part, Dr. Weber wrote an undated letter during this timeframe, which 
documented the following medical opinions: 
This letter is in regards to Faron “Mel” Harms who is a 60-year-old patient 
of mine who suffered a back injury at work in February of 2022.  He 
slipped on the snow/ice and fell on his back.  He has been unable to work 
since April 18th of this year.  He continues to have low back pain with 
radiation into both legs.  He has had multiple treatments including oral 
steroids, antiinflammatories, muscle relaxants, physical therapy 
treatments and 2 epidurals.  The patient has been unable to work since 
April 18 and he continues to be unable to work or perform his duties due 
to his injury and continued pain.  We are in the process of trying to have 
him see orthopedics or neurosurgery for further evaluation. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 41) 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 7 
 
 
In November 2022, William Samuelson, IV, M.D., examined Mr. Harms.  Dr. 
Samuelson diagnosed lumbar spinal stenosis with neurogenic claudication.  (Jt. Ex. 8, 
p. 105)  Dr. Samuelson discussed surgery with Mr. Harms “which he is not currently 
interested in.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 105)  The medical note documented that he wanted to 
consider this.  He was provided a higher dosage of gabapentin.  Dr. Samuelson 
recommended further diagnostic testing of the lumbar spine for surgical planning.  (Id.) 
In January 2023, following the EMG/nerve conduction study, Mr. Harms 
underwent bilateral lower extremity Dopplers and was diagnosed with a right lower 
extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and a pulmonary embolus (PE) by Mei He, M.D.  
(Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 48-50)  After talking with Dr. He, Mr. Harms testified he came to believe 
that this condition was also caused by the fall.  (Tr., p. 50)  Dr. He sent Mr. Harms to the 
emergency room.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 116)  The hospital records document that the DVT and 
PE were “non-invoked.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 98)  After the discovery of the DVT and pulmonary 
embolus, Mr. Harms was referred to Patrick Kelly, M.D., a vascular surgeon, on 
February 1, 2023.  Dr. Kelly diagnosed chronic DVT of the pelvic vein and chronic 
embolism and thrombosis of other veins.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 138)  Dr. Kelly opined that the 
DVT appeared old or subacute and corresponded with a “distant history” of his onset of 
shortness of breath.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 139) He placed Mr. Harms on an anticoagulant and 
compression socks.  This diagnosis undoubtedly interfered with the treatment of his low 
back condition, essentially making surgery a much more complicated option. 
In 2023, Mr. Harms continued to follow up with Dr. Samuelson for his low back 
and he continued to follow up with Dr. Kelly for the DVT/PE diagnoses.  He also 
occasionally followed up with Dr. Weber.  Initially there was some discussion that some 
of his low back and leg symptoms may be partially related to his vascular claudication 
and not his spine.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 124)  In any event, surgical intervention was not 
recommended for his low back for at least one year.  Dr. Kelly documented 
improvement in the symptoms when he saw Mr. Harms in April 2023.  Mr. Harms also 
received some chiropractic treatment in May and June 2023, which improved his low 
back symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 152-155)  In a report dated July 11, 2024, Dr. Kelly 
opined that he could not state within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that the 
vascular condition was caused or aggravated by the fall at work on February 23, 2022.  
(Def. Ex. B, p. 25) 
In August 2023, Mr. Harms was deemed permanently and totally disabled by the 
Social Security Administration.  (Cl. Ex. 5)  His monthly benefit amount is $2,792.00. 
When Mr. Harms saw Dr. Samuelson in July 2024, he was referred to pain 
management.  Following a repeat MRI, Dr. Samuelson did not recommend surgical 
intervention.  Dr. Samuelson recommended evaluation by CNOS workers’ 
compensation specialist Douglas Martin, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 134, 136)  This evaluation 
took place on November 25, 2024. 
Dr. Martin took a history, reviewed relevant medical records and thoroughly 
examined Mr. Harms.  In the history, Dr. Martin documented the following:  “He says he 
does not know much about his family history because they did not go to physicians.  He 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 8 
 
 
apparently had a father that had some mini strokes and what sounds like and [sic] 
emboli that affected his right lower extremity.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 4)  Mr. Harms denied 
telling Dr. Martin that his father had mini strokes.  (Tr., p. 59)  On cross examination, he 
could not recall if he told Dr. Martin anything about his father’s foot turning black.  (Tr., 
pp. 94-95)  In any event, Dr. Martin diagnosed multilevel degenerative disc disease of 
the lumbar spine; possible lower extremity neurogenic claudication, a history of lower 
extremity DVT and pulmonary emboli and possible lower extremity vascular 
claudication.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 5)  Regarding medical causation, Dr. Martin opined that 
none of these conditions were related to the February 2022, work injury.  (Def. Ex. A, 
pp. 6, 8)  The slip and fall injury “could have created a contusion or soft tissue injury, but 
that should have long since resolved.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 6)  He assigned zero impairment 
for the low back soft tissue injury; however, he opined that Mr. Harms is not at 
maximum medical improvement for his degenerative conditions and possible 
neurogenic claudication.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 7)  He did recommend a 20 pound material 
handling restriction for his personal medical conditions.  It appears the defendants 
stopped providing treatment after this evaluation.  On December 13, 2024, the 
defendants provided an Auxier notice and ceased weekly benefits.  (Def. Ex. I) 
On March 18, 2025, Mr. Harms was evaluated by Charles Taylon, M.D., for an 
independent medical evaluation (IME).  Dr. Taylon took a medical history, reviewed 
portions of the medical file and thoroughly examined Mr. Harms.  Dr. Taylon diagnosed 
a mechanical musculoligamentous injury to his lumbar spine and assigned a 10 percent 
whole body rating per the AMA Guides, 5th Edition.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3)  “His permanent 
restrictions related purely to his lumbar issue are 40 pounds of lifting with no repetitive 
bending or twisting.  He should change positions every two hours.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3)  
With regard to the DVT and PE, Dr. Taylon opined as follows: 
Mr. Harms did not have any known preexisting conditions or family history 
of a hypercoagulable state.  As a result of this injury, he had relative 
immobility.  He took large amounts of NSAIDs.  He was given steroids.  
The medical literature supports all of the above as contributors to a 
hypercoagulable state. 
To conclude, absent the fall at work and subsequent treatment, Mr. Harms 
would have developed DVT anyway coincidentally and serendipitously is 
too far-fetched.  With a reasonable degree of medical certainty, it is my 
opinion that the two conditions are related.  I defer further questions 
concerning impairment and care to experts in that field concerning his 
DVT and pulmonary emboli. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Mr. Harms testified about the effect of his conditions on his life at hearing.  He 
testified that the primary difference between his symptoms before the admitted work 
injury and after his work injury was that his symptoms after the work injury “never went 
away.”  (Tr., p. 43)  He essentially testified that while he had some intermittent pain and 
symptoms in his low back before his work injury, his symptoms always resolved with 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 9 
 
 
fairly minimal treatment.  He testified that he could not go back to any of his past 
relevant employment at this point.  He further testified that he has difficulty with even 
small tasks around the house, such as yard work, home repairs or repair work.  He even 
has challenges bending and getting to a standing position.  His wife credibly testified 
that she has witnessed his difficulties in these areas since the work injury.  (Tr., pp. 112-
120)  Mr. Harms has not worked since leaving Marcus Lumber. 
The parties also retained dueling vocational experts.  Claimant secured a report 
from Patricia Conway, who opined that Mr. Harms would be precluded from heavy work 
and some medium level work.  She focused on his lack of computer skills, in addition to 
his history of manual labor work history.  She assessed that Mr. Harms has lost access 
to approximately 70 percent of his preinjury labor market as a result of his work injury.  
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14)  She did document that he could likely perform work as a driver of 
some kind (light delivery, shuttle). 
Defendants secured a report from Jessica Miller, M.A.  She performed a labor 
market survey in claimant’s geographical area, ultimately opining that he is capable of 
full-time gainful employment.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 33)  Mr. Harms has not looked for work 
since his injury and believes he is not capable of gainful employment.  (Tr., pp. 83-84, 
87) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant’s stipulated work injury is a 
cause of any temporary or permanent disability, and if so, the nature and extent of such 
disability. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 10 
 
 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1961). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
In this case, the parties have stipulated that Mr. Harms sustained a work injury 
on February 23, 2022.  The specific question is whether this stipulated injury is a cause 
of any temporary or permanent disability.  I find that the claimant has carried his burden 
of proof that this injury is a cause of temporary and permanent disability in his low back.  
I base this finding upon the medical opinion of Dr. Taylon, which is supported by the 
expert opinion of Dr. Weber, and the clinical notes of Dr. Jeltema and Dr. Samuelson.  I 
specifically find that as a neurosurgeon, Dr. Taylon has the most expertise in the lumbar 
spine.  I reject the opinion of Dr. Martin, as it relates to the low back condition.  Dr. 
Martin opined that “could have created a contusion or soft tissue injury, but that should 
have long since resolved.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 6)  I do not find this explanation convincing 
for a variety of reasons.  Most importantly, he did not point to any particular facts which 
suggest that the contusion or soft tissue injury actually healed, just that it “should have.” 
I find a greater weight of evidence supports a finding that his back condition did 
not fully heal.  There is no doubt that Mr. Harms did have a low back condition prior to 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 11 
 
 
his stipulated work injury.  He either had chronic low back pain which waxed and waned 
over time, or he had intermittent episodes of low back pain from time to time, probably 
depending upon his activities.  Either way, Mr. Harms had never undergone significant 
treatment for this condition prior to his stipulated work injury.  Based upon the record of 
evidence before me, Mr. Harms last received physical therapy for this condition in 2017.  
He last received diagnostic testing (x-rays) in 2020.  Prior to the work injury, his 
condition was manageable.  I find that it is also possible that an additional (unfiled) work 
injury he sustained in April 2022, may have further contributed to his low back problems.  
Even if true, this does not impact the analysis herein. 
The defendants argue all of this demonstrates that Mr. Harms is not credible.  I 
acknowledge that he was not an outstanding historian of his medical conditions.  Mr. 
Harms presented at hearing as a typical small town man who has an excellent work 
ethic and likely does not track his medical history with great detail.  I suspect he 
answered the questions he was asked at his plethora of visits as best he could at the 
time.  I find that the fact he was not an exceptional historian likely contributed to some 
confusion in his medical records.  His physical therapist had previously recommended a 
surgical referral in approximately 2017 (which never happened), and he may have even 
had some type of injection for pain in his low back at some point (although there are no 
previous injection records actually in evidence).  These are facts that Mr. Harms did not 
recall during his testimony.  Overall, however, I believe Mr. Harms’ testimony that the 
condition in his low back was relatively well controlled prior to the work injury.  
Importantly, he never had any work restrictions and the condition never adversely 
impacted his ability to work in any job prior to his February 23, 2022, work injury.  He 
worked in heavy and medium labor positions for his entire adult work-life without taking 
time off or working under medical restrictions for this condition until after his work 
accident. 
Mr. Harms, however, also has DVT and PE, which were fortunately discovered 
through the course of his treatment for his low back.  Unfortunately, some of the 
symptoms associated with these diagnoses can overlap with his low back symptoms, 
making this case even more complicated.  Regarding these diagnoses, I find that Mr. 
Harms has failed to carry his burden that these conditions are causally related to his 
work injury.  I base this finding primarily upon the medical opinion of the treating 
pulmonologist, Dr. Kelly.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 25)  Dr. Kelly was Mr. Harms’ treating 
pulmonologist and is undeniably the most qualified expert to offer an opinion on this 
complicated medical condition.  While it is true that his opinion is a summary opinion in 
response to specific questions from defense counsel on defense counsel’s letterhead, 
his opinion appears to be highly consistent with his treatment records, which suggested 
the DVT was old and corresponded with a “distant history” of his onset of shortness of 
breath.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 139)  In general, the opinion of Dr. Martin regarding the pulmonary 
condition supports the opinion of Dr. Kelly. 
Dr. Taylon opined that these conditions are likely related to the work injury, 
pointing out that it would be highly coincidental for him to develop these conditions 
randomly during this timeframe.  He pointed to factors such as steroid use, use of large 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 12 
 
 
amounts of NSAIDs, and relative immobility as contributing factors in the literature.  This 
analysis is somewhat compelling.  In the final analysis, however, even Dr. Taylon 
acknowledged his own limitations here deferring “further questions concerning 
impairment and care to experts in that field …”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Since I have found that the injury is a cause of temporary and permanent 
disability, I will next address what temporary benefits Mr. Harms is entitled to. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to 
an injured employee who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the employee 
has returned to work; (2) it is medically indicated that significant improvement from the 
injury is not anticipated; or (3) the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.  The healing period can be 
considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of improvement of 
the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 65 
(Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  Teel v. 
McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405, 406 (Iowa 1986). 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Mr. Harms is entitled to healing 
period benefits from the date he was taken off work, which was on or about April 18, 
2022, through November 25, 2024, the date he was released from further treatment by 
Dr. Martin.  I find that this is the date that his condition plateaued. 
The next issue is the extent of disability. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 13 
 
 
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995);  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894 (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ Compensation 
Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark. 385, 609 S.W.2d 102 (Ark. App. 
1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. La. 
1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Harms was 62 years old.  He is a small town man with 
an outstanding work ethic.  He has a high school education and is bright with good soft 
skills.  He had no computer training and is generally ill-equipped for the modern world of 
work.  His past work history is almost exclusively in heavy or medium labor positions. 
He worked for Wells Dairy for approximately 25 years in receiving, maintenance and 
welding.  Before Wells, he worked for K-Products in a variety of labor positions, 
including supervisor where he supervised up to 27 employees.  Mr. Harms has not 
really sought further employment, which I find is reasonable given that he is likely not at 
maximum medical improvement for his unrelated pulmonary condition at this time.  He 
now has a 10 percent permanent functional impairment in his low back with a 40-pound 
lifting restriction, in addition to bending, twisting and changing positions restrictions.  He 
is certainly precluded from a majority of his past relevant employment.  His own 
vocational expert, however, did locate positions in the gainful job market which he could 
perform.  Once he is able to resume employment, however, it is likely that these 
positions will result in a fairly significant loss of income.  I agree with his vocational 
expert that his loss of earnings is in the 40 to 50 percent range.  Considering all of the 
relevant factors of industrial disability, I find that Mr. Harms has proven a 45 percent 
loss of earning capacity.  I conclude this entitles him to two hundred twenty-five weeks 
of compensation commencing on November 26, 2024. 
This finding resolves the disputed credit issue.  The defendants are entitled to a 
credit against PPD for all benefits paid after November 25, 2024.  (See Def. Exs. G and 
H) 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 14 
 
 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by Iowa Code section 
17A.14.  The agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge 
may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in the 
courts are not controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of evidence on which 
reasonably prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of serious affairs.  Health 
care is a serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 855-56, 124 N.W.2d 
548, 553 (1963).  
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
Claimant seeks the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  I have 
reviewed this exhibit thoroughly.  I find that Mr. Harms is entitled to medical expenses 
for his low back condition, but he has failed to prove entitlement for the expenses 
associated with his pulmonary condition (or any other condition referenced in this 
record).  The parties are instructed to sort through all of the expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 8 and determine which expenses are related to the work-related low 
back condition.  There is also a medical lien from The Rawlings Company.  (Cl. Ex. 7)  

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 15 
 
 
The defendants are only responsible for the low back treatment reflected in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 7. 
Defendants are responsible for all such expenses in a manner consistent with 
this decision. 
In the hearing report, the claimant requested alternate medical care.  I find that, 
in this record, there is no claim for further care for the low back as no physician is 
recommending further care.  As such, the alternate medical care claim fails.  Should the 
claimant need to return to a physician for any low back treatment, the defendants may 
authorize a physician at such time. 
The final issue is the IME expense and other costs. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee 
is being examined is determined to be compensable.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2017).  
“An employer is not liable for the cost of such examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to have a compensable injury. A 
determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform 
an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.”  Iowa Code 
§ 85.39(2); Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023).   
Iowa Code section 10A.328 states:Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing 
before the commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 16 
 
 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including 
convenience fees incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of 
notice and subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or 
agency by the party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses 
or of obtaining doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the 
witnesses, doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the 
witness is called or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be 
paid in accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of 
any cost shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner 
before costs are taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be 
reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it 
shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner or 
workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise 
required by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure governing discovery.   
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
I find that the claimant is entitled to IME expenses and costs in the amount of 
$2,996.13. 
Finally, the claimant listed “penalty” as an issue and seeks a penalty for the 
defendants’ failure to pay permanent partial disability.  Having reviewed Iowa Code 
Section 10A.315(4), I find that this is not a penalty case.  The defendants had a 
reasonable basis for the manner in which they processed this claim in all respects.  I 
find the issue of whether Mr. Harms was owed any permanent partial disability 
payments was, in fact, fairly debatable. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 17 
 
 
All benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of seven hundred thirty-three and 
81/100 dollars ($733.81). 
Defendants shall pay healing period benefits from the date claimant went off 
work through November 25, 2024. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant two hundred twenty-five (225) weeks of 
permanent partial disability commencing on November 26, 2024. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid after November 
25, 2024, as set forth in Defendants’ Exhibit G. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 7 and 8, for the low back only.  The defendants are not responsible for 
expenses associated with the DVT or pulmonary condition. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of two thousand nine hundred 
ninety-six and 13/100 dollars ($2,996.13). 
Signed and filed this _13th _ day of November, 2025. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Laura Patterman (via WCES) 
 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 

HARMS V. MARCUS LUMBER CO. 
Page 18 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
