Case Number: 1655936.01
Case Title:  WEIMERSKIRCH, BRIAN V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Weimerskirch Brian-1655936.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
BRIAN WEIMERSKIRCH, 
File No. 1655936.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC, 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
Headnotes: 1803 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
 
Defendant. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Brian Weimerskirch seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendant, self-insured employer Progressive Processing, LLC (Progressive). The 
undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing on April 12, 2022, held using internet-
based video by order of the Commissioner. Weimerskirch participated personally and 
through attorney Jason D. Neifert. The defendants participated by and through Abigail 
A. Wenninghoff. 
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.149(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding deputy 
commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via an 
order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did Weimerskirch sustain an injury to his left shoulder that is a sequela to the 
right-shoulder injury he sustained on April 5, 2018?  
2) Did Weimerskirch give timely notice of the alleged injury? 
3) Is Weimerskirch entitled to temporary disability or healing period benefits 
from October 25, 2019, through August 8, 2020? 
4) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
5) What is the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Oct-21  13:13:01     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 2 
 
6) If Weimerskirch is entitled to workers’ compensation, what is the weekly 
rate? 
7) Is Weimerskirch entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Weimerskirch and 
Progressive at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Weimerskirch sustained a right-shoulder injury on April 5, 2018, which arose 
out of and in the course of his employment with Progressive. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
4) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Weimerskirch’s gross earnings were seven hundred sixty-three and 
00/100 dollars ($763) per week. 
b) Weimerskirch was married. 
c) Weimerskirch was entitled to four exemptions. 
6) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to Weimerskirch: 
a) Fourteen thousand four hundred twenty-eight and 96/100 dollars 
($14,428.96) in permanent partial disability benefits relating to his right 
shoulder injury;  
b) Twenty-one thousand twenty-one and 60/100 dollars ($21,021.60) in 
permanent partial disability benefits relating to his left shoulder injury; 
and 
c) Nine thousand one hundred sixty-six and 26/100 ($9,166.26) for short-
term disability benefits paid. 
With respect to the stipulation in 6(c) above, the parties identified as a disputed 
issue in the Hearing Report Progressive’s entitlement to a credit with respect to healing 
period benefits for short-term disability benefits paid and indicated during the hearing 
they might be able to reach an agreement regarding the amount of the credit before 
post-hearing briefs were due. Hrg. Rpt. § 9(c); Hrg. Tr. pp. 6–8. In Footnote 1 of 
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, claimant’s counsel detailed the parties’ stipulation for 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 3 
 
such a credit. The defendants did not address the credit issue in their Post-Hearing 
Brief. Therefore, this decision adopts the stipulation as detailed in Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Brief. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 7; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits (Cl. Ex.) 1 through 11;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits (Def. Ex.) A through G; and 
 Hearing testimony by Weimerskirch.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Weimerskirch was fifty-three years of age at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13) 
He dropped out of high school during his junior year. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 45; Hrg. Tr. p. 14) He 
later got his GED. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) Weimerskirch had not obtained a postsecondary 
degree or certificate as of the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) 
Weimerskirch worked as a groundskeeper at a trailer home park from 2000 to 
2004. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 18–19) He did not have any physical problems performing his job 
duties. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) Weimerskirch did not sustain a work injury during this 
employment. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) He credibly testified that he could return to this job after the 
work injury to his right shoulder and sequela to his left. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) 
Weimerskirch worked at Eagle Windows and Door as a laborer. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15; 
Cl. Ex. 5, p. 49) He and a coworker would work together to put units together in order to 
fulfill orders. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 15–16) The units were different sizes with different weights. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 16) Weimerskirch could not recall the weights. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) He testified 
he could not return to this work because it is too physically demanding due to the lifting 
it involved. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) 
At Eagle Windows and Door, Weimerskirch changed jobs to cutting jams. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 17) He had to carry materials that weighed as much as fifty or sixty pounds in this 
job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) Nonetheless, he testified he could return to this job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 42) 
Weimerskirch did not sustain any work injuries during his time at Eagle Window and 
Door. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18)  

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 4 
 
Progressive hired Weimerskirch in 2010 after he passed a preemployment 
physical. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 19–20) He was a laborer, first as a utility, which meant he filled in 
for absent workers on the fill line. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20) Weimerskirch worked in multiple 
rooms on the fill line and had to lift as much as fifty-five pounds as part of his job duties. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 20–25)  
On April 5, 2018, Progressive assigned Weimerskirch to help a coworker break 
apart frozen meat crumbles with a fork. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 25–26) While using the fork in an 
up-and-down motion, he felt pain in his right shoulder. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) Weimerskirch 
reported his injury and Progressive provided care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26; Jt. Ex. 3) 
Weimerskirch underwent conservative care at Finley Occupational Health. (Jt. 
Ex. 3) After conservative care failed, Finley referred him to an orthopedic specialist. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 30) After magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of Weimerskirch’s right shoulder 
showed a high-grade partial-thickness tear of the supraspinatus, Robert Bartelt, M.D., 
recommended right shoulder arthroscopy and open rotator cuff repair. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 31–
32) Dr. Bartelt performed the surgery on October 17, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 33) 
Weimerskirch missed some work following the surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 34) Dr. 
Bartelt released him to return to work with the restrictions of no lifting more than two 
pounds with his right arm, effective January 2, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 35; Hrg. Tr. p. 27) 
Progressive provided work within them. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 27–28)  
On January 16, 2019, Weimerskirch was working for Progressive with Dr. 
Bartelt’s lifting restriction in place. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) Progressive tasked him with sorting 
and placing on pallets cans of spam that were shrink-wrapped together in groups of 
twenty-four. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 28–29) Because Weimerskirch could not use his right arm, he 
was using his left arm to move the cases of spam. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 28–29) He credibly 
testified he would have used both arms to perform the task had he not been under 
doctor-prescribed work restrictions following the surgery to repair his right shoulder 
necessitated by the April 5, 2018 work injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) 
For Weimerskirch to handle the packs of Spam without using his right arm, he 
“tipped it up on end, put [his] four fingers on the bottom and put [his] thumb in between 
the cans on the very bottom tote in order to lift it up off the pallet.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 28; Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 39) Weimerskirch felt an onset of excruciating pain in his left shoulder when he 
went to pick up a case of Spam and was subsequently unable to move his left arm. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 29–30; Jt. Ex. 3, p. 39) He reported the injury and Progressive provided 
care through a plant nurse. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30) However, Progressive did not initially accept 
liability for Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder injury, so Dr. Bartelt did not provide care 
concurrently with care for his right shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 39–40) 
On March 15, 2019, Dr. Bartelt examined Weimerskirch, noting forward flexion of 
160; abduction, 140; external rotation, 80; and internal rotation, 30. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 37) 
There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Dr. Bartelt used a 
goniometer when conducting these measurements. Further, Dr. Bartelt did not measure 
adduction or extension. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 37; Jt. Ex. 5, p. 42) He released Weimerskirch to 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 5 
 
work without any restrictions relating to his right shoulder injury. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 37–38; Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 42)  
In a letter dated March 15, 2019, Dr. Bartelt opined on permanent disability to the 
right shoulder thusly: 
We evaluated the patient today. At that point, he was noted to have good 
function of the shoulder with minor limitations in motion. He noted that he 
was happy with the improvement in his shoulder. He also noted that he 
had a new work injury to his left shoulder, which is currently being dealt 
with and for which he is on restrictions. With respect to the right shoulder 
injury, we place him at maximal medical improvement as of March 15, 
2019. We assign him no permanent work restrictions for his right shoulder. 
We assign him 7% impairment to the right upper extremity based on 
motion loss using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, fifth edition, pages 475 through 479. 
(Jt. Ex.5, p. 42) 
On June 26, 2019, Weimerskirch returned to Dr. Bartelt, who noted (sic): 
Patient presents with left shoulder pain. He relates this to a work injury 
from January. He is doing well after right rotator cuff repair. MRI of left 
shoulder shows a high-grade partial-thickness tear of the rotator cuff. He 
also has some degenerative changes of the shoulder including 
degenerative labral tear. We reviewed the symptoms that he has. I think 
his symptoms are largely attributable to the rotator cuff. He is working full 
duty. We reviewed the causation of the shoulder problem. I did review 
records as well as a video of someone performing the job. Based on how 
the job was performed on the video there is a very little shoulder 
movement involved. Brian indicates that he was carrying the cases of 
spam differently with the arm extended from the body. I shared with Brian 
that rotator cuff tears can happen over time from wear and tear as well as 
injury. I also shared with him that the job as performed on video would 
involve very little shoulder movement whatsoever. To address the issue of 
causation he is always somewhat difficult in the circumstances. I think it is 
medically possible that his work activities have caused or aggravated the 
tear. However I think the likelihood of this is probably less than 50%. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 41) 
On October 10, 2019, Weimerskirch saw David Field, M.D., for the injury. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 30; Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 43–44) Dr. Field recommended arthroscopic rotator cuff repair 
with acromioplasty and bursectomy, which he performed on October 25, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 45) Weimerskirch’s recovery from left-shoulder surgery did not go well and he 
experienced ongoing pain and decreased range of motion. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30; Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 
47–56) 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 6 
 
Because of Weimerskirch’s ongoing left-shoulder issues, Dr. Field recommended 
a second surgery to remove scar tissue and adhesions. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 57) On June 6, 
2020, Dr. Field performed the procedure and Weimerskirch participated in rehabilitation 
afterward that included physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 59–63) The surgery and 
rehabilitation helped improve Weimerskirch’s function and reduce his pain. (Jt. Ex. 6, 
pp. 63–64)  
Weimerskirch saw Dr. Fields on July 27, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 63–64) Dr. Fields 
noted “he has gained full abduction and the pain has diminished considerably.” (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 63) “Clinically today he has excellent strength of the external rotations, 
subscapularis, biceps, and supraspinatus strength is 5/5. He still lacks the last 15-20 
degrees of full abduction. Internal rotation is hand to the pocket.” (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 63) The 
evidence does not allow for the finding that Dr. Field used goniometer to measure 
Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and internal and 
external rotation. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 63–64) Because of Weimerskirch’s progress, Dr. Field 
released him to return to work without restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 64) Thus, the evidence 
establishes Weimerskirch missed work from October 28, 2019, the date of his first 
surgery with Dr. Fields, through August 8, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 45, 63; Hrg. Tr. pp. 31–
33) 
After Dr. Field released Weimerskirch to return to full-duty work, Progressive 
assigned him to the batch room, where he had worked before his right-shoulder injury. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 31) Before the right-shoulder injury, Weimerskirch had equipment in his 
work area known as a Bishman, which is essentially a big table with an airbag under it 
that helped lift pallets off the ground and spun them to help workers reach product on 
the pallets. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35–36) After Weimerskirch returned to work in the batch room, 
this equipment was gone. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) No longer being able to use a Bishman to help 
with Weimerskirch’s job duties made them more physically demanding because he had 
to bend or stoop to lift product off pallets. (Hrg. Tr. p. 36) 
In March 2021, Weimerskirch quit his job with Progressive to work at Husco. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 34) The job at Husco paid less than his job at Progressive and meant he 
would have lower earnings after the change. One of the motivating factors in 
Weimerskirch’s decision to quit his job at Progressive was the difficulty he had 
physically performing his job duties after Progressive removed Bishmans, a tool that is 
effectively a table that raises and lowers to aid in lifting product, from his work station. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 35–37; Ex. A, p. 18) 
Husco required Weimerskirch to undergo pre-employment testing as part of the 
hiring process. (Ex. B, pp. 20–22) He had to show he could lift a crate weighing twenty 
pounds seven times from floor to waist, lift a crate weighing thirty-five pounds once from 
floor to waist, carry a thirty-five-pound crate for a distance of eight feet, and push a sled 
weighing one hundred twenty-five pounds for a distance of thirty feet. (Ex. B, p. 22) 
Weimerskirch was able to physically perform these activities. (Ex. B, p. 22)   
 
 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 7 
 
Weimerskirch’s job duties at Husco were not as physically demanding as they 
were at Progressive. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 39–40) Working causes him to experience pain in his 
shoulders. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 45–47) As a result, Weimerskirch attempts to limit his activities 
(e.g., lifting above shoulder level) in an effort to limit his pain. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 47) He takes 
ibuprofen for the pain and ices his shoulders to help reduce it. (Hrg. Tr. p. 48) 
Weimerskirch made just under six dollars per hour less at Husco as a starting 
wage than he was making at Progressive. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 39–40) At the time of hearing, 
Weimerskirch’s hourly wage at Husco was about three dollars less than at Progressive. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 40) The evidence establishes Weimerskirch’s earnings working at 
Progressive were higher than his earnings working at Husco. 
The defendants contend Weimerskirch lacks credibility because he initially 
denied hunting and riding a motorcycle in his deposition testimony. (Ex. F, p. 84, Depo. 
pp. 39–41; Ex. D) While this goes to Weimerskirch’s overall credibility, his ability to ride 
a motorcycle or hunt is not at issue in this case and there is an insufficient basis in the 
record from which to conclude these activities, to the extent they are described in the 
evidence, implicate his physical ability in activities of daily living and working, which are 
assessed under the AMA Guides when determining functional impairment. Overall, 
Weimerskirch provided credible testimony during the hearing. 
Claimant’s counsel talked with Dr. Field over the telephone regarding 
Weimerskirch’s injuries and disability. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1–3) He then sent Dr. Field a 
check-box letter dated May 27, 2021, that summarized Dr. Field’s opinions, based on 
their telephone conversation, in three paragraphs. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1–3) Dr. Field signed 
after each opinion paragraph, affirming his agreement with it, and dated his signatures 
May 27, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 2–3)  
By adopting the opinions in the check-box letter, Dr. Field indicated he believes 
Weimerskirch’s January 16, 2019 work injury was a contributing factor in necessitating 
the treatment he provided from October 10, 2019. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) He also affirmed his 
expert opinion that “it is more likely than not that Mr. Weimerskirch’s prior right shoulder 
injury was a contributing factor in producing his left shoulder injury inasmuch as Mr. 
Weimerskirch would not have been lifting the cases of meat with only one arm had the 
right shoulder not been injured and restricted.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) Dr. Field also indicated 
Weimerskirch reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) from his left-shoulder 
injury on July 27, 2020, and he did not provide an impairment rating at the time because 
no one requested one. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2)  
Claimant’s counsel also discussed Weimerskirch’s injuries and disability with Dr. 
Bartelt by telephone. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 4) He summarized his understanding of Dr. Bartelt’s 
opinions in a check-box letter dated June 22, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 4–6) Dr. Bartelt 
signed the opinions, indicating his agreement with them and dated his signatures June 
25, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 4–5)  
 
 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 8 
 
Dr. Bartelt clarified his nurse practitioner saw Weimerskirch on February 1, 2019, 
which is when he described his left-shoulder injury and affirmed he provided no 
treatment for the left-shoulder injury because he was not authorized to do so. (Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 4) Dr. Bartelt also affirmed that prior to Weimerskirch’s June 26, 2019 appointment, 
he was shown video of an individual performing with both hands the job duties 
Weimerskirch was performing at the time he injured his left shoulder while working for 
Progressive. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 5) The video showing performance of the duties in question 
with both hands, instead of just the left arm as Weimerskirch performed them, “most 
influenced the opinion [he] gave on that date that [Weimerskirch’s] work activities were 
not more than a 50 percent contributor in producing [Weimerskirch’s] left shoulder 
injury.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) 
In the check-box letter, Opinion Paragraph Three states: 
During our conversation, I shared with you that Mr. Weimerskirch was 
actually performing this duty one-handed. In order to accomplish this, he 
was tilting the cases of meat to the side, placing them on the floor, and 
then lifting them upwards using only his left hand to locations that were up 
to shoulder level. This type of activity would be much more stressful on the 
shoulder than what you were shown on the video. Assuming that this 
description of the activities he was performing on the date in question is 
accurate, you believe his one-handed duties on January 16, 2019 were 
more than likely a contributing factor in producing his left shoulder rotator 
cuff tear. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 5)  
Dr. Bartelt signed this opinion, signifying his agreement with it. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 5) 
He also handwrote the additional comment “if he was lifting the cases one handed to 
shoulder height.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 5) This reiterated his past and current understanding of 
the mechanism of injury to the Weimerskirch’s left shoulder.  
Thus, the weight of the evidence demonstrates someone provided Dr. Bartelt 
with video of someone moving shrink-wrapped packs of SPAM in a way that was 
different from how Weimerskirch did so using only his left arm on January 22, 2019. The 
video caused Dr. Bartelt to have an incorrect understanding of how Weimerskirch 
injured his left shoulder on January 22, 2019. This mistaken belief underpinned his June 
2019 causation opinion. In contrast, the opinion in the check-box letter adopted by Dr. 
Bartelt is more persuasive as it is based on a more accurate understanding of the 
mechanism of injury. 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Weimerskirch to undergo an IME with David 
Segal, M.D., J.D., on October 16, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 3) As part of the IME, Dr. Segal also 
performed a records review. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 32–41) Dr. Segal then issued an IME report, 
dated December 9, 2020, with his findings and opinions. (Cl. Ex. 3) 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 9 
 
On the question of causation with respect to Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder injury, 
Dr. Segal opined: 
Were it not for the work-related injury of April 5, 2018, Mr. Weimerskirch 
would not have needed to work under restrictions in January of 2019. 
Were it not for the restrictions, Mr. Weimerskirch would not have had the 
work injury on January 16, 2019, because he was using only his left arm 
for a two-handed task. The diagnoses listed above for Mr. Weimerskirch’s 
left shoulder as well as the symptoms that continue the need for past and 
future treatment are directly caused by the work injury of January 16, 
2019, which occurred because of the work injury of April 5, 2018. 
**** 
The awkward and heavy l[ifitng] of the 18-pound packaged cases with only 
the left arm placed abnormal stressors on the left shoulder. Mr. 
Weimerskirch demonstrated for me the manner in which he needed to lift 
those cases (see attached photos), and the stress would have primarily 
focused on the left shoulder. While there may have been underlying 
degenerative or repetitive microtrauma, one specific lift using the left arm 
on January 16, 2019, either caused the left impingement syndrome, distal 
tear of supraspinatus tendon with full-thickness component and SLAP 
tear, or caused permanent aggravation of preexisting asymptomatic 
anatomic conditions including moderate hypertrophic degenerative change 
in the acromioclavicular joint, glenohumeral degenerative change, and 
degenerative fraying of the labrum. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 23, 24–25) 
The defendants arranged for Weimerskirch to undergo an IME with Robert 
Broghammer, M.D., on August 16, 2021. (Ex. C, p. 35) Dr. Broghammer performed an 
in-person examination of Weimerskirch and a records review. (Ex. C, pp. 51) He then 
issued a report dated August 31, 2021, with opinions on causation and disability. (Ex. C, 
pp. 35–56) 
On the question of what caused Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder injury, Dr. 
Broghammer opined the following question with the following answer: 
4. Do you find that Mr. Weimerskirch suffered a work-related injury to his 
left shoulder? If yes, please explain the date of injury, mechanism of 
injury, and diagnosis. 
Yes, it does appear that based upon review of the medical records, 
including the MRI that was completed within a couple of months after the 
alleged injury, that Mr. Weimerskirch did suffer an injury to the left 
shoulder on or about January 16, 2019. The MRI completed a few months 
after demonstrated an acute/subacute injury consistent with the timeframe 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 10 
 
that MR. Weimerskirch reports. In addition, there was fluid present on the 
MRI which is seen in acute and subacute injuries, not chronic injuries. My 
diagnosis for this would be an aggravation of a more likely than not pre-
existing partial rotator cuff tear and degenerative labrum. 
(Ex. E, pp. 52–54) 
The defendants have not articulated any specific shortcomings with respect to 
Dr. Segal’s records review, examination of Weimerskirch, or his measurements of 
Weimerskirch’s physical ability. Rather, they attack his credibility generally. The 
defendants have included among their exhibits a settlement agreement In the Matter of 
the Statement of Charges Against David H. Segal, M.D., Respondent, before the Iowa 
Board of Medicine (Board). (Ex. E, pp. 68–73) 
The Board alleged Dr. Segal engaged in professional incompetency with respect 
to the use of blood patch to manage postoperative spinal fluid leaks after surgery, his 
patients experienced excessive infections following neurostimulator placement and he 
failed to appropriately manage the infections, failed to establish coverage arrangements 
for his patients when he was absent, and maintained pre-signed prescriptions which 
were intended to be completed and issued at a later time. (Ex. E, p. 69) Dr. Segal “filed 
an Answer denying the allegations.” (Ex. E, p. 69) He then entered into the settlement 
agreement with the Board “to resolve the contested charges.” (Ex. E, p. 69)  
Under the agreement, the Board cited Dr. Segal for the above allegations and 
warned him that future violations of the law and rules governing the practice of medicine 
in Iowa may result in further disciplinary action against his medical license. (Ex. E, p. 
70) He agreed to pay a civil penalty of five thousand dollars. (Ex. E, p. 70) Dr. Segal 
also agreed he will not engage in surgery under his Iowa medical license, which is in 
line with action he had previously taken due to his diagnosis of Parkinsonism. (Ex. E, 
pp. 70–71)  
The agreement states that Dr. Segal “continues to provide non-surgical medical 
services including, but not limited to, medical consultations, medical records reviews, 
and independent medical examinations.” (Ex. E, p. 70) It also states that while Dr. Segal 
had voluntarily agreed “he will not engage in the practice of surgery under his Iowa 
medical license,” his “license is otherwise without restriction.” (Ex. E, p. 71) Thus, the 
Board concluded it was appropriate to allow Dr. Segal to maintain his Iowa medical 
license for the purpose of performing medical consultations, medical records reviews, 
and independent medical examinations.  
The Board has an intimate knowledge of the standards applicable to perform 
medical services under an Iowa medical license. It deals with myriad complaints against 
physicians and has expertise in how to address them. With respect to Dr. Segal, the 
Board voluntarily entered into an agreement that expressly allows him to practice 
medical records reviews and IMEs under his Iowa medical license. The undersigned 
accepts the Board’s conclusion, as memorialized in the agreement, that Dr. Segal is 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 11 
 
qualified to perform these activities as a practicing physician under the standards that 
apply to practicing physicians in Iowa.  
Further, in an affidavit, Dr. Segal asserts he still denies the charges against him 
and entered into the settlement agreement with the Board because he could not afford 
the litigation that would be required to fight the charges leveled against him. (Cl. Ex. 4, 
pp. 42–43) The agreement contains no express admission of negligence or wrongdoing 
by Dr. Segal. The evidentiary record is insufficient from which to conclude Dr. Segal has 
committed malpractice that undermines the credibility of the opinions he expressed in 
the IME report in this case. 
For the above reasons, the undersigned finds that the agreement between the 
Board and Dr. Segal does not undermine Dr. Segal’s credibility in a way that per se 
disqualifies him from providing expert opinions in a workers’ compensation case before 
the agency, which typically involves the performance of medical records reviews and 
IMEs. The Board has deemed Dr. Segal capable of being a practicing physician in Iowa 
so long as he does not perform surgery, which he voluntarily gave up in May 2016 
because of his Parkinsonism diagnosis. It is therefore appropriate to assess the 
credibility of Dr. Segal’s opinions against the rest of the evidentiary records in the case. 
The evidentiary record in this case also includes a decision, Matter of Segal, 
2014 NY Slip Op 08591 (App. Div., Dec. 9, 2014), from disciplinary proceedings 
instituted by the Departmental Disciplinary Committee of the First Judicial Department in 
the State of New York. (Ex. E, pp. 64–67) The defendants contend this shows Dr. Segal 
was a practicing attorney in New York who had his law license suspended multiple 
times. (Def. Brief, p. 3) The defendants posit it was Dr. Segal having his law license 
suspended in New York in 2014 that motivated him to move to Iowa and become a 
practicing neurosurgeon. (Def. Brief, p. 3)  
The record in this case shows Dr. Segal was continually in practice as a doctor 
from 1997 (when he completed his residency) to 2016 (when he voluntarily stopped 
performing surgery because of his Parkinsonism) and that he moved to Iowa in 2009 to 
be closer to his wife’s family, who are from Center Point. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 42) After Dr. 
Segal stopped his clinical practice, he attended the University of Iowa College of Law 
and received his J.D. degree in May 2019. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 42) He worked for a law firm in 
Nevada in 2019 and 2020 while also performing IMEs and writing expert reports. (Cl. 
Ex. 4, p. 43) Further, the attorney disciplined in New York was almost seventy years of 
age in 2014 and Dr. Segal was fifty-three years of age in 2020. (Ex. E, p. 65; Cl. Ex. 4, 
p. 42) There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude the nearly 70-
year-old Attorney Segal disciplined in New York in 2014 is the Dr. Segal who performed 
an IME of Weimerskirch in this case and did not obtain his JD degree until 2019. 
In this case, Dr. Segal performed a records review and examination of 
Weimerskirch before issuing a detailed report. His opinion on causation is in line with 
those of Weimerskirch’s treating physicians, Dr. Bartelt and Dr. Field. Their reasoning is 
compelling and persuasive. Moreover, Dr. Broghammer’s opinion on causation does not 
call the opinions of Weimerskirch’s treating physicians and Dr. Segal into question. Dr. 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 12 
 
Broghammer opined he believed Weimerskirch’s performance of work activities on 
January 16, 2019. Thus, Dr. Broghammer does not directly address the question of 
whether Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder injury of January 16, 2019, is a sequela to his 
initial right-shoulder injury. The weight of the evidence in this case establishes 
Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder injury would not have occurred but for his right-shoulder 
injury and the resulting surgery and work restrictions, which required him to perform job 
duties using only his left arm. 
Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides addresses the upper extremities. AMA Guides, p. 
433. Section 16.4i sets forth the framework for assessing shoulder motion impairment. 
Id. at p. 474. The process requires using a goniometer to measure flexion, extension, 
abduction, adduction, and internal and external rotation. Id. Under the AMA Guides, 
“The shoulder has three functional units of motion, each contributing a relative value to 
its function.” Id. Flexion and extension make up one such unit, abduction and adduction 
another, and internal and external rotation is the third. See id.  
The AMA Guides contain pie charts with impairment curves for each functional 
unit of motion. Id. at 475–79, Figures 16-40, 16-43, 16-46. To determine the impairment 
of an individual’s shoulder, the examining physician must perform and record the actual 
range-of-motion measurements, then apply the various impairment pie charts in the 
AMA Guides. Id. at 475. To correctly use Figure 16-40, one must measure both flexion 
and extension and to correctly use Figure 16-43, one must measure both abduction and 
adduction. See id. at 475–79. “The upper extremity impairment resulting from abnormal 
shoulder motion is calculated from the pie charts by adding directly the upper extremity 
impairment values contributed by each motion unit.” Id. at 475 (emphasis in original).  
Failure to measure and include each range-of-motion measurement results in an 
incomplete assessment of the shoulder’s range of motion that makes it impossible to 
correctly utilize the charts in the AMA Guides for determining the functional impairment 
of a shoulder. See id. at 475–79. 
With respect to Weimerskirch’s right shoulder, the record shows Dr. Bartelt did 
not follow the framework in the AMA Guides when opining on his permanent functional 
impairment. March 15, 2019, was the date of Dr. Bartelt’s final examination of 
Weimerskirch before opining on functional impairment. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 37, 42) During the 
exam, he recorded forward flexion, abduction, and external and internal rotation; 
however, the evidence does not show Dr. Bartelt measured Weimerskirch’s right-
shoulder extension or adduction, as required by the AMA Guides. (See Jt. Ex. 4, p. 37; 
see also AMA Guides, § 16.4i, p. 474). For these reasons, Dr. Bartelt’s opinion on the 
permanent functional impairment to Weimerskirch’s right shoulder is not based on the 
framework in the AMA Guides. This makes Dr. Bartelt’s opinion on the question 
unpersuasive. 
Dr. Broghammer measured: flexion, 115; extension, 36; abduction, 84; 
adduction, 24; internal rotation, 55; and external rotation, 70. (Ex. C, p. 51) He then 
cited to the AMA Guides. (Ex. C, p. 52) On the question of permanent disability to 
Weimerskirch’s right shoulder, he then opined: 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 13 
 
It appears that an impairment rating was already completed by Dr. Bartelt 
and I would agree with his impairment rating of 7% to the right upper 
extremity. I would not utilize today’s measurements as they did not appear 
to be reliable and were markedly different than those obtained by Dr. 
Bartelt in 2019. This could be due to lack of effort, intentional 
misrepresentation, or possibly other intervening factors which have 
occurred to further compromise the range of motion of the right shoulder. 
(Ex. C, p. 52) 
The AMA Guides expressly require an examining physician to measure an 
individual’s flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, internal rotation, and external 
rotation using a goniometer. As found above, there is insufficient evidence in the record 
to establish Dr. Bartelt used a goniometer during the 2019 examination. Further, the 
record shows he did not measure extension or adduction, which means even if he did 
use a goniometer, he did not have all of the measurements necessary to assess 
functional impairment of Weimerskirch’s right shoulder under the AMA Guides.  
Dr. Broghammer does not acknowledge or discuss Dr. Bartelt’s failure to use 
measurements of Weimerskirch’s right-shoulder extension and adduction. Instead, he 
offered potential explanations for the difference between the measurements by Dr. 
Bartelt and the ones he conducted during his examination of Weimerskirch. There is an 
insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude any of the suppositions Dr. 
Broghammer volunteered in his report are anything more than possibilities. Rather, the 
evidence shows it is most likely that Dr. Bartelt’s impairment rating is off base because 
he did not measure or consider extension or adduction as required by the AMA Guides. 
In adopting Dr. Bartelt’s impairment rating, Dr. Broghammer adopted an impairment 
rating reached without following the AMA Guides. Therefore, Dr. Broghammer’s opinion 
on Weimerskirch’s right-shoulder impairment is not credible. 
Dr. Field did not opine on Weimerskirch’s permanent functional impairment to the 
left shoulder. Dr. Broghammer addressed the question of permanent disability to the left 
shoulder as follows: 
It should be noted that like the right shoulder, the left shoulder range of 
motion was markedly diminished possibly due to lack of effort, secondary 
gain or other intervening factors. In fact, the range of motion 
measurements completed on today’s evaluation were even worse than 
those of Dr. Segal. I therefore would opine that the range of motion 
measurements are not reliable particularly when the worker was noted to 
have lacked only 15-20 [degrees] of motion when last seen by Dr. Field in 
July 2020. Furthermore, in my medical opinion, the 60 [degrees] of internal 
rotation demonstrated on the left is not consistent with the other 
significantly limited range of motion measurements. 
 
 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 14 
 
Taking all of this into consideration, I would therefore arbitrarily assign a 
10% left upper extremity impairment for the limited motion of the left 
shoulder and surgery. It is clear based on the medical records that the 
worker did have some increased difficulty with the left shoulder after 
surgery with some ongoing stiffness which was diagnosed as adhesive 
capsulitis by Dr. Field.  This markedly improved by the July 2020 
timeframe and the worker was released by Dr. Field.  Given the increased 
difficulty in my medical opinion it is appropriate to have a slightly higher 
impairment to the left upper extremity than to the right. 
(Ex. C, p. 53) 
As found above, there is no indication Dr. Field used a goniometer to conduct 
measurements of Weimerskirch’s right-shoulder range of motion. While Dr. Field made 
observations about Weimerskirch’s range of motion, he did not record any 
measurements of flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation, or internal 
rotation. The lack of measurements make Dr. Broghammer’s conclusion that 
Weimerskirch’s range of motion is without a baseline established by a complete set of 
measurements using a goniometer, Dr. Broghammer’s opinion that Weimerskirch’s 
range of motion is “markedly diminished possibly due to lack of effort, secondary gain or 
other intervening factors” is unpersuasive. As is his “arbitrarily assign[ed]” ten percent 
impairment rating. 
Dr. Segal measured Weimerskirch’s flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and 
internal and external rotation for both shoulders. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) He documented these 
measurements in his IME report. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) Dr. Segal then used Figures 16-40, 
16-43, and 16-46 in the AMA Guides to determine Weimerskirch had a functional 
impairment based on range of motion to his right shoulder of eleven percent (seven 
percent to the whole person, using Table 16-3) and to his left shoulder of sixteen 
percent (ten percent to the whole body, using Table 16-3). (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) Using the 
Combined Values Chart on pages 604 and 605, they equal a whole person functional 
impairment of sixteen percent. 
Dr. Segal also found Weimerskirch had weakness in his left shoulder on 
examination that was independent of pain. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) Dr. Segal followed page 
507 of the AMA Guides and used Table 16-35 on page 510 to assign impairment for 
weakness. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) He concluded Weimerskirch had an eighteen percent 
impairment to his left shoulder and eight percent to his right. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26)  
The AMA Guides allow for an examining physician to add to an individual’s 
impairment level for loss of strength, “[i]n rare cases, if the examiner believes the 
individual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor that has not been considered 
adequately by other methods in the Guides.” AMA Guides, § 16.8a, p. 508. They further 
provide (sic), “Decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased 
motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence of parts (eg, thumb amputation) that 
prevent effective application of maximal force in the region being evaluated.” Id. 
(emphasis in original). 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 15 
 
As found above, Weimerskirch has a functional impairment in each shoulder 
based on decreased range of motion under the AMA Guides. As discussed below, 
Weimerskirch continued to experience ongoing pain in his shoulders at the time of 
hearing. For these reasons, it is inappropriate under section 16.8 of the AMA Guides to 
give Weimerskirch any impairment rating for loss of strength and Dr. Segal’s impairment 
rating for loss of strength in both shoulders is rejected.  
Further, section 16.8c states with respect to manual muscle testing of shoulder 
strength, “Results of strength testing should be reproducible on different occasions or by 
two or more trained observers. Id. at p. 509. The evidence shows Dr. Segal examined 
Weimerskirch and tested his strength on one occasion and that no other trained 
observers tested his strength. This reinforces the finding that Dr. Segal’s impairment 
rating based on loss of strength is unpersuasive because it was made in contradiction to 
the criteria and process set forth in the AMA Guides. 
On Weimerskirch’s pain, Dr. Segal cited to Section 18.3 of the AMA Guides, 
which deals with pain, to note the organ and body system impairment does not 
adequately address impairment when there is excess pain and the individual has a 
medical condition verified by objective means that causes pain. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 26) He 
then opined:   
For Mr. Weimerskirch, the operation does appear to have been successful 
in relieving some symptomatology, which does make it a successful 
operation; however, there is residual symptomatology. Pain in the right 
shoulder reaches 6/10 daily with certain routine positions and activities. 
Lifting overhead or using force overhead increases his right shoulder pain 
the most. Pain in the left shoulder averages 5–6/10 at work and reaches 
10/10 daily with certain routine positions and activities. Lifting overhead or 
using force overhead increases his left shoulder pain the most. This pain 
with lifting is not accounted for or addressed in the range of motion or 
motor weakness measurements. 
Therefore, Mr. Weimerskirch fits the criteria for assigning a pain-rated 
impairment pages on page 573, section 18.3d, Item C, which states: “If the 
individual appears to have pain-related impairment that has increased the 
burden of his or condition slightly, the examiner may increase the 
percentage found in A by up to 3%,” and “A” is the impairment rating 
without the inclusion of the pain that increases the burden of the condition 
even slightly. This is clearly the case when there is normal range of motion 
after shoulder surgery; however, there is severe pain with lifting. This 
increased burden is not accounted for in the range of motion 
measurements, and therefore Mr. Weimerskirch shoulder be given an 
additional 3% whole person impairment (WPI) for each shoulder. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 26–27) (emphasis in original). 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 16 
 
The AMA Guides state that its impairment ratings “include allowances for the 
pain that individuals typically experience when they suffer from various injuries or 
diseases.” § 18.3, p. 570. It therefore follows, “Organ and body system ratings of 
impairment should be used whenever they adequately capture the actual [activities of 
daily living (ADL)] deficits that individuals experience.” Id. at § 18.3a, p. 570. Under the 
AMA Guides, Chapter 18 should be used to evaluate an individual’s pain-related 
impairment: 
 When there is excess pain in the context of verifiable medical conditions that 
cause pain; 
 When there are well-established pain syndromes without significant, 
identifiable organ dysfunction to explain the pain, or 
 When there are other associated pain syndromes. Id. at 570–71. 
Dr. Segal makes the conclusory assertion that Weimerskirch experiences pain 
that increases “with certain routine positions and activities” and specifically identifies 
lifting or using force overhead. He does not explain the basis for his conclusion that the 
range-of-motion impairment rating—which is based on measurements of flexion, 
extension, adduction, abduction, and internal and external rotation—does not 
adequately capture Weimerskirch’s pain with “routine positions and activities” or 
exerting force overhead. Therefore, Dr. Segal’s opinion with respect to Weimerskirch’s 
impairment caused by pain is unpersuasive and is not adopted. 
The evidence establishes it is more likely than not Weimerskirch has sustained 
permanent functional impairment to his right shoulder of eleven percent to the right 
upper extremity due to the April 5, 2019 work injury to his right shoulder and of sixteen 
percent to the left upper extremity because of the sequela to his left shoulder. 
With respect to permanent work restrictions, neither Dr. Segal nor Dr. Field 
assigned Weimerskirch any and Dr. Broghammer adopted their opinions. However, 
Weimerskirch had been off work for some time when both Dr. Bartelt and Dr. Field 
released him to return to work full duty. In contrast, Dr. Segal examined Weimerskirch 
after he had been working full duty for an extended period of time. Dr. Segal noted this 
in his IME report and that Weimerskirch had been, “working and managing at his current 
job with compensatory maneuvers that he learned by trial and error.” (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28)  
Because Weimerskirch was able to get by at his job, Dr. Segal assigned the following 
permanent work restrictions that would apply if he needs to look for a new job: 
 Occasionally lifting to waist height 31 to 50 pounds; 
 Occasionally lifting to shoulder height 26 to 40 pounds; 
 As tolerated repetitive lifting within the weight limits; 
 Occasionally lifting overhead 11 to 20 pounds; 
 No repetitive lifting overhead; 
 Occasionally carrying 26 to 40 pounds; 
 Occasionally pushing and pulling with 21 to 40 pounds of force; 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 17 
 
 Rarely pushing and pulling with greater than 40 pounds of force; 
 No using torque-type tools or screw guns one handed with his left hand 
 Rarely use forceful grip; and  
 Take breaks as needed. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) 
Under these restrictions, “occasionally” means between zero and two and one-half 
hours per day or zero to one-third of the workday. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 29)  
Thus, Dr. Segal’s assigned work restrictions are in line with what the results of 
the pre-employment functional testing Husco required Weimerskirch to undergo before 
starting employment with the company. Dr. Segal’s assessment is also in line with 
Weimerskirch’s credible hearing testimony regarding his ongoing symptoms. For these 
reasons, Dr. Segal’s work restrictions are most persuasive and are adopted. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
A .  
S e q u e l a .  
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must “provide, 
secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability for 
recovery of damages or other compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). “[W]here an accident occurs to an employee in the usual course of his 
employment, the employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and proximately 
flow from the accident.” Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 266 N.W. 480, 482, opinion 
modified on denial of reh'g, 222 Iowa 764, 269 N.W. 925 (Iowa 1936). This includes, but 
is not limited to, a mental health condition caused by a work injury. See Coghlan v. 
Quinn Wire & Iron Works, 164 N.W.2d 848, 852–53 (Iowa 1969).  
“[T]he burden of proof is on the claimant to prove some employment incident or 
activity was a proximate cause of the health impairment on which he bases his claim.” 
Anderson v. Oscar Mayer & Co., 217 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1974). “[A] possibility is 
insufficient; a probability is necessary.” Id. The claimant must prove causation by a 
preponderance of the evidence. See, e.g., St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 
652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996)). 
 
 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 18 
 
“‘Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” IBP, Inc. v. 
Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency, “as the fact finder, determines the weight to 
be given to any expert testimony.” Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 
1998). The agency must weigh the evidence in a case and accept or reject an expert 
opinion based on the entire record. Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. The agency may 
accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in part. Sherman, 576 N.W.2d at 321. 
Here, the parties agree Weimerskirch sustained a work injury to his right 
shoulder on April 5, 2018. The evidence shows the injury required surgery and work 
restrictions that limited Weimerskirch’s use of his right arm. On January 22, 2019, 
Weimerskirch was lifting shrink-wrapped packages of SPAM using only his left arm in 
accordance with the work restrictions limiting the use of his right arm that were 
necessitated by the April 5, 2018 work injury and surgery to repair it when he injured his 
left shoulder. 
Weimerskirch’s treating physicians, Dr. Bartelt and Dr. Field opined his right-
shoulder injury, resultant surgery, and the work restrictions they necessitated were a 
factor in causing his left-shoulder injury. Dr. Segal opined similarly. Dr. Broghammer did 
not address the question of what, if any, causal link exists between Weimerskirch’s 
initial right-shoulder injury and left-shoulder injury. No expert in this case expressly 
opined Weimerskirch’s right-shoulder injury was not a substantial factor in causing his 
subsequent left-shoulder injury. 
As found above, the weight of the evidence establishes a substantial factor in 
causing Weimerskirch’s left-shoulder injury on January 22, 2019, was his right-shoulder 
injury and the work restrictions prescribed because of it. Weimerskirch has met his 
burden of proof. The evidence establishes his left-shoulder injury is a sequela to his 
right-shoulder injury. 
B . 
H e a l i n g  P e r i o d  B e n e f i t s .  
Temporary benefits compensate an employee for lost wages until the employee 
is able to return to work. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Travelers Ins. Co., 770 N.W.2d 826, 
830 (Iowa 2009). An injured employee is entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or 
healing period (HP) benefits when the employee is unable to work during a period of 
convalescence caused by a work injury. Iowa Code §§ 85.33(1), 85.34(1). Whether an 
employee’s injury causes a permanent disability dictates whether the employee’s 
temporary benefits are considered TTD or HP. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (citing Clark v. Vicorp Rests., Inc., 696 
N.W.2d 596, 604–05 (Iowa 2005)). If there is a permanent disability, the benefits are 
considered HP; if not, they are TTD. See id. 
 
 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 19 
 
As discussed below, Weimerskirch has sustained a permanent disability. 
Consequently, Weimerskirch’s benefits for time off work are considered healing period 
benefits under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Under Iowa Code section 
85.34(1): 
If an employee has suffered a personal injury causing permanent partial 
disability for which compensation is payable as provided in subsection 2 of 
this section, the employer shall pay to the employee compensation for a 
healing period, as provided in section 85.37, beginning on the first day of 
disability after the injury, and until the employee has returned to work or it 
is medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not 
anticipated or until the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the 
employee was engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first. 
The evidence shows Weimerskirch was off work from October 28, 2019, the date 
of his first surgery with Dr. Field, through August 8, 2020, when Dr. Field released him 
to return to work full duty and did so. Weimerskirch’s return to work is the first of the 
alternative events identified in the statute that ends his entitlement to HP benefits. 
Therefore, he is entitled to forty weeks and five days (40.71 weeks) of healing period 
benefits at the weekly rate of five hundred fifteen and 32/100 dollars ($515.32), subject 
to the credit for short-term disability benefits. 
C . 
B i f u r c a t e d  L i t i g a t i o n  P r o c e s s .  
After reaching MMI, Weimerskirch returned to work with Progressive earning the 
same, and later more, than what he was earning when he was injured on April 5, 2018. 
He then voluntarily quit his job. With Weimerskirch’s new employer, his earnings were 
less than they were at Progressive. 
Workers’ compensation is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 
570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 
(Iowa 1992).  And “it is the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the 
act’s benefits may be obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation (apart 
from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a physical 
injury.” Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 2010). 
Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2), the method of compensating permanent partial 
disability caused by a work injury is generally based on whether the injury is to a body 
part itemized in the statutory schedule. Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 
404, 407 (Iowa 1994). “Scheduled permanent partial disabilities . . .  are ‘arbitrarily’ 
compensable according to the classifications of section 85.34(2) without regard to loss 
of earning capacity.” Id. (quoting Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 14–15 
(Iowa 1993)).  

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 20 
 
Before 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body part caused by 
a work injury was “compensated by the industrial disability method which takes into 
account the loss of earning capacity.” Id. (citing Mortimer, 502 N.W.2d at 14–15); see 
also Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009) (quoting Oscar 
Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 1992)). An industrial disability 
analysis was used regardless of whether the injured employee returned to work with the 
defendant-employer or the level of earnings at the time of hearing relative to the date of 
injury. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009) (quoting Oscar 
Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 1992)); see also Quaker Oats 
Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 158 (Iowa 1996); Arrow-Acme Corp. v. Bellamy, 500 
N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa Ct. App. 1993). With the 2017 amendments, the legislature carved 
out an exception to this longstanding general rule and created a mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process on the issue of permanent disability under certain circumstances. See 
2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v)).  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act now articulates an exception and the 
circumstances triggering the bifurcated litigation process as follows: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee's 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee's earning 
capacity caused by the employee's permanent partial disability. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).  
The question presented here is whether section 85.34(2)(v) requires 
Weimerskirch to follow the bifurcated litigation process to obtain a determination of 
what, if any, industrial disability he has sustained due to his unscheduled work injury. 
Weimerskirch believes it does not. The defendants did not address how the statute 
applies in this case. 
While the legislature has not empowered the agency to interpret the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act, the agency necessarily must do so when performing its 
quasi-judicial function as the tribunal responsible for providing the exclusive remedy in 
contested case proceedings under the Act. See Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 
N.W.2d 512, 518–19 (Iowa 2012); see also Iowa Ins. Inst. v. Core Group of Iowa Ass’n 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 21 
 
for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 68 (Iowa 2015); Martinez v. Pavlich, Inc., File No. 5063900., 
(App. July 30, 2020) . To determine Weimerskirch’s entitlement to PPD benefits at 
present, it is necessary to first determine whether he must use the bifurcated litigation 
process under the statute given the timing of him quitting his job at Progressive. 
Therefore, this decision must interpret section 85.34(2)(v). 
One sentence of section 85.34(2)(v), read alone, states that an injured employee 
is entitled only to PPD benefits for functional impairment if the employee “returns to 
work or is offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same or 
greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury.” 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). The sentence contains no express requirement that the 
injured worker remain employed with the defendant-employer after returning to work at 
the requisite earning level. But the analysis of this statutory provision does not end with 
the punctuation at the end of this individual sentence.  
Iowa statutes are interpreted as a whole, not in part. See, e.g., Doe v. State, 943 
N.W.2d 608, 610 (Iowa 2020).  When interpreting the text of a provision in the Iowa 
Code, we must “take into consideration the language’s relationship to other provisions 
of the same statute and other provisions of related statutes. Id. Taking the broader view 
of the statutory scheme at issue here, the next sentence in section 85.34(2)(v) states an 
injured employee who “returns to work with the same employer and is compensated 
based only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury as 
provided in this paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer” may 
seek reopening of the agency award or an agreement for settlement on the question of 
permanent disability.  
The analysis necessarily includes more than just the text of section 85.34(2)(v) 
as the agency’s review-reopening process under Iowa Code section 86.14(2) is also 
implicated. Review-reopening is a process by which a determination of workers’ 
compensation is revisited due to a change in the claimant’s condition. Kohlhaas v. Hog 
Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 391–95 (Iowa 2009) Thus, the legislature has mandated a 
bifurcated litigation process on the question of permanent disability using the agency’s 
review-reopening process after the occurrence of the events identified in section 
85.34(2)(v) because the defendant-employer’s discharge of the claimant after the 
agency awards benefits for permanent functional impairment or approves a settlement 
on that question creates a change in condition that triggers reopening of the 
determination of permanent disability for application of the traditional industrial disability 
analysis. See Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 391–95.  
Moreover, the Commissioner considered section 85.34(2)(v)’s bifurcated litigation 
requirement in Martinez v. Pavlich, Inc., File No. 5063900 (App. July 30, 2020). In 
Martinez, the claimant voluntarily quit employment with the defendant-employer and 
accepted a position with a different employer at higher pay. Id. The Commissioner 
opined: 
[W]hen the two new provisions . . . are read together, as they are set forth 
in the statute, it appears the legislature intended to address only the 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 22 
 
scenario in which a claimant initially returns to work with the defendant-
employer or is offered work by the defendant-employer at the same or 
greater earnings but is later terminated by the defendant-employer. 
Id. (emphasis added). Put otherwise, the statute requires a bifurcated litigation process 
on permanent disability only under the circumstances its text expressly identifies.  
Reinforcing the Commissioner’s reading is the traditional statutory construction 
principle of expressio unius est exclusio alterious, which holds that legislative intent is 
expressed by exclusion and inclusion alike with the express mention of one thing 
implying the exclusion of another. Kucera v. Baldazo, 745 N.W.2d 481, 487 (Iowa 
2008). In section 85.34(2)(v), the text expressly requires a bifurcated litigation process 
only when: 
1) The claimant returns to work or is offered work with the defendant-employer 
after the work injury at the same or higher earnings level as at the time of the 
injury; 
 
2) The agency makes a determination of permanent functional impairment or 
approves a settlement on that question; and 
 
3) The defendant-employer later discharges the injured employee.  
The statute contains no mention of any other circumstances that mandate a bifurcated 
litigation process to determine the extent of permanent disability. The legislature could 
have included such language in the statute but did not. This establishes that the 
requirement for a bifurcated ligation process only applies when the defendant-employer 
discharges the claimant after the agency issues an award or approves the parties’ 
agreement for settlement on the question of permanent disability based on the 
functional impairment caused by the work injury. 
Relatedly, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act “is not to be expanded by 
reading something into it that is not there.” Downs, 481 N.W.2d at 527 (citing Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). Because the statutory 
text does not include an express requirement for a bifurcated litigation process when the 
employment relationship between the claimant and defendant-employer ends before 
hearing, it would be erroneous to expand the circumstances under which section 
85.34(2)(v) requires such a process by reading something into its text that is not there. 
Compounding the legal error that such an interpretation would constitute is the fact it 
would undermine an important purpose of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
In Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130 (Iowa 2003), the Iowa 
Supreme Court considered the Commissioner’s authority to reform a workers’ 
compensation insurance policy. Even though the court’s opinion construed the scope of 
the Commissioner’s authority under section 85.21, its reasoning applies here. Id. at 
132–33. The court drew on longstanding precedent as the foundation of its holding: 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 23 
 
The fundamental reason for the enactment of this legislation is to avoid 
litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize appeals, and 
afford an efficient and speedy tribunal to determine and award 
compensation under the terms of this act. 
“It was the purpose of the legislature to create a tribunal to 
do rough justice—speedy, summary, informal, untechnical. With this 
scheme of the legislature we must not interfere; for, if we trench in the 
slightest degree upon the prerogatives of the commission, one 
encroachment will breed another, until finally simplicity will give way to 
complexity, and informality to technicality.” 
Id. at 133 (quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921) (citation omitted)).  
The court concluded a “bifurcated litigation process” that is drawn out “is a far cry 
from the efficient and speedy remedy envisioned by the general assembly when it 
adopted the workers’ compensation act.” Id. at 133–34. The court held it would be 
erroneous “to read into the statute a limitation on the [C]ommissioner’s authority to 
decide claims for compensation, particularly when to do so would defeat one of the 
primary purposes of the statute—the provision of a prompt and adequate remedy.” Id. 
Applying Zomer here, expanding the mandatory bifurcated litigation process under 
section 85.34(2)(v) requires reading something into the statutory text that is not there 
and would result in a more drawn-out process that would hinder the agency’s ability to 
provide a prompt and adequate remedy, which would defeat one of the primary 
purposes of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act.   
Lastly, reading the requirement for a bifurcated litigation process to apply only 
under the circumstances expressly stated in section 85.34(2)(v) is also consistent with 
Iowa Supreme Court precedent requiring the agency and courts to “apply the workers’ 
compensation statute broadly and liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective: 
the benefit of the worker and the worker’s dependents.” Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. 
Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 2010). Applying the statute as written allows a 
claimant to receive a final determination on permanent disability when the issue is ripe 
for determination. Getting such a determination via a single contested case proceeding 
before the agency means the claimant will receive payment of all PPD benefits to which 
the claimant is legally entitled sooner in time and without having to go through litigation 
of a second contested cast proceeding. Therefore, the result of adhering to the statutory 
text is beneficial to the injured worker and the worker’s dependents. 
Circling back to the agency appeal decision in Martinez, the Commissioner 
specifically considered whether the statute mandates a bifurcated litigation process 
when the claimant quits employment with the defendant-employer and then gets a job 
with a different employer with higher earnings. File No. 5063900 (App. July 30, 2020). 
The Commissioner held reading the statute to require a bifurcated litigation process 
when the claimant quits employment with the defendant-employer and obtains a new 
job with higher earnings before hearing would cause absurd results: 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 24 
 
For example, [such an] interpretation would seemingly “reset” claimant's 
entitlement to benefits and limit them to functional loss any time a claimant 
returns to work or is offered work at the same or greater wages by any 
employer. This would make it virtually impossible for defendants to know 
when to volunteer benefits using the industrial disability method. 
Furthermore, using claimant's interpretation, a claimant entitled to benefits 
under subsection 85.34(2)(v) (2019) might be better off not seeking 
employment after being terminated by a defendant-employer because he 
or she would potentially risk entitlement to benefits under the industrial 
disability analysis should a different employer offer the same or greater 
earnings than the claimant was receiving at the time of the injury. Certainly 
the legislature did not intend to discourage claimants from seeking gainful 
employment after a work injury. 
Id. The Commissioner then concluded, “though claimant in this case was earning 
greater wages at the time of the hearing than he was when he was injured, I conclude 
his earlier voluntary separation from defendant-employer removed claimant from the 
functional impairment analysis and triggered his entitlement to benefits using the 
industrial disability analysis.” Id.  
On judicial review, the district court disagreed with the Commissioner’s 
interpretation of section 85.34(2)(v). See Pavlich Inc. et al v. Martinez, Ruling on 
Petition for Judicial Review, Case No. CVCV060634 (Iowa D. Ct. Polk Co., Apr. 21, 
2022). Nonetheless, the district court affirmed the Commissioner’s determination of 
permanent disability. See id. Thus, the district court’s analysis of whether section 
85.34(2)(v) mandates a bifurcated litigation process when the claimant quits 
employment with the defendant-employer and obtains a job with higher earnings before 
the hearing is obiter dicta and does not control in this case on the question of whether 
Weimerskirch must go through the bifurcated litigation process outlined in section 
85.34(2)(v). See Nixon v. State, 704 N.W.2d 643, 648 n. 5 (Iowa 2005) (citing Boyles v. 
Cora, 232 Iowa 822, 847, 6 N.W.2d 401, 413 (1942)). As Deputy Grell persuasively 
concluded, “[U]ntil a definitive interpretation is provided by the Iowa appellate courts, [a 
presiding deputy is] bound by the precedent of this agency found in Martinez.” Dague v. 
Unisys Corporation, File No. 1645503.02 (Arb., Mar. 28, 2022). 
For these reasons, section 85.34(2)(v) does not require a bifurcated litigation 
process on the question of a claimant’s permanent disability when the employment 
relationship between the claimant and defendant-employer ends before the agency 
hears the case. The requirements identified in the statute that trigger the bifurcated 
litigation process on permanent disability are not met under these circumstances, which 
means the agency may determine the extent of industrial disability just as it did before 
the 2017 amendments. Because Weimerskirch quit his job with Progressive before the 
hearing in this case, this decision will determine what, if any, industrial disability he 
sustained because of the work injury. 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 25 
 
D . 
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
“In this state, the right to workers' compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A 
& H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Caylor v. Employers Mut. 
Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890, 893 (Iowa App. 1983)). The “broad purpose of workers’ 
compensation” is “to award compensation (apart from medical benefits), not for the 
injury itself, but the disability produced by a physical injury.” Bell Bros. Heating and Air 
Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & Lex K. 
Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 80.02, at 80–2 (2009)).  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act “divides permanent partial disability into 
either a scheduled or unscheduled loss.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 
15 (Iowa 1993) (citing Iowa Code §§ 85.34(2). Compensation for work injuries to body 
parts listed in the schedule are limited to functional disability over a number of weeks 
set by the statutory schedule. Id. Injuries to body parts not included in the statutory list 
are considered unscheduled and to the body as a whole. Id.  Disability caused by such 
injuries is deemed to the whole body and compensation is based on industrial disability, 
the impact on the injured worker’s earning capacity. Id. Consequently, the maximum 
amount of compensation to which an injured worker is entitled under the statute can 
“differ radically” depending on whether the worker’s injury is to a scheduled member or 
the body as a whole. Id.  
“‘The very purpose of the schedule is to make certain the amount of 
compensation in the case of specific injuries and to avoid controversies . . . .’” Gilleland 
v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 404, 407 (Iowa 1994) (quoting Dailey v. Pooley 
Lumber Co., 10 N.W.2d 569, 571 (Iowa 1943)). “‘The schedule brings a windfall to the 
worker in some cases and gross hardship to the worker in others.’” Id. at 409 (Lavarto, 
J., concurring specially) (quoting Graves v. Eagle Iron Works, 331 N.W.2d 116, 119–20 
(Iowa 1983 (McCormick, J., concurring specially)). Thus, the legislative purpose of the 
statutorily prescribed schedule is not so much beneficence to the worker, though that 
sometimes is the result, as cost certainty and limiting controversies resolved by 
litigation. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 188 (Iowa 1980) (citing 
Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298, 299 (Iowa 1979); Wetzel v. 
Wilson, 276 N.W.2d 410, 411-12 (Iowa 1979); and Hoenig v. Mason & Hanger, Inc., 162 
N.W.2d 188, 190 (Iowa 1968)) (“The primary purpose of the workers' compensation 
statute is to benefit the worker and his or her dependents, insofar as statutory 
requirements permit.”). 
Before 2017, the shoulder was not included in the statutory list of scheduled 
members. See Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 269 (Iowa 1995) 
(citing Lauhoff Grain Co. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834, 837–39 (Iowa 1986) and Alm v. 
Morris Barick Cattle Co., 38 N.W.2d 161, 163 (Iowa 1949)).  Instead, shoulder injuries 
such as the one at issue in this case were considered unscheduled injuries under Iowa 
law. Alm, 38 N.W.2d at 163; Westling v. Hormel Foods Corp., 810 N.W.2d at 252 (Iowa 
2012). Permanent partial disability caused by shoulder injuries that occurred before July 
1, 2017, was considered industrial. Id.; Westling, 810 N.W.2d at 252. Compensation 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 26 
 
was therefore based on the loss of earning capacity the worker suffered due to the 
work-related shoulder injury. Id.; Westling, 810 N.W.2d at 252. 
In 2017, the legislature enacted a bill that made multiple changes to the statutory 
framework governing workers’ compensation in Iowa. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23. As 
part of the 2017 amendments, the legislature expanded the schedule by adding the 
shoulder to the codified list of scheduled members. 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 7 (now 
codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n)). Under the statute, as amended, work injuries 
to the shoulder that occur on or after July 1, 2017, are treated as scheduled member 
injuries and the award of benefits is consequently limited in the interest of cost certainty 
and limiting controversies to the injured employee’s functional impairment.  
Here, Weimerskirch sustained an initial injury to his right shoulder and a sequela 
injury to his left shoulder. His permanent disability is therefore determined based on his 
bilateral shoulder injuries. In Carmer v. Nordstrom, Inc., File No. 1656062.01 (App. Dec. 
29, 2021), the Commissioner considered which paragraph of section 85.34(2) applies to 
a bilateral shoulder injury and concluded the “catch-all” provision in section 85.34(2)(v) 
governs and not section 85.34(2)(n). Therefore, Weimerskirch must be compensated 
industrially under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act for the permanent disability 
resulting from his bilateral shoulder injuries. See id.; see also Sallis v. City of Waterloo, 
File No. 1643953.01 (App., Aug. 29, 2022). The factors considered when determining 
industrial disability are: functional disability, age, education, qualifications, work 
experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings before and after the 
injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics, and the employer’s inability to 
accommodate the functional limitations. See id.; Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 
N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632–33 (Iowa 
2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976).  
As found above, the weight of the evidence establishes Dr. Segal followed the 
AMA Guides when opining on the permanent functional impairment Weimerskirch has 
sustained to his shoulders due to lost range of motion. This makes his opinion most 
persuasive. The record shows it is more likely than not Weimerskirch has sustained a 
permanent functional impairment to the whole body of sixteen percent. 
The work injury, sequela, and resulting functional impairment also gives rise to 
the following permanent work restrictions: 
 Occasionally lifting to waist height 31 to 50 pounds; 
 Occasionally lifting to shoulder height 26 to 40 pounds; 
 As tolerated repetitive lifting within the weight limits; 
 Occasionally lifting overhead 11 to 20 pounds; 
 No repetitive lifting overhead; 
 Occasionally carrying 26 to 40 pounds; 
 Occasionally pushing and pulling with 21 to 40 pounds of force; 
 Rarely pushing and pulling with greater than 40 pounds of force; 
 No using torque-type tools or screw guns one handed with his left hand 
 Rarely use forceful grip; and  

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 27 
 
 Take breaks as needed. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) 
Following these restrictions would limit Weimerskirch’s ability to return to some of the 
past jobs he has held. While he testified he could physically perform the work cutting 
lumber at Eagle Window and Door and the maintenance duties at the trailer park, he 
would be physically unable to perform the duties of one of his jobs at Eagle Window and 
Door or working in the cook or batch room at Progressive.  
Age fifty-three at the time of hearing, Weimerskirch has obtained a GED. He has 
not earned a postsecondary degree or credential. There is an insufficient basis in the 
record from which to conclude he is a good candidate to do so. As of the time of 
hearing, Weimerskirch intended to keep working at Husco, despite his lower earnings 
there than at Progressive, and there is no indication he plans to retire early. 
After careful consideration of these factors, the weight of the evidence 
establishes Weimerskirch has sustained a thirty-five percent industrial disability from the 
work injury to his right shoulder and sequela to his left shoulder. He is entitled to one 
hundred seventy-five (175) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at the weekly 
rate of five hundred fifteen and 32/100 dollars ($515.32), subject to the stipulated credit 
amount for Progressive’s previous payment of permanent partial disability benefits. 
E . 
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated Weimerskirch’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date 
were gross earnings were seven hundred sixty-three and 00/100 dollars ($763) per 
week. They also stipulated she was married and entitled to four exemptions at the time. 
Based on the parties’ stipulations, Weimerskirch’s workers’ compensation rate is five 
hundred fifteen and 32/100 dollars ($515.32), per week. 
F .  
C o s t s .  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting City of Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 
660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are 
strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Rule 876 IAC 4.33 allows the agency to tax “the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72.” Agency rules do not authorize 
taxation of the cost of a conference call with a treating physician. As an administrative 
rule that provides for recovery of costs, Rule 876 IAC 4.33 is strictly construed.  Young, 
867 N.W.2d at 846 (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 28 
 
1996)). Therefore, Weimerskirch is not entitled to taxation against Progressive of the 
costs associated with doctor conferences. 
However, the assessment of costs includes “the reasonable costs of obtaining no 
more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports.” 876 IAC 4.33.  
A “report” is a “formal oral or written presentation of facts or a 
recommendation for action.” Black's Law Dictionary 1492 (10th ed.2014). 
The word “obtain” is used as a modifier in the rule and means “[t]o bring 
into one's own possession; to procure, esp[ecially] through effort.” Id. at 
1247. Thus, the concept of obtaining a report for a hearing is separate 
from the concept of a physical examination. A “physical examination” is 
“[a]n examination of a person's body by a medical professional to 
determine whether the person is healthy, ill, or disabled.” Id. at 680. The 
concept of “obtaining” a report is separate from the process of “obtaining” 
an examination. Our legislature recognized as much by separately 
authorizing the commissioner to appoint “a duly qualified, impartial 
physician to examine the injured employee and make report.” Iowa Code § 
86.38. A medical report for purposes of a hearing is aligned with a 
prehearing medical deposition. In the context of the assessment of costs, 
the expenses of the underlying medical treatment and examination are not 
part of the costs of the report or deposition. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 845–46.  
Because Weimerskirch prevailed on the questions of permanent disability and 
entitlement to healing period benefits, the following costs are taxed against the 
defendants: 
 One hundred five and 80/100 ($105.80) for attendance of a certified 
shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and 
evidential depositions and transcription of the deposition, 876 IAC 4.33(1),  
4.33(2);  
 Thirteen dollars and 92/100 dollars ($13.92) for the service by certified mail of 
the original notice and petition, id. at 4.33(3); 
 Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the check-box letter, which is effectively a 
doctor report, id. at 4.33(6); and 
 One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the filing fee to initiate this case, id. at 
4.33(7). 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 29 
 
1) The defendants shall pay to Weimerskirch forty and 71/100 (40.71) weeks of 
healing period benefits at the weekly rate of five hundred fifteen and 32/100 
dollars ($515.32). 
2) The defendants shall pay to Weimerskirch one hundred seventy-five (175) 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred 
fifteen and 32/100 dollars ($515.32) per week from the stipulated 
commencement date. 
3) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
4) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
5) The defendants shall be given credit for benefits previously paid for the 
stipulated amounts of: 
a) Fourteen thousand four hundred twenty-eight and 96/100 dollars 
($14,428.96) for permanent partial disability benefits paid relating to his 
right shoulder; 
b) Twenty-one thousand twenty-one and 60/100 dollars ($21,021.60) for 
permanent partial disability benefits paid relating to his left shoulder; 
and 
c) Nine thousand one hundred sixty-six and 26/100 dollars ($9,166.26) 
for short-term disability benefits paid between October 25, 2019, and 
August 8, 2020, applied to the healing period benefits to which 
Weimerskirch is entitled. 
6) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
7) The defendants shall pay to Weimerskirch the following amounts for the 
following costs: 
a) One hundred five and 80/100 ($105.80) for attendance of a certified 
shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and 
evidential depositions and transcription of the deposition; 
b) Thirteen dollars and 92/100 dollars ($13.92) for the service by certified 
mail of the original notice and petition;  
c) Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the check-box letter, which is 
effectively a doctor report; and 
 
 

WEIMERSKIRCH V. PROGRESSIVE PROCESSING, LLC 
Page 30 
 
d) One hundred dollars and 00/100 ($100.00) for the filing fee. 
Signed and filed this 21st day of October, 2022. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jason D. Neifert (via WCES) 
Abigail A. Wenninghoff (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
