Case Number: 5067532
Case Title:  WARREN, MICHAEL V. ALTEC INDUSTRIES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Warren Michael-5067532d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL WARREN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5067532 
ALTEC, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SENTINEL INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :              Head Notes: 1108.50, 1402.40, 
 
Defendants. 
  :                                   1803, 2501, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Michael Warren, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Altec, Inc., employer and Sentinel Insurance Company, 
insurance carrier as defendants.  Hearing was held on December 12, 2019 in Des 
Moines, Iowa. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Michael Warren, Jeanette Warren, Dan Sullivan, and Jeff Greer all testified live at 
trial.  The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE9, claimant’s exhibits 1-
10, and defendants’ exhibits A-F.  Defendants objected to claimant’s exhibit 6, pages 1 
and 2 which were medical bills.  Defendants objected to the admission of the medical 
bills without the supporting clinical records.  The objection was overruled; claimant was 
given additional time to submit the supporting records.  The records were marked as 
joint exhibit 8A and were filed on December 26, 2019 and are admitted into the record.  
The evidentiary record closed at that time.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on January 23, 2020, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Apr-20  15:16:24     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 2 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the stipulated 
March 22, 2017, work injury.  If so, the nature and extent of permanent 
disability claimant sustained. 
2. Claimant’s gross earnings at the time of the alleged injury. 
3. Payment of past medical expenses. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to additional medical care. 
5. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the record, 
finds: 
 
Claimant, Michael Warren, was 62 years old at the time of hearing.  He began 
working for Altec, Inc. in May of 2016.  Michael started working in the body shop 
repairing tanks and toppers.  He then moved to the job of spraying jell coating on the 
tanks.  This was the job he was performing at the time of the injury.   
 
On March 22, 2017, Mr. Warren fell back and hit his head when a J-hook he was 
using came unhooked from a tank he was pulling.  Michael remembers the beginning of 
the fall and his next memory is from the hospital talking to his wife.  According to the 
accident reports, Michael fell and hit the back of his head on the bottom of a unit.  He 
was taken via ambulance to Clarke County Hospital Emergency Room.  (Exhibit B, 
pages 26, 28, Claimant’s Ex. 8, p. 7) 
 
The Clarke County Hospital notes indicate that Michael did not remember 
anything after the beginning of the fall until after his arrival in the emergency 
department.  He reportedly lost consciousness, at least briefly, was confused on site, 
and gradually regained his senses.  He fell and hit a fiberglass unit, then fell on his back 
and hit his head on a concrete floor.  He was noted to have a small abrasion on the right 
side of his head.  He reports some posterior head soreness, especially with movement 
of his head.  He felt very tired and had some blurry vision which cleared.  No vomiting.  
He was positive for dizziness, syncope, headaches, and confusion.  Michael reported 
feeling tired and sore, but otherwise denied any complaints.  He had full range of motion 
of his neck without pain.  His head CT was negative.  He was counseled to take it easy 
for the rest of the day and a discussion was held about concussions.  He was to see 
occupational medicine the next day to discuss return to work plans.  The final diagnoses 
consisted of concussion, with loss of consciousness of 30 minutes or less.  (Joint 
Exhibit 1, pp. 1-7)   
 
Michael saw Jenny A. Butler, M.D. on March 23, 2017.  Her notes indicate that 
Michael regained consciousness within a few minutes of the fall; however, Michael did 
not remember that time period.  He reported no neck pain or confusion.  He slept most 
of the evening and had a full night of sleep last night, which is not normal for him.  He 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 3 
normally does not require much sleep.  He reported a mild headache, mild dizziness, 
and mild nausea.  He had some shoulder, elbow, and right groin soreness.  The plan 
was complete brain rest until Monday.  He was to gradually advance mental and 
physical activity and continue Tylenol, as needed.  He was to remain off of work and 
return to the clinic Monday.  (JE1, pp. 8-12)       
 
Michael returned to the doctor’s office on Monday, March 27, 2017.  He felt he 
had been doing better over the weekend, but he was starting to stress about missing 
work and had to think about getting to the doctor on time.  He felt this has made his 
dizziness and word-finding worse.  He was dizzy, tired, and having difficulty 
concentrating.  He described his headache as mild.  He was kept off work and was to 
return to the clinic on Thursday for reevaluation.  (JE1, pp. 13-15) 
 
Michael did return to the clinic on March 30, 2017, as scheduled.  He reported 
that he was doing better, but then he started to get ready to come to the clinic and 
started to notice symptoms again.  Driving during the day is fine for him, but driving at 
night is not good because of glare and the lights are too bright.  He still tires easily.  He 
reported sleeping well.  He was released to work for two hours starting on March 31 and 
two hours again on Monday.  He was to return to the clinic on Tuesday.  (JE1, pp. 16-
18) 
 
By Tuesday, April 4, 2017, Michael felt about the same.  After significant 
concentration he notices that his eyes do not converge for a few seconds.  He feels as 
though things are out of focus, but it resolves quickly.  He was cutting papers at work 
the last few days and he had a hard time cutting them perfectly even.  He has had some 
headaches, depending on his activity.  The headaches are worse when thinking and 
concentrating.  Saturday night he sanded a truck in his shop.  This did not give him 
symptoms of a headache or nausea, but he was tired.  He avoids driving at night.  The 
decrease in his income has been stressful.  He likes the routine of getting up and going 
to work.  Michael still had some symptoms of concussion that increase with emotional 
stress and mental activity.  Overall, he was doing better.  Dr. Butler did not feel a 
neurology referral was necessary at that time.  Neurologists recommend at least two 
months of symptoms before neurological specialty evaluation in a situation where the 
neurological exam is normal.  Michael was to continue working two hours per day, with 
minimal physical and mental exertion.  (JE1, pp. 19-22)   
 
Michael returned to the clinic on April 11, 2017.  He felt he was getting better, but 
some days he worried that he is getting worse.  He is especially dizzy when he first 
awakens or when getting up quickly from a chair.  No vision changes.  He does not 
have any confusion, but does have a hard time remembering names at times.  He 
worked in his garage all day on Saturday and this wore him out.  He noticed increased 
fatigue and headache when he tries to concentrate.  He had normal range of motion of 
his neck.  He was to increase to four hours of total work per day, with a half-hour break 
in the middle.  His break was to be spent in a quiet environment.  (JE1, pp. 23-26) 
 
On April 25, 2017 Michael reported that overall he was doing better, but he still 
got tired very quickly.  After four hours of work, he has to take a nap.  He takes his 30-

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 4 
minute lunch break in his car.  He had four beers last weekend with his son.  He had a 
headache the next day and was very tired.  He still experiences dizziness when he 
spins too fast.  At work he is cutting out stickers and labels.  He tried scanning and 
filing, but that made his headaches worse.  His neck had normal range of motion.  He is 
not improving as fast as he thinks he should.  He was to continue working four hours.  
He was to avoid alcohol.  Additionally, he was to avoid any physical exertion at home 
that was greater than what was allowed at work.  (JE1, pp. 27-29)     
 
Michael returned to the clinic on May 1, 2017.  He continued with slow 
improvement.  He reported he was the most stressed over the truck that he is supposed 
to be working on at home in his free time because he gets calls from the owner of the 
truck wondering when it will be done.  Prior to his concussion, he worked in his garage 
and that was his stress relief.  He still needs a nap after four hours of work.  He is still 
working cutting labels.  He cannot stand too long due to balance issues.  He is starting 
physical therapy today for tense back and neck.  He was to continue working four hours 
with a 30-minute break.  The goal is to increase to six hours of work in two weeks.  
(JE1, pp. 30-32) 
 
On May 1, 2017, Michael began physical therapy for neck and back pain.  He 
was referred to therapy by Dr. Butler.  He reported that if he stands too long, he gets a 
sharp pain in the lower part of his back.  He reported that his jobs changed at work and 
he was not back to full-time work due to his balance.  (JE2, pp. 1-5) 
 
Michael continued to follow-up at Clarke County Hospital with Dr. Butler.  On May 
15, 2017, Michael went to Clarke County Medical.  He reported that he went to Iowa 
Falls to see his mother-in-law on Sunday.  He went to a car show for a bit in Winterset 
Sunday night, and on the way home he got a mild headache and felt dizzy with a 
shaking head.  He feels that physical therapy is helping with his neck and back pain.  
He has been doing some light sanding in his garage and has to remember not to push 
himself to the limit.  He feels he needs more sleep now and he cannot stand as long as 
he could before his accident.  Dr. Butler felt that Michael continued to make progress.  
She allowed him to go back to working on toppers for four hours per day versus him 
being in the office.  He was not to use ladders or crawl up on trucks.  Dr. Butler felt 
Michael should be able to sit as needed.  He was to follow-up in two weeks.  (JE1, pp. 
33-35)  
 
On May 26, 2017, Michael reported to Dr. Butler that overall he was doing better.  
However, he spent Saturday at graduation parties and had a bad headache on Sunday.  
He did not make it to church the next day due to fatigue and headache.  Working in his 
garage makes him happy and he does not experience any increase in symptoms.  He 
feels that working at Altec for four hours is going well.  He is able to sit down as needed, 
but only needs to once in a while.  He still gets dizzy if he turns too fast.  He was 
allowed to increase his work to six hours per day.  (JE1, pp. 36-38)   
 
Michael returned to Dr. Butler on June 1, 2017.  He reported that he felt great 
Friday through Tuesday and worked six hours without problems.  He went to a country 
concert that night at Lakeside Casino and did not have any symptoms secondary to the 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 5 
music.  The heat bothered him yesterday at work.  He wanted to get two toppers done 
even though that is the expectation for an eight-hour shift and he is only working six 
hours.  He was rushing around and felt dizzy.  Last night he went to three ball games for 
his grandkids.  He got worn out and has a headache today.  Dr. Butler felt he had been 
gradually improving but had a setback yesterday.  Yesterday he went to work at 6:00 
a.m. and then stayed out all evening at ball games.  They discussed how these long 
days seemed to be too much for him.  Dr. Butler mentioned that she saw the patient this 
past Friday night at an outdoor concert in town.  She visited with Michael for about ten 
minutes and he looked great.  (JE1, pp. 39-41) 
 
On June 20, 2017, Michael returned to see Dr. Butler.  He was stressed because 
workers’ compensation was not paying him on time and his house payment was 
overdue.  He experienced some double vision on Saturday for about an hour which 
resulted in a headache.  He sees bright lights in his left eye.  The top of his head hurts.  
He still feels forgetful.  Friday he did not get the paycheck he was expecting to get and 
that increased his stress and symptoms.  He does not feel like he can walk straight, 
feels as if he is walking to the left.  His friends notice that he does not walk in a straight 
line.  When he gets tired, stressed, or has not eaten, at times, the room feels like it is 
spinning.  Dr. Butler’s assessment included concussion with loss of consciousness, 
post-concussion syndrome, and vertigo.  An MRI of the brain was ordered.  The MRI 
was performed on June 23 and was normal.  (JE1, pp. 42-47) 
 
On July 13, 2017, Michael reported that he felt about the same.  Overall, his 
headache and dizziness are his biggest problems.  He feels less stress now that he 
knows the MRI is normal.  His symptoms are worse first thing in the morning, in the 
heat, and also worse around distracting noise.  He has dizziness when trying to make 
his bed; it is also worse if he gets up too fast.  He does not feel like the current work he 
is doing at Altec makes him worse.  He is happy to be sanding and buffing.  He is still 
working in physical therapy and occasionally gets change in vision, but not as 
frequently.  His last physical was a year and a half ago and he was told he was 
borderline diabetic at that time.  Dr. Butler felt Michael could have a general medical 
condition that was complicating his recovery from his concussion.  Dr. Butler 
recommended he undergo a general physical.  (JE1, pp. 48-50) 
 
Michael was discharged from physical therapy on May 1, 2017.  Michael reported 
that he had been taking vitamin D since Saturday and since then he only had one 
headache and had less dizziness.  He was still dizzy when he woke up in the mornings.  
The therapist noted that Michael was making slow, but steady progress regarding his 
post-concussion symptoms.  He had little to no back or neck pain over the last couple of 
visits.  The therapist noted that on days when he had increased headaches and 
dizziness his gait was quite unsteady.  Michael attended 24 sessions of therapy.  The 
discharge note states that Michael was making slow, but steady progress on his post-
concussion symptoms.  The note also states that he had little to no complaints of back 
or neck pain over his last couple of visits.  He also noted decreased headaches and 
dizziness with activity.  He was last seen on July 26, 2017 and had not contacted 
therapy since so he was discharged.  (JE2) 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Michael reported back to Dr. Butler on July 27, 2017.  He went to see his primary 
care physician and was found to be vitamin D deficient.  Since starting the vitamin D, he 
has been less tired and less dizzy.  He did have a headache and dizziness after therapy 
yesterday, but his symptoms went away.  Since starting the vitamin D, he was able to 
focus more and has fewer headaches.  He is no longer experiencing dizziness during 
work.  He would like to go from six-hour shifts to eight-hour shifts.  He was released to 
eight hours per day.  (JE1, pp. 51-53) 
 
On August 10, 2017, Michael saw Dr. Butler again.  He picked up a cold in the 
prior few days and was feeling tired.  On Monday he fell asleep in his driveway after 
work.  Working eight-hour shifts was going well, but he is tired when he gets home and 
takes a 20-30-minute nap.  He only gets headaches when he is stressed.  Dr. Butler felt 
that some of Michael’s personal medical issues could be leading to prolonged recovery 
time.  She recommended he talk to his primary care physician to discuss sleep apnea 
testing, but Michael was not interested.  He continues to slowly improve from his 
concussion symptoms.  He was allowed to continue eight-hour shifts, but Dr. Butler did 
not think he could handle overtime.  (JE1, pp. 54-57)   
 
On August 24, 2017, Dr. Butler reported that three days ago Michael was moved 
into the paint booth.  He does not like this job and he finds it stressful.  He could not 
understand the Spanish speaking lady who works in there and he did not get along with 
her.  Michael told Dr. Butler that he had a bad temper that day.  His headaches and 
dizziness had significantly flared in the last three days.  Michael’s safety manager 
indicated that he would work to move Michael to a different department.  Dr. Butler 
assessed Michael as having a severe episode of recurrent major depressive disorder.  
Michael was also going to try the employee assistance program.  (JE1, pp. 58-61)   
 
Michael saw Dr. Butler again on September 7, 2017 and reported that his mood 
was much better.  He was moved to a different area.  He realizes now that Altec does 
not want to fire him.  He is working on putting brace bars in, doing molds, and painting.  
His headaches and dizziness were better, but certain things still triggered the 
symptoms.  He feels like his vision is not always right, especially in the mornings.  At 
times he still has occasional word and name findings difficulties.  Michael was referred 
to Vision Park, a place with extensive experience and interest in post-concussion vision 
problems and dizziness.  Michael was limited to a maximum of eight hours of work in a 
24-hour period.  (JE1, pp. 62-64) 
 
By late September, Michael continued feeling dizzy and light-headed.  There was 
a day at work that he felt as if he was going to faint.  He was having problems with 
balance, felt like he veers off to the right sometimes.  His vision still did not feel right.  
Fatigue continued to be a big problem.  By the time he gets home, he feels like he could 
just fall asleep in his driveway.  He still has not had a sleep study.  An appointment was 
scheduled with a concussion eye specialist in Des Moines in October.  (JE1, pp. 65-67) 
 
On October 19, 2017, Michael was seen by Beth Triebel, O.D., at Vision Park.  
He reported that he was injured on August 22, 2017 and sustained a concussion.  He is 
having trouble with balance and thought that he recently saw a floater.  He completed 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 7 
physical therapy and feels that his balance and dizziness is getting worse.  His walking 
pulls to the left and rotating his head causes headaches.  Sometimes he sees black 
spots against white.  The diagnoses were myopia, bilateral, presbyopia, vertical 
heterophoria, postconcussional syndrome, and cortical age-related cataract, right eye.  
She changed his glasses and arranged for vision therapy.  Michael attended vision 
therapy from October 19, 2017 through July 24, 2018.  (JE3)   
 
Michael returned to Vision Park on December 21, 2017.  He was still very dizzy 
and felt he was falling to the left.  He reported that moving his head at all caused 
headaches.  He was doing well with his new glasses, but he still needed to work on 
stabilization of his eye, head movements, and his endurance for sustaining binocular 
visions.  He was to set up an appointment with a vision therapist to further assess his 
vision skills.  (JE3, pp. 5-7) 
 
On May 4, 2018, Michael saw Deema Fattal, M.D., the Director of Balance 
Disorders Clinic, Department of Neurology at University of Iowa Health Care.  Michael 
was seen for a consultation for dizziness since traumatic brain injury in March of 2017.  
The notes state that he told the doctor one of his coworkers told him that his head hit a 
steel tank.  He thought he hit a cement floor.  He remembers falling, but the next thing 
he remembers is approximately 45 minutes later in the hospital.  Since his accident, he 
has developed dizziness.  Michael’s dizziness lasts 30 seconds to 30 minutes.  He also 
feels like he could fall anytime; he has not had a fall, but has had near falls.  He veers 
left or right pretty much all of the time; usually it is to the left.  He is more nervous and 
this increases his dizziness.  When he drives at night, the bright lights bother him.  
Michael felt safe sitting.  He also felt safe driving, he does not get dizzy while driving.  
Michael reported that his main issue is his sense of imbalance and he thinks his main 
issue is his glasses.  His glasses were changed due to convergence insufficiency and 
since that time he feels better without those glasses.  At times his vision was 
experiencing diplopia, one up and one down.  If he covers one eye, then it seems to 
resolve.  He was noted to have a very slow gait.  The doctor felt his main issue was 
slow gait and ill-fitting glasses.  She recommended gait physical therapy with emphasis 
on speed one to two times per week for four to six months.  He was to limit his work to 
eight hours per day, but the goal was to get him up to ten hours per day.  She also 
recommended a cervical MRI, nutrition consultation, evaluation with ophthalmology and 
vision therapy and new glasses.  He was to return in November.  (JE4, pp. 1-7)    
 
Beginning on May 14, 2018, Michael was sent for a second round of physical 
therapy at Athletico.  He reported that he had been experiencing diplopia and difficulty 
reading for an extended period.  He attended approximately eight sessions of physical 
therapy from May 14, 2018 to June 6, 2018.  He continued to perform body work and 
painting at home.  The June 4, 2018 note indicates that Michael was able to stand on 
the flat side of a BOSU while talking and tossing weighted balls.  He was also able to 
perform complex gait drills while talking and juggling balls.  There was no path deviation 
or imbalance noted.  On June 6, 2018, he was discharged due to completion of physical 
therapy goals.  (JE5)   

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 8 
 
An MRI of the cervical spine was performed on May 22, 2018.  The radiologist’s 
impression was multilevel spondylosis greatest at C5-C6 and C6-C7.  No focal disc 
herniation or significant spinal canal or neural foraminal stenosis was seen.  (JE6, pp. 1-
2)             
 
On July 24, 2018, Michael saw Dr. Triebel for his vision and was discharged.  
The notes state: 
Feeling great with new work glasses - no more [headaches].  Did HVT for 
1 week then went on vacation and never got back to it.  No longer lid-sting 
to the left.  1 episode of vertical diplopia when reading.  Sometimes still 
see spots against white background only when going from sitting to 
standing.  
(JE3, p. 19) 
 
Michael returned to see Dr. Fattal on November 9, 2018.  The doctor felt that his 
main issue was medication overuse (Tylenol).  Otherwise, he was much improved with 
negative exam, other than known pre-existing neuropathy.  The notes state that Michael 
was 100 percent better subjectively and on exam.  Dr. Fattal’s encounter diagnosis was 
dizziness.  She recommended limiting analgesics to two days per week.  Michael was to 
stop taking Tylenol and only use as needed.  Dr. Fattal recommended progressive 
muscle relaxation for his headaches because they were stress related.  The doctor also 
recommended considering a sleep study and a nutrition consult, exercise, and weight 
loss.  Dr. Fattal agreed with full-time work and did not see the need for any restrictions.  
Michael could follow-up as needed.  (JE4, pp. 8-14)  At hearing, Michael testified that he 
does not recall telling Dr. Fattal that he was 100 percent better.     
 
On February 13, 2019, Michael presented to Shawn P. Spooner, M.D. at CIA 
Urbandale Sports Medicine for a second opinion.  He was not sent to Dr. Spooner by 
the defendants; Dr. Spooner is not an authorized physician.  Michael reported that he 
was not interested in significant litigation.  He just wants to be able to tolerate playing 
with his grandkids and enjoying his hobbies with fewer symptoms.  His most significant 
symptoms involve difficulty with balance and dizziness as well as difficulty with vision 
focusing and tolerating complex environments.  He also has significant sensitivity to 
light and sound.  These seem to trigger headaches which range from mild to moderate, 
but not persistent.  He has difficulty with cognition because he feels foggy, slow, and 
has had difficulty concentrating and with functional memory.  He has difficulty with 
sleep.  Dr. Spooner felt that Michael’s history and exam were consistent with 
concussion.  He recommended treating Michael conservatively.  He wanted to enlist him 
in their multidisciplinary treatment approach which included physical therapy, 
speech/cognitive therapy, as well as a referral to an alternative neuro-optometrist.  He 
was also referred to neuropsychology for consultation regarding documentation of 
underlying cognitive dysfunction.  Dr. Spooner did not see any gross objective evidence 
for malingering, secondary gain, or significant psychosomatic component.  Michael was 
to return in four weeks.  (JE7, pp. 1-6)  Michael never saw a neuropsychologist.   

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 9 
 
On February 21, 2019, Michael began therapy with Kamela J. Kleppe Yeager, 
MS, Speech and Language Pathologist.  Since his injury, he reports changes in his 
ability to remember, concentrate, and with word finding.  Concentrating is difficult for 
him and leads to headaches.  He is bothered by busy environments and noise as well 
as light sensitivity.  Michael reported that today he is particularly bothered by 
unexpected crying and feeling depressed.  He reported that since the injury, he is not 
able to tolerate playing with his grandchildren and maintaining conversations in large 
groups.  (JE8, pp. 1-2)  
Michael returned to therapy and underwent some testing on February 25, 2019.  
The testing suggested mild functional difficulty with both memory and reasoning.  He is 
able to manage daily activities and work in quiet environments without interruptions.  He 
has functional difficulty in busier environments and in groups of people.  (JE8, pp. 3-5)        
 
Dr. Spooner saw Michael again on March 13, 2019.  The doctor noted that 
Michael had post-concussion syndrome symptoms.  His primary symptoms were 
cognitive complaints and postural instability.  He experiences mild headache which 
seems to be exacerbated by complex environments, focusing vision.  Continued 
difficulty with balance and dizziness.  He continued to be sensitive to light and sound.  
Michael had continued mild difficulty with cognition feeling slow with difficulty 
concentrating and remembering.  He feels more emotionally labile with mildly depressed 
mood but denied frank depression or anxiety.  Since his last appointment Michael has 
treated conservatively with rest and activity modification.  He has also started 
speech/cognitive therapy.  Specialty optometry and physical therapy are pending.  
Michael is now endorsing a little bit of right hand numbness in his first and second finger 
predominately.  He also continues to report generalized cervicalgia predominantly right 
posterior lateral.  Dr. Spooner noted that his balance was grossly intact, he did have 
instability with closed eye stance, and Romberg’s was negative.  Dr. Spooner felt that 
Michael’s history and exam were consistent with persistent chronic post-concussion 
syndrome, neurocognitive impairment.  Dr. Spooner felt that the pending optometry and 
specialty physical therapy could help Michael quite a bit.  He was to return again in four 
weeks.  (JE8, pp. 7-11)  
 
On April 8, 2019, Joseph J. Chen, M.D., Board Certified in Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation doctor, issued a missive to defendants.  (Def. Ex. A, pp. 1-10)  Dr. Chen 
examined Michael and also reviewed documents provided to him.  Michael reported to 
Dr. Chen that his symptoms included having headaches, feeling dizzy, having trouble 
with his balance, and trouble driving at night.  When driving he tends to focus on the 
right sideline of the road so he does not have to view oncoming headlights.  He feels 
that he walks to the left when he feels off balance.  He also reported poor sleep, 
irritability, and that he startles easily with noise or loud sound and then he zones out.  
He also reported that he felt depressed, but did not want to take any medications.  
Michael told Dr. Chen that he had seen Dr. Spooner, a concussion specialist.  Dr. Chen 
did not review any of those records because Michael went to Dr. Spooner through his 
health insurance.  Dr. Chen felt that Michael’s initial symptoms of photophobia, balance, 
dizziness, and headache symptoms would be consistent with post-concussion 
syndrome.  Dr. Chen noted that according to Dr. Triebel and Dr. Fattal’s notes of July 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 10 
and November 2018, the symptoms had largely resolved.  Dr. Chen believed that his 
more recent and distressing symptoms of irritability, confusion, crying, and frustration 
appear much more due to depression and were unrelated to his concussion because 
they were not problematic around the time of the injury.  Dr. Chen recommended that 
Michael see his primary care provider for further treatment for anxiety, depression, and 
possible sleep apnea.  Dr. Chen felt that he might also have undiagnosed obstructive 
sleep apnea.  He noted that people with disturbed sleep also report similar mood, 
anxiety, and/or pain symptoms.  Dr. Chen also noted that upon reviewing the records, 
he saw that several providers had recommended light physical activities or submaximal 
aerobic exercise.  Dr. Chen stated that both of these activities can alleviate and reduce 
the duration of post-concussion syndrome symptoms.  Defendants asked Dr. Chen to 
address the issue of permanent impairment.  Dr. Chen stated: 
I am unable to conclude that any of Mr. Warren’s depression symptoms 
were caused by or aggravated by his March 2017 work injury.  Onset of 
depression and anxiety are thought to be multifactorial and arise from to a 
multitude of personal characteristics, genetic, environmental, and social 
factors unrelated to head trauma. 
Therefore, it is my medical opinion that Mr. Warren has not sustained any 
permanent partial impairment rating according to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition as a result his March 
2017 work injury.           
(Def. Ex. A, p. 5) 
 
Michael continued his therapy with Kamela J. Kleppe Yeager, MS, until 
April 11, 2019.  At that appointment, Michael felt he was doing better.  The 
therapist noted that he demonstrated moderate improvement with organization 
and had minimal difficulty comprehending strategies to facilitate initiation.  (JE8, 
p. 15) 
 
On April 17, 2019, Michael presented to Heidi Bell, OD, FAAO for an extended 
prescription check for his glasses.  He reported that he felt he could get his work done, 
but then has nothing left to enjoy his family with once he gets home.  When he is with 
his grandkids the noise is so overwhelming that he “zones out” and does not realize 
what is happening.  He reports that he sees things in his peripheral vision that are not 
actually there.  He finds this very distracting and disturbing.  Although he has been told 
his vision is fine, he experiences blurry vision.  He also has a lot of pain and pressure 
around his eyes, especially in his left eye.  He had daily headaches.  Dr. Bell and 
Michael had a great discussion about how his symptoms aligned with common post-
concussion vision syndrome symptoms.  She recommended a change of lenses.  (JE9, 
pp. 1-3) 
 
At physical therapy on May 6, 2019, Michael reported significant pain to touch in 
the distribution of the greater occipital nerve on both sides.  Work had been very 
stressful.  He had a sharp headache the last two nights.  He had been working on his 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 11 
cars a lot.  The therapist noted he demonstrated significant difficulty with multitasking.  
(JE8A 52-54) 
 
On May 9, 2019, Michael reported to speech therapy.  He reported feeling more 
confident in controlling his temper.  He did have an incident over the weekend where he 
heard a drum set at church which triggered a “spell” and he was unable to continue to 
participate with the family or with conversation for the rest of the day.  (JE8A 50-51) 
 
Michael attended speech therapy on May 16, 2019 and was frustrated with 
concerns surrounding his father’s estate.  When he thinks about his family he gets 
significant headaches.  Therapy focused on managing cognitive and communicative 
impairments related to the concussion.  (JE8A 44-46) 
 
On May 20, 2019, Michael attended physical therapy.  He continued to 
demonstrate slow but steady improvements in his balance and postural stability.  
However, the therapist felt that because Michael did not have appropriate eyewear, his 
visual difficulties were limiting the progress in his postural stability and gaze stability.  
(JE8A 42-44) 
 
Michael attended speech therapy on May 23, 2019.  He continued to express 
distress over family problems, but otherwise he was doing well.  Improved cognitive 
function during everyday tasks were noted.  He also felt he had better control of his 
temper.  (JE8A 40-41) 
 
On May 27, 2019, after Dr. Chen reviewed Dr. Spooner’s records, he sent 
another missive to defendants.  Dr. Chen opined that Dr. Spooner’s recommendation 
from February and March 2019 to have an optometric evaluation at this time was not 
related to his work injury from March 2017.  Dr. Chen felt that Dr. Spooner’s 
recommendation that Mr. Warren undergo specialty physical therapy at this time was 
not related to his work injury from March 2017.  Dr. Chen noted, “[t]he discrepancy in 
Mr. Warren’s reported symptoms to Dr. Triebel in July 2018 and Dr. Fattal in November 
2018 can be puzzling to a physician who does not have the complete medical records.  I 
am uncertain if Dr. Spooner is aware of that Mr. Warren had prior treatment for his past 
and current symptoms.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 13)  Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Spooner’s 
recommendation to engage in a light aerobic exercise regimen but that Michael would 
need to be cautious and listen to his symptoms.  (Def. Ex. A, pp. 11-13) 
 
In early June 2019, defendants denied Dr. Spooner’s treatment 
recommendations.  The denial was based on Dr. Chen’s opinions.  Defendants also 
noted Dr. Spooner was not an authorized provider.  (CL. Ex. 7, p. 4)   
 
Michael attended physical therapy on June 3, 2019.  He felt like the bifocals in 
his new glasses were too high.  When he is able to see through the main part of the 
glasses, the cloudiness was removed.  However, he is struggling to find the sweet spot 
of the glasses.  He was unable to complete any gaze stabilization or visual activities 
with his new glasses on.  He was able to complete exercises with his work glasses on, 
which are the same lenses.  The therapist advised Michael to contact Dr. Bell’s office or 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 12 
stop by to get his glasses adjusted.  She reminded Michael that he had been wearing 
glasses that were not appropriate for him for several months now.  The therapist also 
emailed Dr. Bell and explained her concerns about the new glasses.  (JE8A 35-37)   
 
Michael attended physical therapy on June 10, 2019.  He had taken his glasses 
back to the optometrist because they were the wrong prescription.  He has a set of work 
glasses with the correct prescription, but he does not want to wear them outside of 
work.  He reported a mild headache.  He was encouraged to wear glasses with the 
proper prescription, despite their style.  (JE8A 30-32) 
On June 13, 2019 Michael attended speech therapy.  He reported some family 
difficulties.  During therapy they worked on improving memory.  (JE8A 28-29)   
 
Michael went to physical therapy on June 17, 2019.  He reported that his new 
glasses had helped him immensely; he was no longer seeing double.  He reported no 
headaches or dizziness.  He did report some mildly off-balance feelings with his new 
glasses.  (JE8A 25-27)   
 
At his June 20, 2019 speech therapy, Michael reported no new complaints and 
was able to give several examples of times when he felt that his problem-solving had 
been better in recent days.  (JE8A 23-24) 
 
On June 24, 2019, Michael attended speech therapy.  He reported that his pain 
level increased during cognitive effort and reduced at rest.  The plan was for the 
treatment to focus on awareness and development of strategies to manage cognitive 
and communicative impairments related to his concussion.  (JE8A, pp. 21-22) 
 
In the physical therapy notes from July 8, 2019 Michael reported that he was not 
having any limitations in anything he wanted to do at home.  The therapist noted that for 
the last few weeks, he did not seem to be having many symptoms related to his post-
concussive disorder, but did have some issues with balance and stability.  However, the 
therapist felt that some of those issues had to do with unstable working surfaces and 
reaching overhead.  She felt the issues he was having were within normal limits.  
Michael continued to complain of significant instability feeling but it was not reflected in 
his performance.  She felt this could be a continued mismatch between his visual and 
vestibular systems.  (JE8A, pp. 18-20)    
 
Michael returned to physical therapy on July 15, 2019.  He tried to get into the 
eye doctor but he could not get a last minute appointment.  The therapist encouraged 
him to pester the eye doctor’s office for an appointment.  She encouraged him to 
communicate to the doctor’s office that his glasses were no longer working.  However, 
Michael did not seem to want to pursue this.  During the therapy session he 
demonstrated good balance and gaze stability.  (JE8A, pp. 15-17)   
 
The physical therapy notes from July 22, 2019, indicate that Michael had met a 
guy over the weekend that had sustained a concussion and never improved and he was 
very focused on this other man’s experience.  The therapist provided extensive 
education that teaches that head injuries progress differently and that he may continue 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 13 
to progress even after therapy.  The therapist noted that Michael had not contacted Dr. 
Bell’s office to see if he could move his appointment up.  He reported that he did use a 
small ladder when he lost his balance and fell; he did not get hurt.  Michael told the 
therapist that this never happened to him prior to his work injury.  They had a discussion 
that sometimes balance losses happen due to circumstances, not due to his 
concussion.  The therapist advised him that he does have some impairment due to his 
concussion or she would not have continued to treat him and see him make progress in 
his balance and postural stability, vestibular functioning, and visual/vestibular 
integration, but not all issues are related to the concussion.  (JE8A, pp. 12-14)   
 
Michael went to physical therapy again on July 29, 2019.  He reported that he 
was seeing double with his eyeglasses.  The therapist felt that this was due to his 
glasses needing to be adjusted.  He had an eye appointment last month, but was not 
able to make it to the appointment.  The eye doctor is busy so the next available 
appointment is not until August 29.  This delay in correcting the prism glasses will affect 
his vestibular function, as the visual and vestibular mismatch will continue to make him 
feel little lightheaded and dizzy in complex balance tasks.  She encouraged Michael to 
try to get in to the optometrist sooner.  Otherwise, she felt he may need to decrease to 
one time every other week in order to progress to the home program.  (JE 8A, pp. 9-11)   
 
Michael returned to Dr. Bell on August 8, 2019.  He reported that his headaches 
have been improving.  He has been wearing the tinted glasses full time except while at 
work.  For arm length activity at work his bifocals are not working great for him so he 
ends up taking them off and using safety glasses.  He also reported seeing double 
vision at approximately four to five feet with his glasses on; this resolves when he 
removes his glasses.  Dr. Bell recommended a modification in his lenses.  (JE9, pp. 4-7) 
 
The August 5, 2019 physical therapy note states that Michael did not have any 
headaches during the last week.  He felt he was doing better.  He did note some 
increased neck soreness, due to increased altered posture during work activities.  He 
had been working on some mechanical issues with cars, which required him to be in 
funny positions.  He demonstrated normal balance and gait stability.  She noted that he 
did not see double without his glasses but he was unable to read close up or far away.  
This did change some of his visual perception, which would affect his balance.  She 
wanted to see him again after he received his new glasses for retesting and progression 
of his home exercise program.  (JE8A, pp. 6-8) 
 
Michael attended physical therapy again on August 19, 2019.  He received new 
glasses last Thursday; they removed the tint and changed the prism a bit.  He still has 
“cloudiness” across his vision and bright lights at night still bother him.  His new glasses 
are allowing him to see single objects.  The notes state that he cannot order new work 
glasses so he needs the ones without a prescription.  During his therapy Michael 
reported that he continued to have blurry vision with using his new glasses.  He 
reported no dizziness during his therapy session.  The physical therapist had a 
discussion with Michael about his glasses and reiterated to him that there is no way for 
the optometrist to know that the letters were still blurry unless he tells her.  She noted 
that there was no way for Michael to work with his glasses on due to blurry vision and 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 14 
that he had to take his glasses off to complete his car painting activities.  The physical 
therapist noted that the good news was that even with the changes in his visual function 
and prescription, his balance and dizziness was not affected during that day’s session.  
(JE8A, pp. 3-5)    
 
On August 22, 2019, Michael returned to see Dr. Bell due to blurry vision with his 
new glasses.  He is concerned that he has not always explained his symptoms well.  He 
still has a “water” appearance to his vision that was his initial complaint during his first 
exam.  He feels his vision is smudged or blurred.  Although he can see 20/20 on the 
vision charts it still looks blurry.  He continued to work on peripheral activities and this 
was improving, along with his balance.  When he is driving he always seems to have a 
cloud that moves across his eyes right to left.  Dr. Bell explained to Michael that his 
vision symptoms and concussion are related.  Dr. Bell felt that his blurry vision was not 
a glasses issue, but rather a brain issue.  (JE9, pp. 8-10) 
 
Michael testified that he followed Dr. Spooner’s treatment recommendations 
through August 2019.  He stopped with those recommendations at that time because he 
had to use his health insurance and he was uncertain that he would continue to 
improve.  He did continue treating with Dr. Bell.   
 
Michael attended physical therapy at UnityPoint Clinic with Angela K. Bahr, PT 
on September 9, 2019.  Ms. Bahr noted that Dr. Bell had adjusted Michael’s glasses.  
He was continuing to do the peripheral vision exercises.  He noticed that he does run 
into things occasionally, but this may have to do with poor visual peripheries.  He still 
had difficultly sometimes with complicated visual and very busy environments.  The 
physical therapist encouraged Michael to continue with his walking program daily.  
Although he demonstrates normal balance reactions, he may have more difficulty when 
stressed, and with lack of sleep and complex work environments.  She felt this would 
improve with time.  She felt that he had made significant improvements in his balance, 
postural stability, and vestibular function throughout functional activities.  He did 
continue to have some visual disturbances which were being addressed by Dr. Bell.  
The physical therapist felt that he had met all of his physical therapy goals and should 
continue with a home exercise program.  Michael was discharged.  (JE8A, pp. 1-2)   
 
At the request of his attorney, Michael saw John D. Kuhnlein, D.O. for an 
independent medical examination on October 1, 2019.  In addition to examining 
Michael, Dr. Kuhnlein also reviewed the records that were provided to him.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein listed the following diagnoses: 
1. Closed head trauma with postconcussive syndrome 
a. Cognitive dysfunction 
i. Short-term memory dysfunction 
ii. Irritability and emotional lability   
b. Visual dysfunction 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 15 
i. Convergence insufficiency 
ii. Disorder of binocular vision 
iii. Possible neuro-ophthalmic dysfunction (see Bell, August 22, 
2019) 
c. Posttraumatic headaches 
d. Postconcussive vestibular dysfunction 
2. Cervical strain 
a. Chronic Cervicalgia 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein opined that all of the above diagnoses, except the chronic 
cervicalgia, were directly and causally related to the March 22, 2017 injury.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein noted at the time of the injury Michael fell backward while wearing a paint 
helmet.  He stated that Michael apparently lost consciousness, was confused at the site, 
and gradually regained his sense before being brought to the emergency room.  
Subsequently he experienced cognitive and visual dysfunction related to this closed 
head trauma with post-concussive syndrome.  Dr. Kuhnlein stated that Michael 
developed posttraumatic headaches and post-concussive vestibular dysfunction as a 
result of the injury. 
 
Michael told Dr. Kuhnlein that he was uncertain when his neck pain started.  It 
was sometime after the accident, but the initial records were negative for neck pain until 
around May 1, 2017.  At that time, Dr. Butler noted neck and back pain.  Dr. Kuhnlein 
noted that the initial records tended to focus on the closed head trauma and not the 
neck pain complaints.  Dr. Kuhnlein stated:  
[w]ith the mechanism of injury, it is reasonable that Mr. Warren sustained 
a neck strain as a result of the March 22, 2017, injury.  He denies any 
other intervening or previous neck injuries, and, given the severity of the 
injury significant enough to produce the closed head symptoms, it would 
be reasonable and more likely than not that the force of the injury would 
also produce a neck strain.  He has now developed chronic neck pain.  
This chronic neck pain developed as a sequela to the March 22, 2017 
injury.   
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein recommended that Michael continue to take Tylenol.  He 
recommended that he pursue cognitive exercises.  He also recommended that he 
continue to see Dr. Spooner and Dr. Bell.  Dr. Kuhnlein felt that if the course of care 
outlined by Drs. Spooner and Bell were not undertaken then Michael would reach 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 16 
maximum medical improvement on November 9, 2018.  Regarding the closed head 
trauma and the cognitive issues, Dr. Kuhnlein utilized Table 13-5 and placed Michael 
with a CDR of 0.5.  He used Table 13-6, on page 320.  He assigned 7 percent 
impairment, in the middle range.  This included impairment for posttraumatic 
headaches.   
 
With regard to Michael’s visual dysfunction, Dr. Kuhnlein stated: 
in Mr. Warren’s case, the issue is not one of visual acuity or visual field 
deficit, he has problems with binocular convergence, which is not 
adequately covered in the visual system chapter, nor is it adequately 
covered in the central and peripheral nervous system chapter, so a value 
will be interpolated for the objective findings noted by optometrist’s [sic] 
with respect to his visual dysfunction.  I would assign 5% whole person 
impairment.   
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11)  
 
For Michael’s vestibular disorder, Dr. Kuhnlein utilized Table 11-4, page 252 and 
assigned Michael to Class II and 2 percent whole person impairment.  Dr. Kuhnlein placed 
Michael in between the DRE Cervical I and II and assigned 3 percent whole person 
impairment.  Dr. Kuhnlein assigned a total of 17 percent whole person impairment.  (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 11)  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein did not assign any specific material handling restrictions.  Due to cognitive 
issues, he felt Michael needed to make lists and follow them.  Due to the irritability and 
emotional liability, Michael may have problems with interpersonal relationships in the 
workplace, but Dr. Kuhnlein felt that Michael was apparently being taught how to deal with 
those by therapists.  Dr. Kuhnlein would not allow Michael to work off ground level on ladders 
or scaffolding.  He also suggested that he not work on uneven surfaces or work around 
hazardous industrial machinery.  Due to his cognitive issues, he suggested that Michael work 
on the day shift to avoid shiftwork disorders.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  
 
On June 2, 2019, Dr. Spooner issued a missive to Michael’s attorney.  He noted that 
Michael continued to suffer sequelae of work-related head injury on March 22, 2017.  He 
opined that the symptoms he continued to suffer were attributable to a fall occurring at work on 
March 22, 2017.  Dr. Spooner felt that the injuries include post-concussion syndrome, chronic 
posttraumatic headache, cognitive dysfunction, postural instability, hypersensitivity to 
environment to include light and sound sensitivity.  Dr. Spooner also noted that he continued to 
suffer disordered sleep, functional vision problems, emotional lability, and chronic neck pain.  
Dr. Spooner opined that these injuries had impacted Michael’s quality of life and quality of 
work.  Dr. Spooner felt that Michael had not exhausted appropriate treatment options and per 
UnityPoint’s multidisciplinary treatment team, Michael had not reached MMI, having not fully 
taken advantage of a multidisciplinary/interdisciplinary treatment protocol available to him.   
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 2)    

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 17 
Michael saw Dr. Bell again on October 8, 2019.  He had been working on his 
home therapy activities.  He still noticed a fog that goes across his vision.  It was 
thought this could be a dry eye issue, but drops and blinking have not improved this.  
His glasses are too bothersome with painting at work so he takes those off.  His 
distance vision is good with his glasses but he has issues seeing intermediate.  The 
notes list the diagnoses as convergence insufficiency, headache, and concussion 
without loss of consciousness.  Optometric visual rehabilitative therapy was 
recommended.  (JE9, pp. 11-13)     
After the accident, it took approximately six months for Michael to return to work 
for eight hours per day.  He returned to his job of jell coating, but his performance was 
criticized.  Michael was not the only one performing the job of jell coating who was 
criticized during this time.  (Tr. pp. 120-121)  The increased scrutiny caused Michael’s 
stress level to increase and he felt he could not do anything to satisfy his bosses.  He 
felt he could not continue in that position.  Michael also had an incident with a co-worker 
where he became agitated about a bucket of paint.  After the incident, he was moved to 
a different area, mold prepping.  He now has a job that is less stressful and he only has 
to work with one co-worker who is basically silent.  Michael believes that, for the most 
part, he could physically return to his prior jobs, but would not be able to handle the 
interpersonal aspects of his prior jobs.    
Dr. Kuhnlein stated that if the course of care outlined by Dr. Spooner and Dr. Bell 
was not undertaken, then Mr. Warren reached maximum medical improvement on 
November 9, 2018.  The complete course of care was not undertaken and the medical 
evidence does not indicate that Michael’s condition is likely to change substantially in 
the next year.  I find that Michael reached maximum medical improvement on 
November 9, 2018.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11)         
Despite, years of treatment, Michael continues to experience symptoms.  Michael 
testified that his symptoms have improved, but he is still experiencing symptoms that 
affect his daily life.  His symptoms include vision issues, neck stiffness, cognitive issues, 
and balance issues.  Michael has also experienced issues with headaches.  Even after 
cognitive therapy, he has some ongoing short-term memory and cognitive issues.  
Michael testified that he has had neck stiffness since approximately one month after the 
injury.  His neck symptoms were treated conservatively with physical therapy.  Dr. Fattal 
ordered an MRI of his neck.  Dr. Spooner ordered additional physical therapy for his 
ongoing neck and back symptoms.  Michael credibly testified that he experiences 
“coma” like symptoms when he is around loud noises.  Since the injury, he is irritable 
and withdrawn from interactions with his grandchildren. 
There are several physicians who have rendered their opinions regarding 
causation and permanency in this case.  Dr. Spooner is the Director of the UnityPoint 
Clinic Multidisciplinary Concussion Management Program.  Michael sought treatment 
with Dr. Spooner on his own.  Dr. Spooner related all of Michael’s symptoms to his 
March 22, 2017 work injury.  These included post-concussion syndrome, chronic 
posttraumatic headache, cognitive dysfunction, postural instability, hypersensitivity to 
environment to include light and sound sensitivity.  He also noted disordered sleep, 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 18 
functional vision problems, emotional lability, and chronic neck pain.  (Cl. Ex. Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 2)  As noted above, Dr. Kuhnlein, Board Certified in Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine, also related Michael’s symptoms to the March 22, 2017 work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 
1)  Dr. Chen, Board Certified in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, does not relate all 
of Michael’s symptoms to his work injury.  He was unable to conclude that Mr. Warren’s 
depression symptoms were caused by or aggravated by his March 2017 work injury.  
The opinions of Dr. Spooner and Dr. Kuhnlein are consistent with one another and with 
the record as a whole.  I find the opinions of Dr. Spooner and Dr. Kuhnlein carry greater 
weight than those of Dr. Chen.     
With regard to permanent functional impairment, Dr. Chen opined that pursuant 
to the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides, Michael did not sustain any permanent 
impairment as the result of the work injury.  Dr. Chen does not appear to address 
permanent impairment with regard to vision issues, neck issues, postural instability, 
short term memory loss and cognitive issues.  I do not find the opinions of Dr. Chen to 
be persuasive because his opinion regarding permanent functional impairment does not 
take all of Michael’s conditions into account.              
 
The only other physician to address permanent impairment in this case is Dr. 
Kuhnlein.  As set forth above, he assigned a total of 17 percent whole person 
impairment.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s report appears to take all of Michael’s conditions into 
account.  Thus, I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions regarding permanent functional 
impairment to be more persuasive.  I find that Michael has sustained permanent 
impairment to his body as a whole as the result of the work injury.         
To the credit of both Michael and Altec, at the time of hearing, Michael continued 
to work full-time at Altec.  He was working without any accommodation or restrictions.  
He was earning more money than he did at the time of the injury.  He does not take any 
medications for his work injury.  He continues to work on cars in his personal garage 
and earns approximately $3,500.00 per year.  Jeff Greer, the production supervisor at 
Altec, testified that Michael is in good standing with the company and does a very good 
job.   
Michael has a high school diploma and completed some auto body courses at a 
community college.  Michael testified that for the most part he believes he is still 
physically capable of performing his past jobs.  However, he does not think he could 
handle the interpersonal aspects of his prior jobs.  His work history includes working as 
a salesman at O’Reilly Auto Parts and Barker Implement for approximately seven years.  
He estimated that approximately 70 percent of his time was spent helping customers.  
He worked as a janitor at an early childhood center.  He also has experience driving a 
fork truck.  Additionally, he worked at Rug Doctor as a warehouse worker.  He spent 
about half of his time in the shop working on machines and the other half of his time 
was spent traveling to satellite offices.  Dr. Kuhnlein felt that due to his cognitive issues, 
he could have instructions following novel task instructions.  He also noted that due to 
Michael’s irritability and emotional lability he may also have problems with interpersonal 
relationships in the workplace.  Dr. Kuhnlein restricted Michael from working off ground 
level, on uneven surfaces, and on ladders.  Due to Michael’s vestibular issues, Dr. 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 19 
Kuhnlein suggested that he not work around hazardous industrial machinery.  
Additionally, due to cognitive issues, he recommended that Michael work on the day 
shift to avoid shiftwork disorders.       
Michael clearly is motivated to maintain his employment.  However, he continues 
to experience a “coma” like state when he is around unexpected loud noises.  He would 
not feel comfortable driving a fork truck now due to his vision issues.  He continues to 
have vertigo, problems with vision, imbalance, headaches, pain and depression.  He still 
experiences stiffness in his neck and some back pain.  He also tires more easily.  (Tr. 
pp. 43-56)   
Considering Michael’s age, educational background, employment history, ability 
to retrain, motivation to continue working, length of healing period, permanent 
impairment, and permanent restrictions, and the other industrial disability factors set 
forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that he has sustained a 25 percent loss of future 
earning capacity as a result of his work injury with the defendant employer. 
We now turn to the issue of Michael’s weekly rate of workers’ compensation.  
The parties have a dispute regarding which weeks should be included in the calculation 
of Michael’s gross weekly wages.  The parties have each submitted their rate 
calculations.  It appears the only difference is claimant included the check dated March 
24, 2017 and excluded the check dated December 23, 2016.  Claimant argues that the 
check dated March 24 should be included in the calculation of claimant’s gross weekly 
wages because the end of that pay period was March 19, 2017, prior to the date of 
injury.  It is unclear to the undersigned why defendants believe this week should not be 
included.  I find that claimant’s calculation is correct.  Claimant’s gross weekly wages 
are $703.05.  The parties have stipulated that Michael is married and entitled to two 
exemptions.  Thus, his weekly workers’ compensation rate is $465.32.  (Cl. Ex. 5; Def. 
Ex. E)    
Claimant is seeking payment for past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 6.  Claimant argues that after Michael’s last appointment with Dr. Fattal on 
November 9, 2018, defendants denied additional treatment.  Defendants do not dispute 
that additional treatment was denied.  The medical expenses claimant is seeking 
payment for are for dates of service from February 13, 2019 through April 17, 2019.  
The bills are for treatment with Dr. Spooner, Dr. Bell, or for physical therapy 
recommended by Dr. Spooner.  Both Dr. Spooner and Dr. Bell indicate that this 
treatment is related to the work injury.  Michael testified that the treatment was 
somewhat beneficial.  I find that this treatment was reasonable and necessary as the 
result of the work injury.  (JE 7, 8, 9; Cl. Ex. 6; Def. Ex. F)   
Michael is also requesting further treatment with Dr. Spooner and Dr. Bell, as 
well as any referrals from either of them.  Prior to the hearing, defendants denied 
claimant’s request for treatment based on Dr. Chen’s opinions.  However, defendants 
have now been found liable for Michael’s ongoing symptoms.  Under Iowa law, the 
employer has the right to control the medical treatment for work-related injuries.  I find 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 20 
defendants maintain this right.  Defendants are responsible for the reasonable cost of 
any future treatment that is causally connected to the March 22, 2017, work injury.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.14(6)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 21 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Michael sustained 
permanent disability to his body as a whole as the result of the March 22, 2017 work 
injury.  As such, he is entitled to an award of industrial disability.  Considering the 
industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I conclude that he has 
sustained a 25 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of his work injury with 
the defendant employer.  Michael is entitled to 125 weeks of permanent partial disability 
commencing on November 9, 2018.     
The parties have a dispute regarding Michael’s weekly workers’ compensation 
rate.  Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury.  The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment.  The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury.  Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, however.  Section 85.36(6).  For the reasons set forth above, I 
conclude that claimant’s gross weekly wages are seven hundred three and 05/100 
dollars ($703.05).  The parties have stipulated that he is married and entitled to two 
exemptions.  Thus, claimant’s weekly workers’ compensation rate is four hundred sixty-
five and 32/100 dollars ($465.32).   
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 6.  The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975).  Based on the above findings of 
fact, I conclude that the submitted charges were incurred as a result of the March 22, 
2017 work injury and therefore are the responsibility of the defendants.  Additionally, 
defendants are responsible for the reasonable cost of any future treatment that is 
causally connected to the March 22, 2017, work injury.   
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the workers’ compensation commissioner or the deputy hearing the case.  
876 IAC 4.33.  I find that claimant was generally successful in his claim; therefore, an 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 22 
assessment of costs is appropriate.  I find that the $100.00 filing fee is an appropriate 
cost under 4.33(7).  I further find that the $120.00 report fee is appropriate under 
4.33(5).  Defendants are assessed costs totaling two hundred twenty and no/100 dollars 
($220.00). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of four hundred sixty-five and 32/100 
dollars ($465.32).   
Defendants shall pay one hundred twenty-five (125) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on the stipulated commencement date of November 9, 
2018. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Deciga 
Sanchez v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5052008 (App. Apr. 23, 2018) (Ruling on 
Defendants’ Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider or Amend Appeal Decision re: Interest Rate 
Issue). 
Defendants are responsible for the past medical expenses contained in 
claimant’s exhibit 6.   
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs totaling two hundred twenty and 
no/100 dollars ($220.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this 20th day of April, 2020. 
 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

WARREN V. ALTEC, INC. 
Page 23 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
