Case Number: 23700666.01
Case Title:  RAMOS LOPEZ, EDITH M V. FARMERS UNION INDUSTRIES, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ramos Lopez Edith - 23700664.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
EDITH RAMOS LOPEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
File Nos. 23700664.01, 23700666.01 
 
 
  : 
 
 
23700662.01 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES, 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NATIONWIDE AGRIBUSINESS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
            Head Note No.: 1108 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Edith Ramos Lopez, filed three petitions for arbitration in August 
2023, and seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Farmers’ Union Industries, 
employer, and Nationwide Agribusiness, insurance carrier.  The claimant was 
represented by Mary Hamilton.  The defendants were represented by Bryan Brooks. 
Just prior to hearing, claimant moved to dismiss File No. 23700662.01 without 
prejudice.  This motion is hereby GRANTED. 
The matter came on for hearing on May 23, 2025, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh originating in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 6; and Defense Exhibits A through J.  The record is 
voluminous and there were significant disputes before hearing regarding the exhibits. 
Claimant secured an expert report from Sunil Bansal, M.D., in March 2025.  
Claimant had apparently seen Dr. Bansal in July 2024, but his report was not secured 
until March 2025.  Claimant’s counsel had not designated Dr. Bansal as an expert 
witness as required by rule.  This matter was originally scheduled to be heard on 
October 3, 2024.  The parties jointly continued the hearing in September 2024.  On 
March 11, 2025, claimant sought an additional continuance, this time resisted by 
defendants.  Ms. Hamilton’s law partner and brother was at end-of-life.  He was dying 
and Ms. Hamilton was his power of attorney for health decisions.  I granted the short 
continuance over the objection of defendants.  The matter was rescheduled for May 23, 
2025, necessitating the disclosure of exhibits 30 days prior to May 23, 2025. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Nov-19  15:30:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 2 
 
In April 2025, Ms. Hamilton served the expert report on defendants in advance of 
the modified 30-day exhibit deadline.  She acknowledged at hearing that her failure to 
designate Dr. Bansal as an expert and then serve this report for a few weeks was an 
oversight on her part.  Dr. Bansal’s expert report was designated as Claimant’s Exhibit 
2.  In any event, the defendants quickly secured a rebuttal report and served this on 
claimant, just after the 30-day exhibit deadline.  Defendants introduced this exhibit as 
Defendants’ Exhibit J.  Just prior to hearing, claimant secured a rebuttal to the rebuttal 
and introduced this expert report as Claimant’s Exhibit 7. 
On May 13, 2025, claimant objected to Defendants’ Exhibit J, citing that it was 
served past the 30-day deadline.  On May 15, 2025, defendants objected to Claimant’s 
Exhibit 2, arguing that while the report was provided before the 30-day deadline, Dr. 
Bansal had never been specifically designated as an expert.  On May 16, 2025, I 
summarily denied (without analysis) both motions.  On May 23, 2025, the morning of the 
hearing, defendants renewed the objection to Claimant’s Exhibit 7.  At hearing, when 
reviewing the evidence, I informed the parties that I would reconsider my prior rulings 
and allow the parties to argue all of the objections on the record.  This was done.  Both 
parties argued their positions and a full record was secured.  Defendants argued 
strenuously that the failure to designate an expert is essentially the worst type of 
prejudice imaginable.  Claimant argued it is unfair to allow the rebuttal report. 
Having reviewed the entire file and listened to the extensive arguments of 
counsel, I reject the defendants’ argument that they are prejudiced by this under the 
standard set forth in the recent Iowa Supreme Court decision, Hagen v. Serta/National 
Bedding Co., LLC, 1 N.W.3d 1 (Iowa 2024).  The defendants argue that they were 
prejudiced by not knowing that claimant had been evaluated by Dr. Bansal and were 
awaiting a report.  While the Hagen Court makes clear that the agency has discretion to 
reject untimely reports, it certainly does not mandate exclusion.  In fact, the Hagen 
decision ultimately reaffirms the agency’s discretion to accept or deny such evidence 
based upon the long-understood prejudice standard.  Id. at 6-7.  The fact that 
defendants easily secured a rebuttal report to the merits of Dr. Bansal’s report 
completely belies their own prejudice argument.  Ultimately, defense counsel failed to 
state anything he would have done differently had he known that Dr. Bansal was to be 
used as an expert witness. 
Similarly, I reject the claimant’s argument that she suffered any prejudice by the 
late rebuttal report of the defense expert.  With regard to Claimant’s Exhibit 7, however, 
which was served just a few days prior to hearing, I find this report is prejudicial as 
defendants have no meaningful opportunity to respond to it.  I further find that, under the 
circumstances, the evidence has to stop somewhere or the parties could continue 
securing rebuttal reports indefinitely.  Another option would have been to allow 
defendants to secure a rebuttal to the rebuttal of the rebuttal.  Simply stated, this just felt 
like nonsense.  In my ruling, both parties were allowed a full opportunity to develop the 
record and have this case heard on the merits and I find this is the correct and fair 
decision. 
The claimant testified at hearing.  She was the only witness.  She testified 
through a Spanish language interpreter on direct examination for roughly one hour and 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 3 
 
then on cross for another 90 minutes.  Her testimony was, unfortunately, not complete.  
The hearing was recessed until May 28, 2025 when her testimony was finally 
completed.  Ernest Nino-Murcia served as the Spanish language interpreter.  Buffy 
Nelson served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on July 21, 2025. 
ISSUES AND STIPULATIONS 
It is stipulated the parties had an employer-employee relationship regarding both 
alleged dates of injury.  The claimant alleges she sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of her employment on February 28, 2022, which primarily impacted 
her right shoulder and arm.  The defendants deny this and further dispute medical 
causation regarding this alleged injury.  The claimant further alleges she sustained an 
injury which arose out of and in the course of her employment on June 27, 2023, which 
caused disability in her bilateral shoulders, arms, as well as her neck.  The defendants 
stipulate that a work injury occurred on this date, however, dispute medical causation 
for this injury.  The claimant is seeking healing period benefits and permanency benefits 
for both injuries.  The defendants deny any responsibility for any further benefits.  In 
fact, all of the issues relating to the nature and extent of permanency are disputed, 
including the date of commencement. 
The parties do agree and stipulate that claimant was single and entitled to one 
exemption for rate calculation purposes.  The parties, however, dispute her 
representative gross wages prior to the alleged injuries.  The defendants have waived 
affirmative defenses, other than the statute of limitations.  As an affirmative defense, the 
defendants assert that neither claim was timely filed under Iowa Code Section 85.26. 
The claimant is also seeking the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
1, page 15 and Claimant’s Exhibit 2, page 47.  I find that these expenses are not 
medical expenses under Section 85.27, but rather costs and IME expenses.  The 
defendants contend they are not responsible for these expenses as they are not 
causally connected to the work injury.  The defendants further contend the treatment 
was not authorized.  The claimant also seeks future medical treatment or alternate 
medical care.  The parties represent that the issue of credit is no longer in dispute.  
Finally, the claimant seeks reimbursement for her independent medical evaluation 
under Iowa Code Section 85.39, and the costs set forth in her exhibits. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Edith Ramos Lopez was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  She 
was born in Guatemala in 1976 and went to high school there through the 9th grade.  
Her native language is Spanish.  (Transcript, page 31)  She testified through a qualified 
Spanish language interpreter at hearing.  Ms. Ramos migrated to the United States in 
2004.  Soon after arriving in the United States in Delaware, she moved to Worthington, 
Minnesota, and then finally to Iowa.  She has worked primarily in positions which are 
typical of immigrants, such as watching children, hotel and restaurant work, egg 
processing and meatpacking.  Her entire work history is outlined in detail in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 4. 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 4 
 
Ms. Ramos testified live and under oath at the Zoom hearing.  Her testimony is 
not entirely credible.  Ms. Ramos was a difficult witness.  She testified at the outset that 
she had significant memory loss from a severe head injury many years ago.  She was a 
poor historian and remembered very little of her medical history, particularly on cross-
examination.  In fairness to her, all of the questions were posed through an interpreter 
and many were often difficult to follow.  Her demeanor, however, was not slow at all.  
Her demeanor was combative.  Her answers unfortunately were frequently long and 
nonresponsive. 
Ms. Ramos testified she began working for Farmers’ Union, the employer in this 
case, in May 2018.1  (Tr., p. 36)  Farmers’ Union Industries, LLC, is a hog processing 
plant which includes a slaughtering operation.  Ms. Ramos began working for Farmer 
Foods in slaughtering. 
By the time Ms. Ramos began working at Farmer Foods, she already had a 
chronic right shoulder disability.  The record demonstrates she had been treated for a 
right shoulder condition as early as September 2014.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3)  This was a work-
related injury for a different company.  She was treated promptly for pain in her right 
shoulder joint and limited range of motion.  She had an MRI and was referred for an 
orthopedic consultation.  Ultimately surgery was recommended, specifically a diagnostic 
arthroscopy, subacromial decompression and AC joint resection.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 29)  Ms. 
Ramos, however, had diabetes and her blood pressure was too high.  Surgery was 
postponed and she began receiving treatment for her blood pressure and diabetes.  (Jt. 
Ex. 1, pp. 38-40)  At this time, she was rating her shoulder pain as a 7 of 10 on the 
standard pain scale.  Eventually, she stopped seeking treatment for this condition. 
When she began working at Farmer Foods in May 2018, she was working at full-
duty.  The work was relatively heavy and fast paced.  She had to use a knife, perform 
repetitive tasks, lift up to 50 pounds, and perform a variety of other physical tasks.  (Def. 
Ex. E, p. 33)  She testified that she performed a number of jobs using a knife which 
required forceful grasping and cutting.  (Tr., pp. 38-39) 
Ms. Ramos testified she sustained a work injury to her right shoulder on or about 
May 23, 2019.  She was struck by a hog carcass on a line and knocked to the ground 
on her right side.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 46-48)  An MRI arthrogram was ordered showing mild 
to moderate tendinosis with subacromial surface fraying of the supraspinatus.  “Findings 
are similar to mildly progressed compared to 2014, …”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 57)  Surgery was 
recommended.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 269)  Ultimately, however, surgery was not scheduled 
because of her personal conditions (HBP, diabetes, A1c).  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 125-126)  
Surgery was delayed for a year.  She returned to a new physician in February 2021, 
John Leupold, M.D., at Northwest Iowa Bone Joint and Sports Surgeons.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
278)  He also recommended surgery, but again surgery was postponed due to her 
personal health conditions.  The records reflect that Ms. Ramos was “desperate to have 
her surgery . . . as she can’t take the pain.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 138)  This indicates that her 
 
1 There are various references to the employer in this record by other names, including Farmer Foods 
and Redwood Farms.  Throughout the course of this decision, the employer is referred to as “Farmer 
Foods”. 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 5 
 
symptoms and condition were relatively severe.  Permanent restrictions were 
recommended but never followed.  After an evaluation with Douglas Martin, M.D., her 
case was closed.  (Def. Ex. G) 
Thereafter Ms. Ramos continued performing fairly strenuous labor for Farmers.  
These jobs possibly exceeded the restrictions recommended by Dr. Martin.  Ms. Ramos 
testified the knife work was quite difficult for her.  (Tr., p. 40)  Ms. Ramos testified that 
she reported increased pain and symptoms in 2022.  (Tr., pp. 40-45)  She testified her 
supervisors ignored her and apparently believed she was simply reporting symptoms 
related to her “closed” 2019 work injury.  (Tr., p. 44)  Ms. Ramos therefore sought 
medical treatment on her own.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 176)  In her petition, she alleges she 
sustained a new, discrete cumulative injury to her right shoulder and upper extremity 
which manifested on or about February 28, 2022.  It is unclear to me in this record why 
this date was chosen.  Claimant’s counsel did not articulate a reason this date was 
chosen as the manifestation date in her brief. 
Ms. Ramos returned to Dr. Leupold in April 2023.  Dr. Leupold documented that 
Ms. Ramos “absolutely has impingement syndrome as well as some evolving AC Joint 
degenerative disease.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 283)  He did not opine this was a new, discrete 
work injury.  In fact, his opinion regarding causation is entirely unclear. 
I find that it is possible that Ms. Ramos sustained a new, discrete cumulative 
work injury in 2022.  She was certainly doing the type of work which could have 
aggravated or accelerated her condition.  The problem is, for this to be probable, I 
would need other credible evidence to support this.  The testimony of Ms. Ramos, 
however, is not credible.  While she testified that she worked in strenuous jobs in 2021 
through 2022, and her right shoulder symptoms increased, she was unable to provide 
credible testimony regarding how her symptoms were worse or different from the 
symptoms she had been having since 2014, or even from her May 2019 work injury.  
When provided an opportunity on cross-examination to explain this, the following 
exchange occurred: 
MR. BROOKS: 
Thank you, Judge. 
Q. 
I think at this point we’ll start from the beginning.  Ms. Ramos 
Lopez, I’m going to go back to September of 2014 and the first right 
shoulder injury that you had sustained.  Do you recall injuring your right 
shoulder in 2014 at Pipestone Systems? 
A. 
Honestly, it wasn’t an injury.  The company wanted to know 
if I was injured, and so that’s why they took me to the hospital.  But when I 
started at Farmers Union, I wasn’t injured.  I didn’t have any pain. 
Q. 
Okay.  All right.  So you don’t recall falling 9-12-2014 and 
presenting to Pipestone Family Clinic with right shoulder pain which was a 
7 out of 10?  Does that sound correct? 
A. 
I did go.  I’m not going to deny that I went.  But the pain went 
away quickly.  They did tests, and they didn’t find anything.  A few days 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 6 
 
later the pain had gone away.  I didn’t break anything.  They didn’t find 
anything.  It’s just a small pain, no breaks, not a big injury.  The pain went 
away.  The years went by.  I didn’t feel anything else. 
Q. 
All right.  You said they didn’t find anything.  So you recall 
having an MRI of your right shoulder in September of 2014? 
A. 
But they didn’t find anything. 
Q. 
On October 2, about two, three weeks after the injury, it 
looks like you went back to Pipestone Family Clinic following up on your 
right shoulder complaints.  Electric – this is from the report – electric 
shocks noted at the shoulder.  Heavy sensation noted into the right hand.  
Pain down the arm and into the wrist.  Physical therapy two times a week.  
Patient shares that she feels as though she doesn’t have strength in the 
right arm.  Do you recall that? 
A. 
No, I don’t remember. 
Q. 
I’m going to assume, then, at that 10-2 of 2014 visit that you 
also do not recall being diagnosed with a cervical myofascial strain, or a 
neck injury? 
A. 
No, I don’t remember that either. 
Q. 
Okay.  And, of course, you mentioned that after this injury 
there was pain for a few days, but it went away quickly.  Was that an 
accurate recitation of the testimony? 
A. 
Yes, very quickly. 
Q. 
All right.  Do you recall a recommendation for shoulder 
surgery in April of 2015, some seven months after that injury? 
A. 
No, I don’t remember that. 
Q. 
Okay.  It looks like the pre-op for surgery was April 23, 2015, 
but, unfortunately, the surgery could not move forward due to the 
discovery of some diabetic condition.  Do you recall that? 
A. 
I don’t remember that happening. 
Q. 
After this May 23, 2019 injury, again you mention that you 
were struck by a hog carcass that knocked you off your stool and you fell 
a few feet to the ground; is that correct? 
A. 
But that case doesn’t go with this case now. 
Q. 
Do you recall that? 
A. 
But I said we’re not talking about the 2019 case. 
Q. 
We are.  We are.  Do you recall the 2019 injury where you 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 7 
 
were struck by a carcass and knocked off your stool? 
A. 
No. 
Q. 
You don’t recall that injury happening at Farmers Union in 
May of 2019? 
A. 
Yes. 
(Tr., pp. 68-71) 
The problem for Ms. Ramos here is obvious.  She is unable or unwilling to 
provide accurate testimony of the state of her condition between 2014 and 2022, as it 
relates to the condition of her right shoulder.  Her counsel argues strenuously that this is 
because of memory loss from being savagely attacked in approximately 2009.  This 
may be the case.  The problem, though, is that the burden of proof to demonstrate she 
sustained a new, discrete cumulative injury to her right shoulder on February 28, 2022, 
is on her.   
The contemporaneous medical notes, however, also do not help prove that she 
sustained a new, discrete work injury during this timeframe, certainly not for a specific 
manifestation date on February 28, 2022.  In fact, it appears from the contemporaneous 
medical notes that she had been suffering from the same chronic right shoulder 
condition, for which she needed surgery, since 2014.  It appears in this record that her 
symptoms as far back as 2014 were significant and disabling.  Undoubtedly, performing 
heavy manual labor on a shoulder which was already damaged is not a good thing for 
her which is why I thoroughly scoured the medical records for objective evidence for 
proof that she sustained a new, discrete cumulative work injury.  I find that while there is 
evidence of significant continued ongoing complaints in her right shoulder, the objective 
portion of the record is quite meager that a new, discrete injury occurred or even that 
her condition substantially worsened during this time. 
On cross-examination, Ms. Ramos testified over and over that she could not 
remember important details of her preexisting medical condition.  On the few occasions 
when she did answer cross-examination questions directly, she minimized her condition 
in a way which is not consistent with the contemporaneous medical file.  Furthermore, 
the medical records are replete with examples of medical providers suggesting that her 
subjective complaints reported were out of proportion to the clinical findings.  For all of 
these reasons, I find that Ms. Ramos has failed to prove that she sustained a 
cumulative work injury for the employer which manifested in February 2022. 
In any event, Ms. Ramos continued working for Farmer Foods through 2023.  
The parties have stipulated that she sustained a new work injury on June 27, 2023.  On 
that date, she was working on the line, apparently working full-duty.  A pig carcass 
detached from the line, hook and all, and fell, impacting her left shoulder.  She 
immediately reported left shoulder and hand pain and was taken for treatment and she 
was placed on light-duty.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 181)  She remained on light-duty through the 
summer and fall, following up for treatment regularly.  On July 6, 2023, her authorized 
medical provider documented the following: 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 8 
 
 
Edith is a 47 years old female is here for Workmen’s Compensation 
follow-up appointment.  She was accompanied by his staff from safety 
department.  She is also planning on establishing care with me.  She does 
have a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension.  She had a previous 
labs done in January 2023. 
Her injury happened on 6/27/23 and she was last seen by me on 
6/29/23.  She did have left shoulder injury and the bruising is much better 
at this time.  She is taking diclofenac 50 mg twice daily along with heating 
pad 3 times a day.  She is currently on light duty and avoids working in a 
cold room.  She is comfortable with these accommodations.  She thinks 
the pain starts in the spinal cord by the neck and goes all the way down to 
her lower back.  She is also bothered by right shoulder pain which is going 
on for the last few years as a result of previous work related injury.  The 
case was closed.  She did see orthopedic surgeons, Dr. Pruitt and also Dr. 
Leopold recently.  The pain seems to be worsening in nature.  She has 
had previous injections and physical therapy done.  X-rays done recently 
on 4/6/23 showed degenerative joint disease of the left acromioclavicular 
joint and glenohumeral joint. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 188)  Ms. Ramos was diagnosed with work-related left shoulder pain from 
acute injury.  It is unclear what treatment was provided; however, she was continued on 
light-duty with modified restrictions.  There is evidence she was undergoing physical 
therapy for the left shoulder at this time. 
In August 2023, she was evaluated at United Hospital District Clinic in Fairmont, 
Minnesota by Timothy Soelter, PA-C.  The claimant contends this was authorized 
medical care.  Mr. Soelter documented her left shoulder injury and symptoms in some 
detail.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 286)  He recommended a cervical MRI and other diagnostic 
treatment while continuing conservative care (heat/ice, medications, restrictions).  (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 288)  Following this treatment she followed up with Mr. Soelter in October 
2023.  Mr. Soelter focused his treatment on the left shoulder at this time (while 
continuing to diagnose cervicalgia) and recommended occupational therapy and 
injections.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 297)   She continued to decline injections.  Ms. Ramos 
underwent a cervical MRI in October 2023, which showed a disc herniation at C3-C4.  
(Jt. Ex. 7)  On December 4, 2023, Mr. Soelter documented the following: 
Edith Ramos Lopez is a 47yr female who presents to the office 
today for recheck of her left shoulder and posterior neck and shoulder 
injury that she sustained on June 26, 2023.  She has been currently in 
occupational therapy and she has had some improvement in her pain of a 
moderate amount.  She still has not only physical pain but also emotional 
trauma with concerns about another hog falling on her in particular she is 
around the line she is concerned and worried about that.  She feels better 
when she is able to stand upright and is not having her neck flexed down 
because otherwise she begins having posterior neck pain as well as 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 9 
 
posterior shoulder pain with sometimes numbness and tingling down into 
the hand she gets a sharp shooting pain in the backside of the shoulder in 
the anterior shoulder when she does this type of modified work.  She 
however is concerned about going back on the line and does not feel she 
is strong enough to lift and wash the hogs and the other job on the line 
she does not feel that she is quite capable of doing either.  She is not 
going to go back to any type of the knife work as well. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 298)  Mr. Soelter diagnosed left shoulder pain and left rotator cuff tendinitis 
and recommended more occupational therapy and conservative care.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 299) 
Ms. Ramos testified that on December 12, 2023, she was terminated.  She 
testified she had been sick with a fever and cough.  She testified the plant manager told 
her to go home. 
And the plant manager sent me home and even talked about 
getting me a ride, because as bad as I looked they didn’t want me to drive 
myself.  And they said to me, ‘Come back tomorrow if you’re better.  If not, 
just call and say that you’re still sick.’ 
And so I went to the doctor.  The doctor said I looked bad.  The 
doctor sent me a note. 
And when I came back to work with that note, they told me that I 
didn’t have a job anymore, that I was fired, and that I couldn’t do anything 
else there and that the doctor’s note wasn’t valid. 
And so I didn’t say anything.  I just said, ‘Thanks,’ and left.  But I 
don’t think I deserved to be fired like that. 
(Tr., pp. 47-48)  The employer provided personnel file documentation indicating that Ms. 
Ramos was terminated for excessive unexcused absenteeism after accumulating too 
many points under the employer’s absenteeism policy.  (Def. Ex. F) 
Ms. Ramos returned for treatment with Mr. Soelter in January 2024.  He 
documented her ongoing complaints of neck pain, left shoulder pain and left hand 
paresthesias.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 301)  Mr. Soelter recommended continuing with 
conservative care for her conditions.  She had still not had an EMG at this point.  He 
mentioned the possibility of referral to a specialist of some sort.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 303)   
She returned to Mr. Soelter on February 12, 2024.  He documented that she 
returned for left shoulder pain and to review her EMG results, noting she had undergone 
11 OT visits with minimal improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 306)  “She reports that she wants 
to go back to work she does not want any restrictions she overall is frustrated but wants 
to get back to work and start paying her bills.”  (Id.)  Mr. Soelter agreed at this point and 
released her medical restrictions, stating “I think this is reasonable given the normal 
EMG she does have some arthritis in the AC joint and in the glenohumeral joint as well 
and some mild degenerative disc disease in the spine at the cervical spine but really 
nothing that would prevent her from going back to regular work activities.”  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 
307-308)  She was offered an injection which she refused and placed at maximum 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 10 
 
medical improvement. 
In March 2024, Ms. Ramos participated in a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) 
to establish medical restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  The FCE was performed by WorkWell and 
was deemed valid.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2)  This was not authorized treatment and claimant 
seeks this expense as a cost.  The FCE placed Ms. Ramos in the light work category.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3)  The specific restrictions assigned are significant, however, there is no 
differentiation between her various injuries and alleged injuries so it is of little use. 
Ms. Ramos returned to Mr. Soelter in April 2024.  He documented that she had 
started a new job but was unable to even work for a full day.  She requested he 
reinstate her restrictions, which he did.  He recommended significant lifting restrictions 
and possibly a functional capacity evaluation (FCE).  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 311)  This is her last 
documented visit with Mr. Soelter. 
Dr. Martin performed a second IME on Ms. Ramos on September 30, 2024.  He 
reviewed some records and examined her.  His report focused primarily upon the long 
history of problems in her right shoulder.  Dr. Martin did not seem to understand that the 
June 27, 2023, work injury was an admitted claim.  He barely mentions this work injury 
in his report and when he did, he mischaracterized it as a “contusion to the left shoulder 
…”  (Def. Ex. I, p. 54)  It does not appear that he reviewed her medical reports related to 
her left shoulder and neck, although it is somewhat unclear.  He did mention that she 
was a difficult historian, which is believable.  (Def. Ex. I, p. 50)  Ultimately, he opined 
that Ms. Ramos had no permanent conditions which were causally connected to any of 
her work injuries.  (Def. Ex. I, pp. 54-55)  While he specifically pointed to her preexisting 
right shoulder condition to explain his causation opinion, he did not mention either the 
admitted left shoulder injury or any other reason for refusing to link causation on the left.  
(Def. Ex. I, p. 55)  For all conditions, he assigned zero impairment or restrictions, but 
stated she had reached “a degree of maximum medical improvement.”  (Def. Ex. I, p. 
57) 
Claimant’s counsel had Ms. Ramos evaluated by Sunil Bansal, M.D., in July 
2024.  He prepared a report which was dated March 11, 2025.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  Dr. Bansal 
interviewed Ms. Ramos, reviewed numerous appropriate records, and thoroughly 
examined her.  He summarized the medical file as well.  Ultimately, Dr. Bansal opined 
that Ms. Ramos suffers from the following conditions: 
RIGHT SHOULDER: 
Rotator cuff tendinosis, with subacromial surface graying of the supraspinatus. 
Aggravation of the acromioclavicular joint arthropathy. 
Right shoulder impingement syndrome. 
LEFT SHOULDER: 
Long head of the biceps tenosynovitis. 
Subscapularis, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus tendinosis. 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 11 
 
Aggravation of acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis.  
Subcoracoid bursitis. 
NECK: 
C3-C4 central and left-sided disc protrusion. 
RIGHT WRIST/HAND: 
Right wrist/hand contusion – resolved. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 41)  Dr. Bansal opined that the right shoulder condition was “aggravated by 
her continued work duties through 2022.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 42-43)  He provided seven full 
paragraphs of analysis for this opinion.  Regarding the left shoulder and neck, he opined 
that her stipulated work injury was the direct cause of those conditions.   
The impact of the falling carcass against her left shoulder would create 
compressive and shearing forces to the acromioclavicular joint, 
glenohumeral joint and supporting soft tissues.  Simultaneously, the axial 
loading and lateral flexion forces would be transmitted to the cervical 
spine.  Following this event she experienced immediate pain and 
dysfunction of her left shoulder with radiation into her left arm and hand, 
as well as pain that she described as starting in her neck and radiating 
down her back … 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 43-44)  I find his opinion regarding the left shoulder convincing as it is 
based almost exclusively upon her contemporaneous medical notes. 
Dr. Bansal assigned impairment ratings pursuant to the AMA Guides, 5th edition.  
For the right shoulder he assigned a 10 percent right upper extremity impairment.  On 
the left, he assigned a 6 percent rating (which converts to 4 percent whole body).  For 
the neck he assigned a 5 percent whole body rating (placing her in DRE Category II).  
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 45)  He addressed restrictions globally, endorsing the FCE restrictions for 
all conditions.  For future care for the left shoulder and neck, he recommended various 
injections or nerve blocks, which Ms. Ramos has repeatedly refused.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 46) 
The defendants secured a rebuttal report from Dr. Martin dated May 9, 2025.  He 
broadly attacked Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion, generally stating it did not comport with 
evidence-based literature.  He described the “time-honored” process for assessing 
medical causation and summarized it as follows: 
1. Identify evidence of disease 
2. Review and assess the available epidemiological evidence for causal 
relationship 
3. Obtain and assess the evidence of exposure 
4. Consider other relevant factors 
5. Judge the validity of testimony 
6. Form conclusions about the relatedness of the disease and the person 
undergoing evaluation 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 12 
 
(Def. Ex. J, pp. 59-60)  Dr. Martin then provided a full page of analysis, primarily 
attacking Dr. Bansal’s opinions as they relate to the alleged February 2022 right 
shoulder claim.  (Def. Ex. J, p. 60)  I find that Dr. Martin did not use this time-honored 
process for determining medical causation as it relates to the stipulated August 27, 
2023, work injury, or if he did, he did not document it.  Dr. Martin, however, did not 
adequately address the left shoulder injury.  This was an admitted claim involving a 
fairly significant injury of a hog falling on Ms. Ramos.  The contemporaneous medical 
notes document the injury and her immediate treatment in the aftermath.  He did 
reiterate generally that none of her alleged dates of injury were a cause of any disability.  
(Def. Ex. J, p. 61)  He also attacked Dr. Bansal’s method of rating the cervical condition. 
Since leaving Farmer Foods, Ms. Ramos has attempted employment with a 
number of different employers including Daybreak (egg processing) and Farmland 
Foods (meat processing).  She has searched for jobs appropriately.  (Cl. Ex. 5)  
Because of a combination of her disabilities, she was unable to perform this work and 
reasonably quit both jobs.  At the time of hearing, she had secured employment with 
Michael Foods.  (Tr., pp. 49-53)  She was having difficulty performing this work and this 
position was not secure according to her testimony. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant sustained a cumulative injury 
which manifested on or about February 28, 2022. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 13 
 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287-88 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-30 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985). 
In cumulative injury claims, the issue of whether an injury occurred is often 
closely aligned with the issue of medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 14 
 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
 
The standard that must be met to establish two separate work-related injuries 
requires a claimant to demonstrate a distinct and discrete "disability attributable to ... 
work activities" that occurs after an initial injury.  Ellingson v. Fleetguard, 599 N.W.2d 
440, 444 (Iowa 1999).  It is not enough for the worker to show disability has been 
increased by subsequent work activities.  Id.  These circumstances may serve to 
increase the disability attributable to the first injury, but do not establish a separate and 
discrete disability.  Id. To establish a separate injury claim, the subsequent condition of 
the claimant must not be a consequence of the first injury.  Excel Corp. v. Smithart, 654 
N.W. 2d 891 (Iowa 2002). 
 
The court in Smithart explains: 
 
If a claimant establishes the existence of an initial disability based 
on an injury to the lower back resulting in the imposition of a lifting 
restriction, the mere subsequent imposition of a greater lifting restriction 
could indicate either a separate and discrete injury or an increase in the 
disability caused by aggravating work activities.  
(Id. At 900) 
In Smithart, the worker sustained a number of injuries to his back while lifting 
boxes for the defendant employer.  After a 1995 injury, he returned to work with a 50-
pound lifting restriction.  After a 1997 lifting injury with the same employer, he returned 
to work with a 25-pound lifting restriction.  The claimant in Smithart asserted separate 
injuries, as opposed to one cumulative injury.  The only evidence of a separate and 
discrete injury was the report made by Mr. Smithart that his back became sore after 
lifting boxes on May 6, 1997, and that his lifting restriction was subsequently changed 
from fifty pounds to twenty-five pounds.  The Supreme Court determined substantial 
evidence did not exist to support a finding of two separate and discrete disabilities.  The 
Court held evidence of increased lifting restrictions alone is insufficient to find a 
separate and distinct injury.  As such, it was determined the claimant failed to sustain 
his burden of establishing a separate and discrete injury following the initial injury. 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that the claimant has failed 
to prove that she sustained a new, discrete cumulative injury on or about February 28, 
2022.  I conclude that the claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings as it 
relates to File No. 23700666.01.  All other issues for resolution related to this file are 
moot. 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 15 
 
The next issue is whether the claimant has proven that her stipulated June 27, 
2023, injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent partial disability, and if so, the 
nature and extent of such disability. 
For this issue of medical causation, I use the same legal standards which are 
articulated above. 
I find that the stipulated injury is, in fact, a cause of both temporary and 
permanent disability.  I base this finding in large part upon the expert medical opinion of 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., as well as the contemporaneous medical notes of physician 
assistant Soelter, who treated Ms. Ramos between August 2023 and April 2024, for this 
condition.  (See Cl. Ex. 2; Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 284-311)  Importantly, Dr. Bansal provided a 
thorough and detailed causation which is logical and believable in light of the actual 
facts of this case.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 44)  Significantly, I do not rely upon the testimony of Ms. 
Ramos to reach this finding.  This injury, rather, is proven through the more objective 
facts set forth in the contemporaneous medical notes. 
There is no evidence in this record that Ms. Ramos had any medical condition in 
her left shoulder prior to this stipulated work injury.  She had intermittently experienced 
some cervical pain from her prior right shoulder injury, however, upon review of those 
notes, this was not a significant part of that claim.  I strongly suspect if she had been 
having any symptoms in her left shoulder prior to this date, it would be documented 
somewhere in the plethora of medical reports prior to August 27, 2023.  After a large 
hog carcass fell on her, she immediately reported pain and disabling symptoms in her 
left shoulder and a couple of weeks later in her neck.  Again, this is not based upon her 
testimony but rather the contemporaneous clinical notes.  She was seen two days after 
the injury by a company physician at AMG Estherville who documented the injury and 
treated the injury as a work-connected condition.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 183)  Farmer Foods 
apparently provided light-duty work for her for these conditions, as well as authorized 
medical treatment from the time of this appointment through the time of her discharge.   
The defendants may argue that Dr. Martin provided an adverse causation 
opinion.  He technically did.  “She very easily may have had contusions to the left 
shoulder with an impact from a carcass in June 2023.”  (Def. Ex. I, p. 54)  He went on: 
However, I do not think that those injuries are an explanation of why she 
presents like she does now with bilateral shoulder issues of degeneration, 
impingement, and adhesive capsulitis.  Instead, I think those things are 
either pre-existing from 2012 or representative of a degenerative process.  
Also adhesive capsulitis is known to be a significant issue in individuals 
with diabetes and I think that is likely the true correlative positive with 
regards to causation of that condition. 
(Def. Ex. I, p. 55)  This is the extent of Dr. Martin’s analysis for a left shoulder or neck 
causal connection.  There is no indication that he reviewed the contemporaneous 
medical notes from AMG Estherville, or the MRI, or the notes from P.A. Soelter.  There 
is no indication that he understood that she had sustained a stipulated work injury 
where a heavy hog carcass along with the chains and hooks fell onto the left side of her 
body.  He certainly did not indicate that he understood that at the moment prior to this 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 16 
 
incident she had no documented condition in her left shoulder and the moment after she 
had pain and limited range of motion documented by a company physician.  Because 
Dr. Martin did not have a full understanding of the claimant’s stipulated June 27, 2023, 
work injury, I reject his opinion, and instead adopt the well-reasoned opinion of Dr. 
Bansal. 
The next issue is whether the claimant is entitled to any temporary disability 
benefits. 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are:  (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
At the time Ms. Ramos was terminated on December 13, 2023, she was not at 
maximum medical improvement for her condition.  She was still under significant 
medical restrictions and working on light-duty through the date of her termination.  She 
was not capable of substantially similar employment.  Healing period benefits are owed 
from December 13, 2023 through February 12, 2024, the date P.A. Soelter released her 
medical restrictions at her request and placed her at maximum medical improvement 
(MMI).  The claimant argues for a later date, as suggested by Dr. Bansal.  While I do 
find that it is likely that Mr. Soelter only released her on that date at her own request, the 
truth is she did not continue to receive any significant treatment after this date.  Her 
condition had plateaued at this point and I find this is the most accurate date of MMI. 
The next issue is the nature and extent of her permanent partial disability. 
I find that Ms. Ramos has sustained permanent functional disabilities in her left 
shoulder and neck area.  Therefore, I conclude that her permanent disability must be 
evaluated under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v) (2023), for loss of earning capacity. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 17 
 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995).  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894, (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark.385, 609 S.W.2d 
102 (1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. 
La. 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
Ms. Ramos was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  She is a Spanish 
speaking immigrant from Guatemala with limited English proficiency.  She had a 9th 
grade Guatemalan education.  She did attempt some online courses in approximately 
2021.  Her work history is primarily in manual labor positions such as meat and egg 
processing, cleaning and service sector work. 
She sustained a fairly serious stipulated work injury when a hog carcass fell on 
her left side while performing her normal employment activities.  This incident caused 
injury to her left shoulder and neck.  She underwent approximately 8 months of 
treatment wherein she was on light-duty and receiving authorized medical care.  Her left 
shoulder condition is best described as aggravation of acromioclavicular and 
glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis for which she has sustained a four percent whole body 
impairment.  Her cervical condition places her in a DRE Category II with radicular 
complaints and loss of range of motion.  These conditions undoubtedly impact her 
ability to secure employment in the competitive job market.  She is no longer suited for 
high impact meat processing work or egg processing.  Unfortunately, all of the medical 
restrictions suggested by physicians in evidence address her condition globally 
(including her more severe right shoulder injury claim, which has been found to be 
noncompensable).  Of course, the burden is on the claimant to prove the extent of her 
disability. 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 18 
 
Considering all of the relevant factors of industrial disability, I find the claimant 
has sustained a 30 percent loss of earning capacity as a result of her August 27, 2023, 
work injury.  I conclude this entitles her to one hundred and fifty weeks of compensation 
commencing on February 12, 2024, the date she was placed at MMI by her authorized 
physician. 
The next issue is past and future medical expenses.  The medical expenses 
claimant listed in the Hearing Report are actually case costs and IME expenses.  I find 
there are no past medical expenses in dispute.  Claimant also seeks alternate medical 
care.  The only care recommended by any physician is Dr. Bansal who recommended 
different injections, which claimant has repeatedly refused in the past.  Should the 
claimant need further medical care for her work-related left shoulder or neck conditions, 
the defendants shall authorize a physician to evaluate her and provide medical 
treatment upon request. 
The next issue is gross wages. 
The basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the time of 
the injury.  Iowa Code § 85.36 (2015).  Weekly earnings are the gross salary, wages, or 
earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment.  Id.  The various subsections of 
section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type 
of earnings and employment.  Id. 
The parties have submitted competing claims regarding gross wages.  (Compare 
Def. Ex. C, with Cl. Ex. 6)  Having reviewed the exhibits, I find that the calculation of the 
defendants set forth in Defendants’ Exhibit C is the best evidence of her gross earnings 
at the time of her June 26, 2023, injury.  Consequently, I conclude that the appropriate 
rate of compensation is four hundred seventy-six and 80/100 ($476.80) per week. 
The next issue is costs and expenses. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 19 
 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed 
in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate including 
convenience fees incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of 
notice and subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or 
agency by the party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses 
or of obtaining doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the 
witnesses, doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the 
witness is called or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be 
paid in accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of 
any cost shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner 
before costs are taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be 
reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it 
shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the Iowa 
Rules of Civil Procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to 
implement Iowa Code section 10A.328. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons engaged 
in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report or 
evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner’s report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
I find that claimant is entitled to IME expenses for her left shoulder and neck from 
Dr. Bansal in the amount of $3,321.50.  Given the complexity of claimant’s medical 
conditions, multiple injuries and the volume of medical records, I find this is a 
reasonable expense for this claim.  Ms. Ramos had undergone an evaluation of 
permanent disability from P.A. Soelter in February 2024, when he released her without 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 20 
 
restrictions.  For some reason, defendants waited to request a specific impairment 
rating from Dr. Martin until August 2024, but P.A. Soelter’s evaluation in February 2024, 
certainly qualifies as an “evaluation of permanent disability” under Section 85.39(2).  In 
addition, the claimant requests $1,400.00 for the FCE.  Costs are discretionary.  The 
claimant was seeking this cost on both claims.  I did not award any benefits for the 
alleged February 28, 2022, work injury.  Accordingly, I award the claimant one-half of 
this cost, or $700.00. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
For File No. 23700662.01 
This claim is DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE. 
For File No. 23700666.01 
The claimant shall take nothing further. 
For File No. 23700664.01 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of four hundred and seventy-six and 
80/100 dollars ($476.80) per week. 
Defendants shall pay healing period benefits from December 13, 2023, through 
February 12, 2024. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant one hundred fifty (150) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on February 13, 2024. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Defendants shall pay IME expenses in the amount of three thousand three 
hundred twenty-one and 50/100 ($3,321.50). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of seven hundred and no/100 
dollars ($700.00). 
 
 
 
 

RAMOS LOPEZ V. FARMERS’ UNION INDUSTRIES 
Page 21 
 
Signed and filed this _19th __ day of November, 2025. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Mary Hamilton  
(via WCES) 
 
Bryan Brooks  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
