Case Number: 23008425.01
Case Title:  RENAUD, TAMMY V. WARREN COUNTY/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Commissioner
Source:      Renaud Tammy-23008425.01a.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TAMMY RENAUD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
          File No. 23008425.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
                    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
       
WARREN COUNTY, 
  : 
      
 
 
  :                    APPEAL DECISION              
 
Employer, 
  :    
 
 
  : 
 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  :       Head Notes:  1108.20, 1402.30, 1802, 
 
 
  : 
 
1803, 3202, 2906 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Defendants appeal from a May 21, 2025 arbitration decision.  Claimant cross-
appeals.  The presiding deputy commissioner held an arbitration hearing in this case on 
September 18, 2024 and the case was fully submitted before the deputy on November 
27, 2024. 
The deputy commissioner entered pertinent evidentiary rulings at the 
commencement of the arbitration hearing, which admitted some untimely evidence but 
ordered defendants to reimburse claimant for any necessary rebuttal evidence.  The 
deputy commissioner concluded that claimant sustained permanent injuries to her right 
knee, right ankle, and a permanent aggravation of her mental health, including a post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) diagnosis.  The deputy found that claimant was 
terminated by the employer and entitled to an industrial disability award.  He awarded 
claimant a 60 percent industrial disability. He also entered a penalty benefit award in the 
amount of $5,963.65.  The deputy concluded, however, that claimant failed to prove 
entitlement to healing period benefits.  Finally, the deputy commissioner concluded that 
claimant failed to prove a first qualifying injury and failed to prove entitlement to Second 
Injury Fund benefits. 
On appeal, defendants challenge the deputy’s assessment of sanctions, 
including the cost of claimant’s rebuttal evidence, for defendants’ submission of 
evidence after established agency deadlines.  Defendants also challenge claimant’s 
credibility.  On the merits of the claim, defendants challenge the deputy commissioner’s 
conclusion that claimant proved a permanent aggravation of her mental health, 
including a PTSD diagnosis.  Defendants contend claimant’s recovery should be limited 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Dec-19  09:21:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
to a scheduled member award involving only the right knee and right ankle.  In the 
alternative, defendants challenge the extent of the industrial disability award, contending 
that the deputy commissioner’s award is excessive. 
Claimant responds to the appeal and cross-appeals on three issues.  First, 
claimant contends the deputy erred in finding that claimant failed to prove permanent 
injuries to her back and neck.  Second, claimant contends the deputy commissioner 
erred in failing to award healing period benefits from March 1, 2024 through March 16, 
2024.  Finally, claimant contends the deputy commissioner erred in concluding claimant 
failed to prove a first qualifying injury and declining to award Second Injury Fund 
benefits. 
The Second Injury Fund responds to claimant’s cross-appeal.  The Second Injury 
Fund urges the deputy commissioner’s decision should be affirmed with respect to the 
Second Injury Fund portion of this claim. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.321 and section 17A.15(3), I performed a de 
novo review of the evidentiary record and the detailed arguments of the parties.  Those 
portions of the proposed arbitration decision pertaining to issues not raised on appeal 
are adopted as part of this appeal decision.  With respect to the issues properly raised 
on appeal, I reach the same analysis, findings, and conclusions as those reached by the 
deputy commissioner.  Pursuant to Iowa Code sections 17A.5 and 10A.321, I affirm and 
adopt as the final agency decision those portions of the proposed arbitration decision 
filed on May 12, 2025, which relate to the issues properly raised on intra-agency appeal 
with the following additional analysis. 
Evidentiary Ruling and Sanctions 
Defendants’ initial challenge on appeal is to the deputy commissioner’s ruling on 
claimant’s motion to exclude certain evidence.  In that motion, as verbally amended at 
hearing, claimant objected to the introduction of Defendants’ Exhibits G through K as 
untimely.  Ultimately, the deputy commissioner admitted all of the offered exhibits.1  
Defendants’ challenge is to the remedial nature of the deputy’s ruling and order.   
Specifically, defendants challenge the deputy commissioner’s ruling pertaining to 
the admission of Defendants’ Exhibits G, H, and I.  The deputy commissioner admitted 
Defendants’ Exhibits G through I into the evidentiary record, but required defendants to 
pay claimant’s expenses related to obtaining rebuttal to those reports.  Defendants’ 
Exhibits G through I were served after the deadlines established by administrative rule 
and by the hearing assignment order.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.310(1)(a), 
the commissioner is granted authority and mandated to adopt and enforce 
administrative rules to implement the Iowa Workers’ Compensation statutes.  See 
Hagen v. Serta/National Bedding Co., L.L.C., 1 N.W.3d 1, 5 (Iowa 2024) (noting that the 
 
1 Exhibit K was initially excluded at hearing but ultimately accepted into the evidentiary record in 
the arbitration decision.  The deputy commissioner’s ultimate receipt of Exhibits J and K is affirmed, as 
there was little or no prejudice to claimant in those exhibits being received. 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
court reviews evidentiary rulings from this agency on an abuse of discretion standard 
because “the commissioner is statutorily required to ‘[a]dopt and enforce rules 
necessary to implement’ Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws.”). 
The commissioner has adopted administrative rules in compliance with section 
10A.310(1)(a).  Agency rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(d) provides a relevant deadline for 
exchange of all evidence at least 30 days prior to hearing.  Rule 4.19(3)(d) provides, in 
relevant part, “At least 30 days before hearing, counsel of record and self-represented 
parties shall serve a witness and an exhibit list on all opposing counsel and self-
represented parties and exchange all intended exhibits that were not previously 
required to be served.”  The hearing assignment order in this case also provides: 
Failure to comply with any part of this order may result in imposition of 
sanctions as provided in rule 876 IAC 4.36. If evidence is offered at 
hearing that was not disclosed in the time and manner required by this 
order, other rulings made by a deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner or agency rules, the evidence may be excluded if the 
objecting party shows that receipt of the evidence would be unfairly 
prejudicial. Sanctions may be imposed pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.36 in 
addition to or in lieu of exclusion of the evidence… 
It is undisputed that defendants served Defendants’ Exhibits G, H, and I after the 
30-day deadline established in 876 IAC 4.19(3)(d) and the hearing assignment order.  
The deputy commissioner found that the late exchange of Exhibits G through I was 
prejudicial to claimant.  I concur that the late disclosure was prejudicial to claimant. 
Defendants alleged that the production of the late reports from treating providers 
was merely a reaction to and caused by claimant’s production of her independent 
medical evaluation one day before disclosure deadlines.  Interestingly, one of the late-
produced records defendants introduced was Defendants’ Exhibit K.  Exhibit K is an 
October 10, 2023 letter from defendants for clarification of work restrictions as well as a 
request for a permanent impairment rating from Iowa Orthopaedic Center related to 
claimant’s right knee.   
Having not received a response to Defendants’ Exhibit K, defendants sought the 
answer to those same questions on August 27, 2024, which resulted in the September 
4, 2024 report from Dr. Vinyard.  Contrary to defendants’ current assertions, it appears 
they knew they needed a report from Dr. Vinyard by October 2023 and did not actually 
secure or produce that report until after the applicable evidentiary deadlines.  Again, 
contrary to their assertions, it appears defendants’ request for restrictions and an 
impairment rating from Dr. Vinyard was not just a reaction to receipt of Dr. Bansal’s 
independent medical evaluation a day before the applicable deadline. 
Defendants also obtained untimely reports from Dr. Moyse and Nurse Swift 
pertaining to claimant’s neck and back claims.  In their appeal brief, defendants assert 
the “August 12, 2024, IME report is the first notice of any claim being made for a 
cervical spine injury.”  (Defendants’ Appeal Brief, p. 7)  Yet, in an office note dated 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
December 22, 2023, claimant presented “with complaint of neck and upper and mid and 
low back pain since patient had altercation at work at the prison on 6/14/2023 which 
caused injury to her foot and her back.”  (Joint Exhibit 11, p. 1)  Defendants appear to 
have been aware claimant submitted to MRIs of her spine in February 2024. 
(Defendants’ Exhibit G)  On May 15, 2024, Dr. Moyse evaluated claimant.  In that office 
note, Dr. Moyse noted the onset of claimant’s mid and low back pain was “since an 
assault by an inmate while working at Warren Co Jail.”  (Joint Ex., 13, p. 1)  Certainly, 
by May 15, 2024, defendants were aware of Dr. Moyse’s treatment and the assertion 
that claimant injured her back as a result of the work incident.  They did not seek any 
clarification, or even obtain complete copies of office notes from Nurse Swift, until 
August 2024.  (Defendants’ Exhibits G & I)   
Assuming defendants were monitoring this claim and actively and timely 
reviewing relevant medical records, they clearly should have known months before this 
hearing occurred that claimant alleged she sustained injuries to her neck and back as a 
result of her work injury.  Rather than being pushed into action out of surprise by 
claimant’s independent medical evaluation, it appears that defendants instead stuck 
their head in the sand with respect to claimant’s neck and back issues and waited to 
see if claimant was able to prove those claims before pursuing clarification or evidence 
on the issues.  Defendants appear to have relied upon the erroneous assumption that 
they can admit late evidence from treating medical providers beyond the applicable 
evidentiary deadlines without ramification.  Defendants’ arguments appear to be an 
attempt to shift some type of blame to claimant (even though claimant timely produced 
her medical evidence), to deflect from their untimeliness. 
The deputy commissioner in this case admitted Defendants’ Exhibits G through I.  
He concluded that admission of the reports from treating medical providers is mandated 
by Schoenfeld v. FDL Foods, Inc., 560 N.W.2d 595 (Iowa 1997).  However, the deputy 
commissioner imposed sanctions pursuant to agency rule 876 IAC 4.36 for violation of 
the hearing assignment order.  Specifically, the deputy commissioner ordered 
defendants to pay the expenses related to claimant’s rebuttal of Defendants’ Exhibits G, 
H, and I.  Ultimately, claimant obtained rebuttal reports from Dr. Bansal ($596) and Dr. 
Vinyard ($400). 
Defendants urge that Schoenfeld “requires the admission of such records and 
prohibits the imposition of penalties, including cost-shifting.”  (Defendants’ Appeal Brief, 
page 12)  Defendants contend that Schoenfeld “mandates that treating physician 
records are admissible regardless of procedural deadlines and cannot be the basis for 
sanctions or penalties.”  (Defendants’ Appeal Brief, p. 11)  In fact, defendants assert 
that “evidence from treating physicians—even if served late—is admissible by right and 
cannot give rise to punitive consequences, because the evidentiary value outweighs 
any potential prejudice.”  (Defendants’ Appeal Brief, p. 10) 
Claimant concedes in her appeal brief that Schoenfeld “mandates admission of 
treating physician records, it does not prohibit procedural remedies, such as allowing 
rebuttal or assigning costs when unfair prejudice results from violations of scheduling 
rules.”  (Claimant’s Appeal Brief, p. 6)  Claimant accurately notes that the deputy 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
commissioner did not exclude the untimely evidence and that “he ensured fairness by 
allowing rebuttal and requiring Defendants to bear the costs.  That is not a sanction on 
the evidence, but rather, a procedural remedy for their disregard of deadlines.”  
(Claimant’s Appeal Brief, p. 6)  Claimant urges the ruling on the motion to exclude be 
affirmed in its entirety, including the imposition of sanctions to include the cost of 
claimant’s rebuttal evidence. 
When considering this issue, it is perhaps important to take a step back and 
consider why and how this problem has developed.  Late evidence is not an uncommon 
or recent development in the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  This agency and the 
appellate courts have been dealing with the issue of late-served evidence in worker’s 
compensation cases for decades.  See Hagen v. Serta/National Bedding Co., L.L.C., 1 
N.W.3d 1 (Iowa 2024); Thorson v. Larson Mfg. Co., Inc., 682 N.W.2d 448 (Iowa 2004); 
Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119 (Iowa 2003); Schoenfeld v. FDL 
Foods, Inc., 560 N.W.2d 595 (Iowa 1997); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Stephenson v. Furnas Elec. Co., 522 N.W.2d 828 (Iowa 
1994).  See also Kudic v. IOC Black Hawk County, Inc., File Nos. 5066504, 5066505 
(Appeal December 2020); Aalbers v. Pioneer Hi-Bred International, File No. 5042600 
(Appeal March 2016); Saengchanpheng v. Tyson Fresh Meats, File Nos. 5043784, 
5043785, 5043786 (Appeal May 2015) (“discretion is needed to prevent trial by ambush 
as well as significant and unnecessary delays in the submission of cases and 
decisions”);  Richards v. Menard’s Distribution, File No. 5041336 (Appeal July 2015) 
(“Parties should not assume that late reports will be admitted into evidence.  This 
agency will review each situation on a case-by-case basis and exercise its discretion on 
whether late produced evidence should be admitted into evidence.”); Stallman v. 
Rockwell Collins, File No. 5027023 (Appeal April 2011) (“It must be reiterated, due to 
the all too common practice of parties who come before the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, that there is a fair likelihood that late-served reports will be excluded 
from evidence for willful or unjustifiable disregard for the rules of the agency.”); Madrid 
v. Oakland Food Corp., File No. 1232305 (Appeal January 2002) (noting that a “party 
naturally prepares for hearing based on the evidence known to it; if the existence of 
important evidence is not brought to light until just before the hearing, that party is 
prejudiced by a lack of time to properly respond to the new evidence.”); Toyne v. 
Muscatine School District, File No. 1115388 (Appeal December 1999) (“the problems 
raised here and in Schoenfeld would be avoided if the parties prepared their cases in a 
timely fashion and complied with the hearing assignment order.”). 
“The goal of modern discovery rules is to ‘make a trial less a game of blind man’s 
bluff and more a fair contest with the basic issues and facts disclosed to the fullest 
practicable extent.’  United States v. Procter & Gamble Co., 356 U.S. 677, 682-83, 78 S. 
Ct. 983, 986-87, 2 L.Ed.2d 1077, 1082 (1958). However, this goal is often hindered by 
the adversarial nature of discovery and the gamesmanship of parties locked in litigation. 
Garcia, 734 S.W.2d at 347.”  Comes v. Microsoft Corp., 775 N.W.2d 302, 311 (Iowa 
2009).  The goal of basic fairness and full disclosure is even more important in the 
workers’ compensation arena, where the purpose of the system is to avoid litigation, 
reduce the expense associated with the system, minimize appeals, and provide, rough, 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
speedy justice without highly technical and formal procedures.  See Marovec v. PMX 
Industries, 693 N.W.2d 779, 787 (Iowa 2005); Cross v. Hermanson Bros., 235 Iowa 
739, 742, 16 N.W.2d 616 (1944). 
The Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation has standard and detailed rules 
and deadlines for disclosure of evidence.  876 IAC 4.19(3); Hearing Assignment Order.  
See also Thorson v. Larson Mfg. Co., Inc., 682 N.W.2d 448 (Iowa 2004) (noting the 
importance of this agency having a formally adopted rule pertaining to deadlines). 
However, the process and deadlines are frequently ignored or even abused as currently 
practiced.  This discourages the goal of full disclosure and defeats the goal of fairness if 
remedial measures are not taken. 
As demonstrated by the numerous cases coming before this agency and the 
appellate courts on the issue of evidentiary deadlines, it has become commonplace to 
confront medical reports served beyond the evidentiary deadlines.  When some parties 
to the system follow the rules and others ignore them for tactical gain or even out of 
negligence, injustice results.  This leads to a system which is inefficient, and actually 
encourages the parties to disregard the rules governing their conduct.  See Hagen v. 
Serta/National Bedding Co., L.L.C., 994 N.W.2d 481 (Iowa Ct. App. 2023) (2023 WL 
2671941) (unpublished decision) (dissenting opinion) (noting that reversal of the 
agency’s exclusion of evidence could serve “as a map to ignore deadlines and navigate 
around the rules” and urging that the “agency should have discretion to apply the 
standards so that does not become the pattern”). In this case, in fact, defendants argue 
they have a right under Schoenfeld to disregard the applicable evidentiary deadlines 
without ramification. 
Defendants read Schoenfeld too broadly, as providing them a “safe harbor” that 
allows them to wait to obtain and exchange reports from treating medical providers until 
the last minute without ramification. Indeed, Schoenfeld holds that it is an abuse of 
discretion to exclude such evidence from the record.  However, the Schoenfeld court 
noted that a continuance was not requested by defendants, but presumably could have 
been granted by the agency.  Schoenfeld, 560 N.W.2d at 599.  Schoenfeld does not say 
that a party has an absolute right to introduce late evidence from a treating medical 
provider without ramification. 
Defendants failed to disclose or discuss subsequent Iowa Supreme Court 
caselaw that specifically references and applies Schoenfeld.  In Trade Professionals, 
Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 122 (Iowa 2003), the Iowa Supreme Court specifically 
rejected the argument now being made by defendants.  The Shriver court explained, 
“Schoenfeld should not be read so broadly as to require admission of evidence received 
after the cutoff date on the basis the employer merely knew of the existence of the 
reporting doctor.”  Therefore, I reject the defendants’ argument that they have an 
automatic right to introduce treating medical providers’ records and that Schoenfeld 
necessarily overrides or trumps this agency’s rules and orders establishing case 
preparation deadlines.  The Iowa Supreme Court has clearly indicated that admission of 
late evidence is not automatic or guaranteed, even from a treating medical provider.  
Hagen, 1 N.W.3d at 7. 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
Rather, the Iowa Supreme Court has reiterated that this agency has discretion on 
the admissibility of late-served evidence.  Id.  However, the Iowa Supreme Court has 
also made it clear they prefer this agency enact and enforce the deadlines in a manner 
that allows cases to be tried on the merits, rather than being decided on procedural 
grounds.  City of Davenport v. Newcomb, 820 N.W.2d 882, 893 (Iowa 2012) (quoting 
Ragan v. Petersen, 569 N.W.2d 390, 394 (Iowa 1997) (“The concept of ‘substantial 
justice favors a trial which allows both parties an opportunity to fully and fairly develop 
their claims and defenses without prejudice to the other party.”)); Thorson v. Larson 
Mfg. Co., Inc., 682 N.W.2d 448, (Iowa 2004) (“It is, of course, desirable in the interest of 
fairness to afford sufficient detail to allow opposing parties to prepare for the hearing.”).  
When addressing the admissibility of late-served evidence, the Court has directed this 
agency to balance the respective interests of the parties.  Trade Professionals, Inc. v. 
Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 122-123 (Iowa 2003).  
In the past, the record was often left open to allow one of the parties to seek 
additional evidence.  The submission of late evidence often results in additional 
expense to the non-offending party seeking rebuttal evidence.  Hagen v. Serta/National 
Bedding Co., L.L.C., 1 N.W.3d 1, 6 (Iowa 2024) (“deputy commissioners in similar 
circumstances often remedy untimely evidence by leaving the record open and giving 
the objecting party an opportunity to seek responsive reports.”)  Leaving the record 
open for further evidence often seems like an inequitable result, especially when the 
need was likely predicated on the offending party either intentionally waiting to disclose 
last-minute evidence or the offending party not diligently preparing their case for trial.  In 
either event, the non-offending party once blind-sided is forced to scramble and attempt 
to respond to the late evidence, often at significant additional effort and expense without 
any detriment to the offending party. 
Turning to the facts of this case, defendants seek to introduce reports from 
treating medical providers.  In this sense, it is clear that claimant was aware of these 
medical providers, having submitted to treatment with each of the providers.  
Nevertheless, the last-minute production of these reports was prejudicial to claimant’s 
trial preparation, as found by the deputy commissioner.  The last-minute production of 
this evidence warranted rebuttal from claimant’s expert witnesses. 
The deputy commissioner appropriately recognized binding precedent and 
concluded that the late evidence is admissible pursuant to Schoenfeld.  Yet, he also 
found that prejudice resulted to claimant.  The deputy exercised judgment and 
discretion to balance the respective interests and rights of the parties, exactly as the 
Iowa Supreme Court has urged this agency to do.   
Rather than excluding the late evidence, the deputy commissioner allowed 
claimant an opportunity to file rebuttal evidence without a resulting financial prejudice to 
claimant.  The deputy attempted to balance the parties’ interests by allowing the rebuttal 
evidence but requiring defendants, as the offending party, to pay that additional 
expense.  In so doing, the deputy creatively balanced the parties’ rights and interests by 
allowing defendants to introduce the evidence they generated and produced untimely to 
ensure that the case could be decided on a substantive, rather than procedural, basis.  

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
On the other hand, the order for defendants to pay claimant’s rebuttal expenses 
ensured that claimant also had a full and fair opportunity to develop and submit her 
evidence without causing financial prejudice to her.  This balancing by the deputy 
commissioner was a proper and appropriate exercise of his discretion and ensured that 
all parties’ rights and interests were protected.  It ensured the case was tried on the 
merits without significant prejudice to either party.  I concur with the deputy 
commissioner’s analysis and order. 
The next question to be considered is whether this agency has authority to enter 
the order assessing the rebuttal expenses to defendants.  Defendants contend that 
Schoenfeld supersedes or renders this agency’s hearing assignment order and/or 
administrative rule ineffective or null.  I conclude this is inaccurate given the analysis 
provided by the Iowa Supreme Court in Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 
N.W.2d 119 (Iowa 2003). 
Again, this agency has a duly enacted administrative rule at 876 IAC 4.36, 
which provides:  
If any party to a contested case or an attorney representing such 
party shall fail to comply with these rules or any order of a deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner or the workers’ compensation commissioner, 
the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner may impose sanctions which may include 
dismissing the action without prejudice, excluding or limiting evidence, 
assessing costs or expenses, and closing the record in whole or in part to 
further activity by the party. 
The agency’s rule clearly grants the agency authority and discretion to enforce its 
own orders and administrative rules.  Without the ability to enforce its own orders and 
administrative rules, the litigation goals of full disclosure, avoidance of playing blind 
man’s bluff, and a fair contest are frustrated.  Comes v. Microsoft Corp., 775 N.W.2d 
302, 311 (Iowa 2009).  The agency must be able to enforce its own orders and rules in 
some manner or those rules and orders mean nothing.  See Iowa Code section 
10A.310(1)(a); Hagen, 1 N.W.3d at 5 (“the commissioner is statutorily required to 
‘[a]dopt and enforce rules necessary to implement’ Iowa’s workers’ compensation 
laws.”).  Therefore, I conclude 876 IAC 4.36 permits this agency to impose sanctions in 
some manner when, as here, a party violates the agency’s order and/or administrative 
rule regarding evidentiary disclosure deadlines.   
In this situation, the deputy commissioner selected the least onerous sanction 
permitted in rule 876 IAC 4.36.  By permitting rebuttal and awarding the expense of that 
rebuttal evidence, the deputy ensured that all parties’ evidence would be received into 
the evidentiary record for consideration and that no financial prejudice would result to 
the non-offending party.  I conclude there is an agency rule permitting the sanction 
imposed by the deputy commissioner and that defendants were put on notice in the 
hearing assignment order of the potential for imposition of sanctions for violation of the 
evidentiary deadlines.  I further conclude that the deputy commissioner’s discretion was 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
reasonable and sound.  I concur with the deputy’s order and therefore affirm the ruling 
on the motion to exclude and arbitration decision with respect to the admissibility of 
Defendants’ Exhibits G through J and the imposition of the expense of claimant’s 
rebuttal reports totaling $996.00.  (Claimant’s Exhibits 8-9) 
Claimant’s Credibility 
While I weigh the competing and potentially contradictory evidence, I give 
considerable deference to findings of fact that are impacted by the credibility findings, 
expressly or impliedly, made by the deputy commissioner who presided at the hearing. 
The deputy commissioner who presided at the hearing had the best opportunity to 
evaluate the demeanor of the persons who testified at the hearing. The presiding deputy 
has the ability to include the demeanor of a witness when weighing credibility to find the 
true facts of the case. My ability to find facts that are affected by witness demeanor 
and credibility cannot be expected to be superior to that of the deputy who presided at 
the hearing. If anything, my ability when reviewing a transcript and written exhibits is 
likely inferior because I do not have the tool of witness demeanor to use in my 
evaluation. See Cerwick v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5047247, Rehearing 
Decision, June 2017); Niemeyer v. Ottumwa Good Samaritan, File No. 5020338 
(Appeal Decision, July 2008). I do not perceive the discrepancies identified by 
defendants as sufficient, in and of themselves, to reverse the deputy's credibility 
determination as to the testimony of claimant.   
Moreover, the deputy analysis and award of benefits does not appear to be 
directly reliant upon the credibility of claimant.  Although the deputy commissioner 
appears to have implicitly found claimant credible, the deputy commissioner 
appropriately noted and weighed competing evidence when necessary.  For instance, 
on the issue of healing period benefits, the deputy commissioner noted, “I recognize 
claimant disagrees with the termination and refused to sign the termination report.”  
(Arbitration Decision, page 10)  The deputy commissioner clearly was considering the 
claimant’s credibility in rendering his decision.  I accept the deputy commissioner’s 
findings and implicit finding that claimant was credible in many respects and also 
acknowledge, as did the deputy, that claimant’s credibility may suffer on other issues.  I 
conclude that none of the credibility challenges asserted by defendants change my 
analysis or ultimate conclusions pertaining to claimant’s entitlement to benefits. 
Mental Health/PTSD Claim 
Defendants initially assert that claimant’s offered expert evidence on her mental 
health issues is legally insufficient to prove a mental injury.  Specifically, defendants 
argue that IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621 (Iowa 2000)2, “requires that mental 
health causation opinions be rendered by individuals legally recognized as qualified 
physicians.”  My reading of Al-Gharib is different.  In that case, the Iowa Supreme Court 
 
2 Defendants did not provide a citation to this case, but referenced “IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib.”  It is 
presumed defendants intended to cite to the above case, though it is highly recommended that parties 
and attorneys provide actual citations to cases they rely upon and urge are binding on this agency. 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
found the agency abused its discretion by excluding the testimony of a psychologist on 
a mental health claim.  The Court stated, “admission of such testimony is … left to the 
discretion of the commissioner.”  Id. at 631.  The Court further noted that the State of 
Iowa has a liberal approach to the admission of expert opinions and that the “scope of 
evidence in administrative proceedings which an agency may consider is expanded 
rather than contracted.”  Id. at 630. 
Defendants further assert on page 21 of their appeal brief that “Turner v. NCI 
mandates that PTSD diagnoses be made by licensed psychologists or psychiatrists 
using DSM-based methodologies.”3  I find no such mandate in Turner.  In fact, quite to 
the contrary, it appears that the Iowa Court of Appeals acknowledged that admissibility 
of expert evidence is within the agency’s discretion.  Once admitted: 
“It is the commissioner's duty as the trier of fact to determine the credibility 
of the witnesses, weigh the evidence, and decide the facts in issue.” Arndt 
v. City of Le Claire, 728 N.W.2d 389, 394–95 (Iowa 2007). So the fight on 
factual matters and judgment calls is fought mainly before the agency—
not a court. See Sellers v. Emp't Appeal Bd., 531 N.W.2d 645, 646 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 1995). 
 
Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., 19 N.W.3d 710, at *3 (Iowa Ct. App. 2025) (2025 WL 52426) 
(unpublished decision). 
At the arbitration hearing, claimant offered evidence from a licensed occupational 
medicine physician as well as a licensed mental health counselor in support of her 
mental health injury claim.  Defendants did not object to the admission of this evidence 
at the time of trial.  Instead, they argue the agency cannot rely upon this undisputed 
evidence in rendering findings and conclusions pertaining to claimant’s mental health 
injury claim.  Particularly given the lack of an objection to their admissibility, I conclude 
the opinions of the occupational medicine physician as well as the licensed mental 
health counselor were appropriately admitted and considered.   
Ultimately, the credentials of the medical professional may help determine the 
weight that is given to the medical opinion.  In fact, the requirement to weigh expert 
opinions and “the determination of whether to accept or reject an expert opinion is within 
the ‘particular province’ of the commissioner.”  Cedar Rapids Community School Dist. v. 
Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011).  However, unrebutted expert medical 
evidence generally cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, 
Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-912 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
I perceive no error by the deputy commissioner’s admission of the opinions of an 
occupational medicine physician and licensed mental health counselor.  Their causation 
 
3 Again, defendants fail to provide a citation for the case, though asserting it is binding legal 
authority that should be determinative in this case.  The agency located an unpublished Iowa Court of 
Appeals case at Turner v. NCI Building Systems, 19 N.W.3d 710 (Iowa Ct. App. 2025) (2025 WL 52426).  
This case references mental health workers’ compensation claims and is assumed to be the legal 
authority defendants are referring to in their brief. 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
opinions were not rebutted in this evidence record and I find no error and concur with 
the acceptance of these unrebutted opinions.  Ultimately, I concur with the deputy 
commissioner’s conclusion that claimant proved a permanent aggravation of her 
underlying mental health condition, including the diagnosis of PTSD. 
Defendants further argue that only a psychiatrist or psychologist can render a 
causation opinion or permanent impairment under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  On page 22 of their brief, defendants assert that 
claimant must establish a permanent impairment rating pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(x).  By its specific language, Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) provides: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u,” or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association. 
Under the plain language of the statute, the mandatory use of the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, is only required if claimant does 
not qualify for industrial disability benefits.  In this case, claimant has been terminated 
by the employer.  Her earnings at the time of hearing are less than those at the time of 
her work injury.  Accordingly, claimant qualifies for an industrial disability award, and the 
provisions of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) are not applicable by its own specific terms.  
Second, even if a psychiatrist or psychologist is required to render a permanent 
impairment rating, the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, deal with the formulation and issuance of a permanent impairment rating, not 
causation issues.  Nothing in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) provides that opinions other 
than those from psychologists or psychiatrists are inadmissible or inappropriate on 
causation issues. 
Defendants also contend that the AMA Guides to Causation, Second Edition, 
mandates certain diagnostic tools and evidence be utilized.  Defendants offer no citation 
to authority that mandates the use of the AMA Guides to Causation, Second Edition.  In 
fact, no such legal mandate exists to make the AMA Guides to Causation, Second 
Edition, binding on this agency.  While that medical guide may be persuasive, any 
argument that it is binding is rejected. 
Finally, defendants urge on page 22 of their appeal brief, “Before the Claimant 
can obtain an award for her mental health condition, she must be found to have a 
functional impairment.”  Once again, defendants offer no precedent or authority for this 
bold assertion.  Defendants’ argument is, in fact, not supported by existing legal 
authority.   
On page 25 of their appeal brief, defendants argue: 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
 
In Clark v. Arconic, Inc., File No. 1655050.01 (App. Dec. June 1, 2024), 
the Commissioner rejected a psychological impairment rating that was not 
conducted in accordance with Chapter 14 by a qualified mental health 
provider. 
The citation provided by defendants does not exist.4  This agency has issued a 
case Clark v. Arconic, Inc., File No. 5061553.01 (Appeal June 2022).  Assuming this is 
the case being referenced by defendants, their assertion as to the holding of that case 
is inaccurate.  What this agency recognized in Clark is that the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition, do not provide a specific procedure or methodology to render a permanent 
impairment rating for mental health injuries.  The agency went through the various 
categories established by the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, and ultimately found that 
claimant sustained a permanent impairment.  However, to say that the agency rejected 
a psychological impairment rating that was not conducted in accordance with Chapter 
14 by a qualified mental health provider is a misinterpretation of that case.   
Ultimately, I reject defendants’ arguments on the mental health issues.  I concur 
with the deputy commissioner’s findings and conclusions.  I conclude that claimant 
sustained a permanent aggravation of her underlying mental health condition, including 
PTSD.   
Back and Neck Injury Claims 
On cross-appeal, claimant challenges the deputy’s findings and conclusions with 
respect to her back and neck injury claims.  I concur with the deputy commissioner’s 
analysis and adopt his findings and conclusions with respect to the alleged back and 
neck injury claims.  I specifically concur with the deputy commissioner’s finding that Dr. 
Moyse’s opinion is the most convincing and credible in this record with respect to the 
neck and back injury claims.  I concur that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof 
that she had a permanent injury to the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar spine as a result of 
the June 14, 2023 work injury.  I affirm the arbitration decision with respect to the back 
and neck injury claims. 
Extent of Permanent Disability 
As noted above, claimant qualified for an industrial disability award in this case 
because she was terminated by the employer.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  
Claimant has proven a mental health injury, which is clearly not contained within the list 
of scheduled injuries in Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  This type of injury is often referred 
to as an injury to the “body as a whole,” or an “unscheduled” injury.  Since claimant has 
an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability has been sustained.  
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 
591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
 
4 Defendants’ repeated failure to provide a citation with reference to cases or providing a citation 
that is inaccurate is troubling.  Counsel should ensure citations provided to this agency are accurate to 
enable efficient review of cases and avoid any potential to mislead this agency. 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961).  The number of 
years in the future it is reasonably anticipated that the claimant would work at the time 
of the injury is also a relevant industrial disability factor.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
The deputy commissioner evaluated and weighed the applicable industrial 
disability factors.  Considering all of the relevant industrial disability factors, I concur 
with the deputy commissioner’s 60 percent industrial disability award.  Although 
claimant has obtained subsequent employment and her wage loss may not be 60 
percent, she has permanent work restrictions, she has PTSD, and is not likely to return 
to her higher paying occupation.  The deputy commissioner had a chance to observe 
claimant and weigh the relevant industrial disability factors.  His analysis is appropriate 
and I affirm the 60 percent industrial disability award. 
Healing Period Benefits 
Claimant cross-appeals on the issue of healing period benefits.  Claimant 
requests an award of healing period benefits from March 1, 2024 through March 16, 
2024.  I concur with the deputy commissioner’s analysis of this issue on pages 10 and 
11 of the arbitration decision.  I conclude that claimant was disqualified from recovering 
healing period benefits during the claimed period as a result of her misconduct and the 
reason for her termination.  Claimant’s actions caused a serious security lapse at the 
Warren County jail that I conclude was tantamount to a refusal of suitable work.  
Reynolds v. Hy-Vee, Inc., File No. 5046203 (Appeal October 2017).  Therefore, I affirm 
the deputy commissioner on the healing period issue. 
Second Injury Fund Claim 
The final appellate issue is a challenge by claimant to the deputy commissioner’s 
conclusion that she failed to prove a first qualifying injury for purposes of the Second 
Injury Fund claim.  Claimant points out that Dr. Bansal offered a permanent impairment 
rating for her left knee, allegedly resulting from a motor vehicle accident in the 1980s.  
The deputy commissioner noted the evidence cited by claimant but also noted contrary 
evidence introduced by the Second Injury Fund.  I concur with the deputy 
commissioner’s weighing of the evidence and ultimate conclusions. 

RENAUD V. WARREN COUNTY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
 
I concur with the deputy’s analysis on pages 15 and 16 of the arbitration 
decision.  In addition, I note that Dr. Vinyard examined claimant’s left knee during his 
evaluation on July 19, 2023.  He noted that claimant had active, pain free range of 
motion in the left knee.  He did not note any other significant exam findings for 
claimant’s left knee.  While, admittedly, Dr. Vinyard’s examination was principally 
focused on the right knee, he is a specialist and he identified no abnormalities in the left 
knee in July 2023.  Ultimately, I concur with the deputy commissioner and conclude that 
claimant failed to prove a first qualifying injury.  I affirm the arbitration decision with 
respect to the Second Injury Fund claim. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
The May 21, 2025 arbitration decision is affirmed in its entirety. 
Defendants, employer and insurance carrier, shall bear the costs of appeal, 
including the cost of the hearing transcript. 
Signed and filed this __19th ___ day of December, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          INTERIM WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Randall Schueller   
(via WCES) 
Michael Roling 
 
(via WCES) 
Adrienne Williamson 
(via WCES) 
