Case Number: 22004297.01
Case Title:  SMITH, JEFFREY V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Smith Jeffrey-22004297.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
JEFFREY T. SMITH, 
No. 22004297.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC., 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
Headnotes: 1108, 1401, 1402.40, 1702,   
1703, 1803, 1806 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
Claimant Jeffrey Smith seeks workers’ compensation benefits from employer 
ABF Freight System, Inc. (ABF) and its workers’ compensation insurance carrier, ACE 
American Insurance Company (ACE). The undersigned presided over an arbitration 
hearing on February 3, 2025. Smith participated personally and through attorney 
Matthew J. Petrzelka. Both ABF and ACE participated by and through attorney Stephen 
W. Spencer. Mark Mirsch, ABF service manager, served as the employer representative 
during the hearing. 
II.  
ISSU ES  
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) Is Smith entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or healing period (HP) 
benefits for the following time periods: 
a) April 11, 2022, through July 1, 2022; and 
b) January 31, 2024 to present and continuing. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Aug-06  07:51:11     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 2 
 
2) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
stipulated injury? 
3) What is the commencement date for permanency benefits, if any are 
awarded? 
4) If Smith is entitled to workers’ compensation, what is the weekly rate? 
5) Are the defendants entitled to a credit? 
6) If the defendants are entitled to a credit, what is the amount? 
7) Is Smith entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical examination 
(IME)? 
8) Is Smith entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Smith and Arkansas 
Best at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Smith sustained an injury on April 6, 2022, which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with Arkansas Best. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Smith’s gross earnings were one thousand three hundred forty-eight 
and 53/100 dollars ($1,348.53) per week. 
b) Smith was married. 
c) Smith was entitled to two exemptions. 
5) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to Smith eleven (11) weeks of 
compensation at the rate of eight hundred ninety-one and 09/100 dollars 
($891.09) per week. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 3 
 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through M; and 
 Hearing testimony by Smith and his wife, Martha.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
A .  
C r e d i b i l i t y  
During Smith’s testimony at hearing, he was forthright and direct when answering 
questions. He did not attempt to evade questions; rather, he did his best to give 
responsive answers. The undersigned observed Smith’s demeanor during his hearing 
testimony and his eye movements and body language were in line with a witness 
providing honest and forthright testimony.  
Mirsch was service center manager at ABF at all times material to this case. In 
that role, Mirsch participated in aspects of the defendants’ handling of Smith’s workers’ 
compensation claim. During the hearing in this case, Mirsch served as the 
representative of ABF. In that role, Mirsch heard all of Smith’s testimony. The 
defendants elected not to have him or any other employee testify to rebut anything 
Smith said during his testimony. It is more likely than not that if Smith had given 
testimony the defendants felt was inaccurate regarding matters about which Mirsch had 
knowledge, they would have called Mirsch to provide rebuttal testimony. 
For the above reasons, the undersigned finds Smith’s hearing testimony to be 
credible. 
B . 
E d u c a t i o n &  W o r k  H i s t o r y  
Smith was 63 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hearing Transcript page 8) He 
graduated from high school but did not enroll in any postsecondary education or training 
programs. (Hr’g Tr. p. 8) Smith was a smoker for the 35 or 36 years before the date of 
hearing. (Hr’g Tr. p. 46)  
After graduating high school, Smith worked for Mid-Continent Bottlers for 16 
years in a production facility. (Hr’g Tr. p. 8) He worked in the warehouse, on the 
production line, and as a shuttle driver performing manual labor and driving duties. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 9) Smith worked throughout the plant with the exception of quality control. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 8) His employment there ended in 1996 when the company shut down the 
production part of the operation. (Hr’g Tr. p. 9) 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Smith’s second job was with Crouse Cartage Company as a city driver. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 10) The company then transferred him to a road driver hauling freight. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10) 
Smith worked there for about three years before the business closed. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10)  
Smith next found employment with AW Schmidt, another freight company. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 10) He worked there as a freight hauler for a little over two years. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10) 
AW Schmidt laid off Smith in 2001 as part of a reduction in force. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10)   
Smith applied for jobs at ABF and Roadway Corporation. (Hr’g Tr. p. 11) 
Roadway Corporation hired Smith as a road driver out of Rock Island, Illinois. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 11) He worked there for just under two years. (Hr’g Tr. p. 11) While Smith was on the 
road in Texas working for Roadway Corporation, ABF contacted him with a job offer. 
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 12) Smith interviewed with ABF upon his return to Iowa and the company 
hired him on August 16, 2004. (Hr’g Tr. p. 12) 
Smith started out with ABF as a city driver, working the dock, and picking up and 
delivering freight. (Hr’g Tr. p. 13) Then he worked for about a decade in the job of utility 
employee in which he would deliver freight to Tomah, Wisconsin as part of the 
company’s next-day or two-day freight service. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 12–14) In that position, 
Smith spent most of his time driving. (Hr’g Tr. p. 14) 
Smith learned the job from some of the best workers at the company. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
16) He considered himself a dedicated, reliable, and hard-working employee for ABF. 
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 16–17) Smith would put his skills up against anybody as far as driving. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 16) 
C . 
P r e - A p r i l  6 ,  2 0 2 2  I n j u r i e s  
Before the stipulated injury at the center of this case, Smith sustained multiple 
injuries arising out of and in the course of employment during his career. (Hr’g Tr. p. 16) 
The work injuries required him to undergo neck fusion surgery, two shoulder surgeries, 
a knee surgery, and three back surgeries. (Hr’g Tr. p. 16) The defendants included in 
defense exhibits the agency’s arbitration decision and November 3, 2016 agreement for 
settlement.  
1 .  
J a n u a r y  1 3 ,  2 0 0 5  I n j u r y  t o  R i g h t  S h o u l d er  &  N e c k  
o r  C e r v i c a l  S p i n e  
The defendants included as Exhibit K the agency arbitration decision in Smith v. 
ABF Freight System, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5027176, 2009 WL 
3382073 (Arb. Oct. 16, 2009). In that case, the parties stipulated that Smith sustained 
an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with ABF on January 13, 
2005, that caused him lost earning capacity. (Exhibit K, p. 116) Smith’s work injury was 
to the right shoulder and neck or cervical spine. (Ex. K, p. 117) There is no indication in 
the arbitration decision that the stipulated work injury affected his lumbar spine. (Ex. K, 
pp. 116–18) 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Dr. Neiman performed an IME of Smith arranged by claimant’s counsel. (Ex. K, 
p. 117) He assigned Smith a 27 percent permanent impairment rating. (Ex. K, p. 117) 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to find Dr. Neiman did so in 
accordance with the Guides or what share of that rating was attributable to the right 
shoulder or cervical spine. (Ex. K, p. 117) Dr. Neiman opined Smith “should avoid 
excessive flexion/extension and lateral flexion of the cervical spine.” (Ex. K, p. 117) 
There is no indication any doctor prescribed Smith any work restrictions stemming from 
the January 13, 2005 work injury that implicate his lumbar spine.  
The agency assigned Smith a 35 percent lost earning capacity based on the 
traditional industrial disability analysis while noting he “has not suffered much of a loss 
in his earnings from his work injury and ha[d] returned to work that appears to be 
suitable to his disability. He appears to be able to fully perform the job of truck driving 
and do some limited freight handling.” (Ex. K, p. 118) 
2 .  
M a r c h  2 2 ,  2 0 1 0  I n j u r y  t o  L e f t  S h o u l d e r &  L u m b a r  
S p i n e  
Most pertinent to the current case is the agreement for settlement the 
commissioner approved on November 3, 2016. (Ex. F, pp. 34–43) Smith and ABF 
stipulated that he sustained a work injury to his left shoulder and low back on March 22, 
2010. (Ex. F, p. 36) The parties included as an attachment to the agreement for 
settlement the September 4, 2015 IME report by Richard Neiman, M.D. (Ex. F, pp. 40–
43) 
Dr. Neiman recounted that Smith was working on a loading dock when a 400-
pound treadmill fell on him, causing him to twist his back, tear his rotator cuff, and tear 
his biceps tendon. (Ex. F, p. 40) All of these injuries required surgical intervention. (Ex. 
F, p. 40) Dr. Neiman describes the treatment of Smith’s lumbar back thusly: 
[H]e developed problems on the lower back. He had been seen by Dr. 
Loren Mouw. He tried the epidural injections and eventually had surgery 
around July 2010. He had a total of 3 surgeries as far as the lumbar spine 
and eventually underwent fusion at the L4-L5, I believe, around December 
13, 2013. He continues to have some pain in the lower back and 
weakness in the left leg. Right leg is normal. 
(Ex. F, p. 40) 
Dr. Neiman used Chapter 16 of the Fifth Edition of the American Medical 
Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides) to opine 
Smith sustained an eight percent permanent impairment to the whole body caused by 
the left shoulder injury. (Ex. F, p. 42) He also cited to Chapter 15 of the Guides in using 
the Diagnosis-Related Estimate (DRE) method to find Smith met the criteria to be 
placed in Category IV for the lumbar spine. (Ex. F, p. 42) He opined Smith sustained a 
21 percent impairment to the whole body caused by the work injury to his lumbar spine 
due in part to “moderate” back pain. (Ex. F, pp. 37, 42)  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 6 
 
The Guides identify the following alternative characteristics for an individual to be 
found in that category: 
Loss of motion segment integrity defined from flexion and extension 
radiographs as at least 4.5 mm of translation of one vertebra on another or 
angular motion greater than 15° at L1–2, L2–3, and L3–4, greater than 20° 
at L4–5, and greater than 25° at L5–S1 (Figure 15-3); may have complete 
or near complete loss of motion of a motion segment due to 
developmental fusion, or successful or unsuccessful attempt at surgical 
arthrodesis 
 
or 
 
fractures: (1) greater than 50% compression of one vertebral body without 
residual neurologic compromise 
Guides, Table 15-3. 
Dr. Neiman did not identify why he felt Smith met the criteria for DRE Category IV 
for his lumbar spine surgery. Dr. Neiman did not include any discussion of any fractures, 
radiographs, loss of motion of a motion segment due to developmental fusion, or 
surgical arthrodesis. (Ex. F, pp. 40–43) There is an insufficient basis in the record from 
which to conclude why Dr. Neiman opined Smith properly fit in DRE Category IV for his 
lumbar spine injury. Consequently, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from 
which to find that Dr. Neiman correctly applied the Guides when opining on the 
permanent impairment caused by Smith’s 2010 work injury to the lumbar spine. 
Dr. Neiman assigned Smith permanent work restrictions “against the use of the 
left arm above shoulder level, against lifting more than 50 pounds, and to avoid 
excessive flexion, extension and lateral flexion of the lumbar spine.” (Ex. F, pp. 37, 42) 
Dr. Neiman’s report links the left arm restriction to the shoulder injury and the lifting and 
excessive flexion, extension, and lateral flexion restrictions to the back injury. (Ex. F, p. 
42) Dr. Neiman opined, “Apparently, he can do his job quite nicely with these 
restrictions. He has learned how to manage his lifting. Prefers use of a lift or something 
similar.” (Ex. F, p. 42)  
The parties stipulated that the injury to Smith’s left shoulder and low back caused 
him to sustain a 10 percent loss of earning capacity. (Ex. F, p. 37) Agency precedent 
that pre-dates the parties’ 2016 settlement by a decade holds that, while possible, it is 
rare for a worker to sustain an industrial disability that is lower than the extent of 
permanent impairment. Ferch v. Oakview, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 
5010952, 2006 WL 1132924, *1–*2 (App. Apr. 13, 2006). Consequently, the fact that 
the parties agreed Smith sustained a 10 percent industrial disability—caused by injury 
to both the shoulder and lumbar spine—after Dr. Neiman opined Smith sustained a 21 
percent impairment to the lumbar spine alone further undermines the persuasiveness of 
his opinion on permanent impairment and weighs against finding that it was rendered in 
accordance with the Guides. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 7 
 
There is no description in the settlement documents of what percentage of the 
agreed upon lost earning capacity was caused by Smith’s shoulder injury or what share 
was due to his back injury. (Ex. F, pp. 36–43) The text of the parties’ agreement for 
settlement provides an insufficient basis from which to reach a finding with respect to 
what share of the 10 percent loss of earning capacity is attributed to Smith’s shoulder or 
back. The parties have offered no additional evidence on the question. 
Smith filed the petition initiating this case on November 20, 2023, before the Iowa 
Supreme Court issued its opinions in Loew v. Menard, Inc., 2 N.W.3d 880 (Iowa 2024), 
and P.M. Lattner Manufacturing Co. v. Rife, 2 N.W.3d 859 (Iowa 2024). The court 
issued its opinions in those cases on February 9, 2024, roughly 10 months before the 
deadline for exchanging exhibits, about 11 months before the proposed hearing report 
was initially due, almost a year before the February 3, 2025 hearing in this case, over a 
year before the deadline the undersigned gave the parties to submit an amended 
hearing report, and over a year before the deadline the undersigned set for post-hearing 
briefs.  It is more likely than not counsel for the parties knew or should have known of 
the courts’ opinions in these cases when litigating this case, preparing exhibits, 
completing the proposed hearing report, trying the case at hearing, and writing post-
hearing briefs.  
The record in this case contains no additional evidence regarding what part of 
the 10 percent industrial disability identified in the parties’ earlier agreement for 
settlement is apportioned to the lumbar spine injury. This is exacerbated by the fact that 
the parties chose not to address the issue in their post-hearing briefs. The lack of 
evidence and argument combine to create an insufficient basis for the agency to reach 
a factual finding on the question of what share of the 10 percent lost earning capacity 
identified in the parties’ 2016 agreement for settlement is attributable to Smith’s 2010 
work injury to the lumbar spine. To do so would require impermissible speculation. 
3 .  
A f t e r  R e a c h i n g M M I  F r o m  t h e  M a r c h  2 2 ,  2 0 1 0  
I n j u r i e s  &  B e f o r e  t h e  A p r i l  6 ,  2 0 2 2  I n j u r y  
a .  
O n g o i n g  S y m p t o m s  
After reaching MMI following the March 22, 2010 work injuries, Smith continued 
to experienced symptoms. Smith credibly testified that before the work injury of April 6, 
2022, “I wasn’t pain-free by any means, but I was able to perform my duties relatively—
both my duties at work and in my personal life. Was able to function pretty well.” (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 17) Smith experienced intermittent aching-type pain in his back that was moderate 
in nature and occasionally radiated down his left leg. (Ex. 2, p. 4; Ex. F, p. 22; Hr’g Tr. p. 
28) There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Smith 
experienced ongoing radiated pain in his right buttock or right lower extremity after 
reaching MMI from his March 22, 2010 work injuries. 
The evidence shows that after Smith reached MMI from his March 22, 2010 work 
injuries, he returned to work and performed his work duties without accommodation. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 16) Smith’s condition was stable for years. (Ex. 2, p. 4) Neither Smith’s 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 8 
 
activities of daily living nor his job duties caused him symptoms severe enough that he 
needed to seek medical care. His continuing symptoms did not cause him to request or 
receive additional care. Smith planned to work until age 66 or 67 in this stabilized 
condition. This was Smith’s baseline until the stipulated work injury on April 6, 2022. 
b .  
P e r m a n e n t  I m p a i r m e n t  &  D i s a b i l i t y  
The agency issued an arbitration decision in 2009 that found Smith sustained a 
35 percent loss of earning capacity due to work injuries he sustained to his right 
shoulder and cervical spine. The work restrictions the agency relied on were those 
assigned by Dr. Neiman of “avoid[ing] excessive flexion/extension and lateral flexion of 
the cervical spine.” (Ex. K, p. 117) There is no indication in the decision that Smith 
received any work restrictions for an injury to the lumbar spine. (Ex. K) And there is no 
medical evidence supporting the finding that a doctor assigned Smith permanent lifting 
restrictions necessitated by the injuries at issue in that case. (Ex. K) 
The parties entered into an agreement for settlement in the amount equal to 10 
percent industrial disability for Smith’s March 22, 2010 injuries to his left shoulder and 
lumbar spine. As detailed above, the evidence provides an insufficient basis from which 
to conclude Dr. Neiman evaluated Smith’s permanent impairment in accordance with 
the Guides or find what share of the agreed-upon industrial disability was caused by the 
back injury as opposed to the shoulder injury. Dr. Neiman assigned Smith work 
restrictions “against the use of the left arm above shoulder level, against lifting more 
than 50 pounds, and to avoid excessive flexion, extension and lateral flexion of the 
lumbar spine.” (Ex. F, pp. 37, 42) 
In the defendants’ answer to Interrogatory No. 15, they cite to the payment of 
PPD benefits equal to the amount of 46 percent industrial disability prior to the 
stipulated work injury. (Ex. I, p. 70) Smith knew or should have known that the 
defendants contend this is the amount of lost earning capacity for which they are 
claiming to have previously paid Smith in weekly workers’ compensation benefits. Smith 
has presented no contradictory evidence or argument against using this figure as the 
lost earning capacity he sustained from work injuries pre-dating the injury at the center 
of this case. Therefore, the weight of the evidence shows that the defendants paid 
Smith weekly PPD benefits equal to a 46 percent industrial disability and this is an 
accurate reflection of the lost earning capacity he sustained from work injuries pre-
dating the stipulated work injury in this case. 
The weekly PPD benefits the defendants paid to Smith for lost earning capacity 
caused by work injuries he sustained prior to the stipulated work injury giving rise to this 
case are for injuries to the whole body. Because the disability is to the whole body, it is 
paid out of 500 weeks under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). Multiplying 46 percent by 
500 equals 230 weeks. The evidence shows it is more likely than not the defendants 
paid to Smith 230 weeks in PPD benefits for the lost earning capacity caused by work 
injuries pre-dating the stipulated work injury in this case.  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 9 
 
D . 
A p r i l  6 ,  2 0 2 2  W o r k  I n j u r y  
On April 6, 2022, Smith was working for ABF delivering pallets of bagged 
concrete to a customer in Iowa City. (Hr’g Tr. p. 17) The weight was skewed, making it 
inaccurate. (Hr’g Tr. p. 17) This meant the pallets he was hauling were overweight. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 17) The pallets on which the concrete sat were also relatively low to the ground, 
which meant a pallet jack would not fit underneath them—only the forks of a forklift. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 19) 
Smith was required to load and unload his truck at the time because of the shift 
he was working. (Hr’g Tr. p. 18) In this instance, Smith had to move six pallets of 
concrete from another truck to his. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 17–19) The pallets had been loaded into 
the nose of the trailer, which is the end closest to the cab, likely because of their heavy 
weight. (Hr’g Tr. p. 18)   
Smith attempted to use a forklift graded to lift up to 4,000 pounds to move the 
pallets of concrete. (Hr’g Tr. p. 17) When Smith attempted to pick up a pallet of 
concrete, it lifted up the back end of the forklift he was using because the pallet weighed 
at least 4,500 pounds. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 17, 18) This displeased Smith, who went to report 
the situation to Mirsch, the service center manager, and Andy Sullivan, safety director. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 18)  
Typically, Mirsch would accompany Smith in situations such as this and attempt 
to help find a solution but he did not do so on this occasion because of what he and 
Sullivan were working on. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 18–19) This left Smith to deal with the situation 
alone. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19) Smith was able to put each of the pallets onto a standard-sized 
pallet and then use a pallet jack to move them. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19) He loaded all six onto his 
trailer. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19) Because the customer to which Smith was delivering the concrete 
was not his first stop, he loaded the pallets in fairly deep into the trailer so that they 
would not block the product he was delivering earlier on his route. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19) 
Smith arrived at the customer’s facility to deliver the pallets of concrete. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 19) The customer had a forklift but no delivery dock. (Hr’g Tr. p. 19) Smith had to 
move the pallets to the tail of his trailer using a pallet jack that was not rated for the 
weight of the pallets of concrete. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 19–20) Smith testified, “Getting it off the 
ground, it was kind of half dragging, half up, and I . . . pulled it back and twisted around 
to get it turned around, and I felt my back pop.” (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) Smith felt pain after the 
pop. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) Because the pop and pain were in his low back, Smith feared he 
had broken the fusion loose from his 2013 surgery. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20)  
After Smith completed the delivery, he telephoned Mirsch and told him what 
happened. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) Mirsch asked Smith if he needed to come in or if he could 
finish his deliveries. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) Smith finished his deliveries. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) He also 
worked as scheduled the next two days with Mirsch checking in regularly on how he 
was feeling. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20)  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 10 
 
Smith decided to take the weekend to see if ice and rest improved his symptoms. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 21) By Sunday, he knew he needed to see a doctor. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 21–22) 
Smith informed Mirsch, who notified Gallagher Bassett, the third-party administrator of 
ABF’s workers’ compensation claims at the time. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 22, 24)  
E . 
C a r e  f o r  t h e  A p r i l  6 ,  2 0 2 2  W o r k  I n j u r y  
An adjuster contacted Smith to interview him about the stipulated work injury and 
directed him to go to the emergency room (ER) at St. Luke’s on Monday despite Mirsch 
having made him an appointment at Work Well for the following Wednesday, which was 
the earliest available time. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 22–25) Smith did as instructed. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 22–
25) At the ER, Ryan Dowden, M.D., noted: 
The patient states that this past Wednesday he was moving concrete 
pallets which was when the back pain started. He states that the pain has 
been lingering. The patient states that the back pain starts at the lumbar 
spine and “shoots” down the bilateral buttocks. The patient states that he 
has experienced sciatica prior to this incident. He states that he is more 
comfortable sitting up and the pain worsens with standing or movement. 
The patient states that he has biofreeze and that it helps with the pain. 
The patient reports a past history of lumbar decompression and fusion. 
(Ex. 3, p. 15) 
On examination, Dr. Dowden noted “some slight tenderness midline lumbar on 
palpation but no other gross abnormality no ecchymosis erythema soft tissue swelling.” 
(Ex. 3, p. 17) He opined, “Patient appears to have lumbar strain now he has some static 
pain which may suggest some radiculopathy and nerve root impingement.” (Ex. 3, p. 18) 
Dr. Dowden recommended conservative care and prescribed Percocet and Robaxin. 
(Ex. 3, pp. 18–19) 
Cindy Hanawalt, M.D., saw Smith at Work Well on April 13, 2025, and noted he 
presented the day prior with complaints of “pain shooting into bilateral buttocks without 
any other red flags” and that: 
He reports his pain is the same and reports significant amount of 
frustration with the process for being treated for his back pain. He also 
shares that he and his case manager discussed getting a repeat MRI 
given his complicated back history. He has had 3 back surgeries and 
reports intermittent low back pain with left sciatic symptoms on occasion. 
He reports maneuvering very heavy concrete with this injury he now has 
pain going down his right buttocks. He denies being treated for back pain 
since his back surgery. He reports he is able to manage with rest and 
Biofreeze. Physical therapy has been helpful in the past. He reports prior 
to surgery he had epidurals that were not effective. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 11 
 
Pain is worse with[ ]standing bending and leaning forward but is also 
present with sitting and disruptive to sleep. He tried ice, heat and 
Biofreeze. He has not taken any anti-inflammatories or Tylenol for this 
injury. He denies any kidney problems, abnormal bleeding[,] bruising or GI 
distress with NSAID use. Pain is rated 8/10 described as sharp, burning 
with spasms. He denies leg weakness or numbness or tingling in legs or 
feet. He drove to the clinic today. 
(Ex. 3, p. 22)  
On examination of Smith’s spine, Dr. Hanawalt observed in pertinent part: 
Loss of lumbar curvature, paraspinal tightness mid thoracic down to the 
lower lumbar area. Discomfort SI joints as well as into his sciatic notch. 
Forward flexion limited by pain hands just to his lower thighs. Limited 
extension rotation due to pain and stiffness. With encouragement he can 
stand on his toes, had increased pain with heel walking. Seated straight 
leg raise caused tension posterior hamstrings bilaterally. Declined supine 
testing. Lower extremity strength weakness left leg compared to the right 
4+/5 most notable in left hip flexion. Sensation sharp and dull intact lower 
extremities. Lower extremities no edema. 
(Ex. 3, p. 23) Her assessment was that Smith had, “Acute on chronic low back pain with 
new right-sided radiculopathy. Left lower extremity weakness. History and exam 
corroborate a specific work-related injury.” (Ex. 3, p. 23) 
Dr. Hanawalt ordered magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lumbar spine to 
help assess his low-back pain. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 23, 25; Ex. 3, p. 23) She prescribed 
Robaxin to help with Smith’s muscle spasms at night, anti-inflammatories, and Toradol. 
(Ex. 3, p. 23) Dr. Hanawalt also ordered physical therapy (PT). (Ex. 3, pp. 23, 25) She 
assigned the following work restrictions: 
 Sedentary work only, primarily sitting; 
 No bending, twisting, or lifting;  
 No driving a commercial motor vehicle; and 
 Inform his supervisor “if he cannot safely perform his essential job functions.” 
(Ex. 3, pp. 23–24) 
After the MRI, Dr. Hanawalt referred Smith to Dr. Chad Abernathey, one of the 
surgeons who had performed his earlier spinal fusion. (Hr’g Tr. p. 25) Dr. Abernathey 
interpreted the MRI to show that Smith’s fusion remained intact, felt surgery was not 
needed, and referred him back to Dr. Hanawalt. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 25–26) Dr. Hanawalt 
prescribed physical therapy. (Hr’g Tr. p. 26) ABF arranged for PT at Performance 
Therapies, P.C., in Cedar Rapids. (Ex. C, p. 21) 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Smith’s first evaluation at Performance Therapies was on April 22, 2022. (Ex. C, 
p. 21) The parties did not include medical records from this appointment in its exhibits 
and the parties did not submit joint exhibits. Other Performance Therapies records 
included in the exhibits show that in physical therapy, Smith worked on stretching and 
strengthening to reduce the pain in his low back that occasionally radiated into his left 
leg. (Hr’g Tr. p. 26) Smith attended physical therapy throughout his time off work. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 26) 
Smith underwent an MRI of his lumbar spine on April 29, 2022. (Ex. D, pp. 32–
33; Hr’g Tr. p. 26) Scott Truhlar, M.D., interpreted the MRI, without comparison, to 
show: 
1. Postoperative and degenerative changes without significant evidence 
of acute injury. The mild T2 signal between the L4/5 pedicle screws 
bilaterally could I suppose represent some kind of acute injury but 
simply cannot be well characterized on this exam. 
2. Mild degenerative central canal stenosis at L3/4. 
(Ex. D, pp. 32–33)  
On May 3, 2022, Smith returned to see Dr. Hanawalt, who noted he was 
“frustrated as he is not feeling any better; continued pain in his lower lumbar area with 
tightness/stiffness along his paraspinal regions with continued pain radiating down his 
left leg as well as into his right buttocks with left lower extremity weakness.” (Ex. 3, p. 
26) He reported: 
 PT and heat helped to relieve the tightness in his low back but neither lasted 
very long; 
 He was off work because ABF could not accommodate his restrictions; 
 He tried to walk around his cul-de-sac daily; 
 Bending forward and standing at the sink caused increased pain and 
discomfort in his back and leg; and 
 Pain caused him to wake from sleep. (Ex. 3, p. 26)  
Dr. Hanawalt documented the results of the MRI and that there was a “[q]uestion 
of acute injury L4-L5 but difficult to discern due to artifact.” (Ex. 3, p. 26) On 
examination, she noted his gait was stiff, antalgic, that he leaned forward, and had no 
foot drop. (Ex. 3, p. 26) Under assessment, Dr. Hanawalt diagnosed, “Acute on chronic 
low back pain with new right-sided radiculopathy and progressive [left lower extremity] 
weakness.” (Ex. 3, p. 26) She found her examination “concerning with progressive left 
lower extremity weakness” and that the question of whether the MRI showed a new 
acute injury merited referral to a neurosurgeon. (Ex. 3, p. 27) Dr. Hanawalt continued 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 13 
 
PT and assigned work restrictions of sedentary work only, no commercial motor vehicle 
driving, and to sit and walk as needed for comfort. (Ex. 3, pp. 27–28) 
Smith next saw Dr. Hanawalt on June 9, 2022.1 (Ex. 3, pp. 29–31) Dr. Hanawalt 
noted Smith had seen Dr. Abernathey and that, “Aggressive neurosurgical treatment 
deferred due to paucity of clinical or radiographic findings.” (Ex. 3, p. 29) Dr. Abernathey 
found Smith’s “neural elements are well decompressed.” (Ex. 3, p. 29) Smith was 
relieved by the news. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 25–26; Ex. 3, p. 29) 
Smith reported that he had been attending PT and was “doing much better.” (Ex. 
3, p. 29) His radicular symptoms had improved even though he still occasionally had 
“some pain in his left side.” (Ex. 3, p. 29) Smith’s ability to get up and walk was better, 
he was sleeping better, and his lower extremity strength was improved. (Ex. 3, p. 29) He 
rated his pain level as “4/10 primarily across the low back worse with bending and 
lifting; described as sharp to tight.” (Ex. 3, p. 29) Smith denied new concerns or 
reinjuries. (Ex. 3, p. 29) He had not yet returned to work because ABF could not 
accommodate his work restrictions. (Ex. 3, p. 29) 
Dr. Hanawalt noted on examination, “tightness with TTP bilateral lumbar 
paraspinals, no palpable spasm. Forward flexion fingertips to mid shin, mild discomfort 
and extension. SLR negative. Lower extremity strength continues to be asymmetrical 
but improved knee flexion to nearly symmetrical. Calves nontender to palpation no 
edema. Sensation LE intact.” (Ex. 3, p. 29) Dr. Hanawalt released Smith to return to 
work within the restrictions of no lifting more than 10 pounds; no driving a commercial 
motor vehicle; no repetitive bending, twisting, climbing, crawling, kneeling, or squatting; 
and sit, standing, walk as needed for comfort. (Ex. 3, p. 30) Dr. Hanawalt opined that 
she anticipated Smith being able to return to work without restrictions in two weeks. (Ex. 
3, p. 30) 
On June 20, 2022, Smith reported to Blake Tiedtke, P.T., that he was feeling 
better because the pain in his right glute region had gone away. (Ex. C, p. 21) But he 
also shared that he still had tingling and discomfort on the left side. (Ex. C, p. 21) 
Despite Smith’s ongoing symptoms, he felt he would be able to return to work. (Ex. C, p. 
21) Smith identified his functional limitations at the time as walking, carrying, moving, 
and handling objections, and maintaining a body position such as remaining seated or 
standing. (Ex. C, p. 21) Sitting, standing, and walking aggravated his symptoms. (Ex. C, 
p. 21) Tiedtke noted that Smith had attended and complied with PT, was showing 
improvement, and would benefit from two sessions per week as he returned to work. 
(Ex. C, p. 23) 
Smith returned to PT on June 23, 2022, and reported he was “feeling pretty 
good.” (Ex. C, p. 26) He hoped to be released to return to work by Dr. Hanawalt in the 
                                                 
1 The records for this appointment from Work Well contain the date May 3, 2022, but the records 
reference events that occurred after that date. (Ex. 3, pp. 29–30) Moreover, Dr. Hanawalt’s signature is 
dated June 9, 2022, as is the Patient Status Report summarizing the work restrictions and treatment from 
the appointment. (Ex. 3, pp. 29–31) The evidence establishes that his appointment occurred on June 9, 
2022, and the date on the first page of the record is incorrect.  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 14 
 
near future. (Ex. C, p. 26) Smith’s functional limitations and aggravating activities 
remained the same as on June 20. (Ex. C, pp. 21, 26)  
Smith also followed up with Dr. Hanawalt on June 23, 2022. (Ex. 3, p. 32) Dr. 
Hanawalt noted: 
He reports he has been doing well with physical therapy continuing to 
meet goals. He feels ready to go back to full duty, he would like 1 more 
session with his physical therapist and then return 6/27/2022. He has not 
been working as his company cannot accommodate light duty. He reports 
the pain in his left leg is more intermittent and more towards his baseline. 
He denies any pain going down his right leg. He has been applying ice. He 
has not needed to take anything for pain. He denies any new complaints 
or reinjuries. He describes a tightness in his back particularly with bending 
and first thing in the morning, he did not provide a pain rating. 
(Ex. 3, p 32) 
Dr. Hanawalt released Smith to return to work without any restrictions on June 
27, 2022. (Ex. 3, p. 32) She ordered him to continue PT for the four-week transition after 
that date. (Ex. 3, p. 32) Dr. Hanawalt opined that MMI was “anticipated by July 28, 
2022.” (Ex. 3, p. 32) She noted that Smith “agreed to schedule a follow-up appointment 
if he is not back to baseline.” (Ex. 3, p. 32) There is no indication in the record that 
Smith attempted to schedule a follow-up appointment with Dr. Hanawalt. 
Smith continued physical therapy after he returned to work. (Hr’g Tr. p. 26) At 
Smith’s June 30, 2022 PT appointment, he reported that he had returned to work. (Ex. 
C, p. 27) He further shared that, as a result, he was experiencing “some stiffness,” as 
he would expect, “but nothing too bad.” (Ex. C, p. 27) His functional limitations and 
aggravating activities remained the same. (Ex. C, pp. 21, 26, 27) 
On July 20, 2022, Smith had a PT session at Performance Therapies. (Ex. C, p. 
29) Smith reported he had been “feeling pretty good, no new complaints.” (Ex. C, p. 29) 
His functional limitations and aggravating activities remained the same. (Ex. C, pp. 21, 
26, 27, 29) 
Smith had another PT appointment on July 28, 2022. (Ex. C, p. 30) There are no 
additional records from PT at Performance Therapies in the record. (Ex. C) Smith 
testified he continued PT for “several weeks” after Dr. Hanawalt released him to return 
to work. (Hr’g Tr. p. 26) He estimated that he stopped PT at the “end of August, maybe.” 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 26) Given Smith’s testimony identifying an approximate end date and the 
fact that the last PT record in evidence is from his July 28, 2022 session, it is more likely 
than not that the July 28, 2022 PT session was his last. 
At Smith’s July 28, 2022 PT session, he reported feeling “pretty good” with no 
increased pain. (Ex. C, p. 30) Smith further shared that he “had some soreness with 
work getting back to using the pallet jack and things [he hadn’t] done for a while.” (Ex. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 15 
 
C, p. 30) He described soreness of the type he would have expected, which was not 
painful. (Ex. C, p. 30) Smith’s functional limitations and aggravating activities remained 
the same with the following activities negatively impacted by the stipulated work injury: 
 Maintaining the body positions of sitting and standing; 
 Walking; and 
 Working. 
(Ex. C, pp. 21, 26, 27, 29, 30)  
According to the record from Smith’s July 28, 2022 PT session, he had met the 
following goals of PT: 
 Compliant with home exercise program to supplement PT treatments; 
 Tolerate a progressive mobility and standing program without aggravation of 
symptoms; and 
 Have 5/5 strength or greater with all lower extremity manual muscle testing. 
(Ex. C, p. 30) 
But Smith had not accomplished other goals of PT. He was 90% toward meeting 
the goal of “be[ing] able to walk and perform transfers without limitation from back/leg 
pain.” (Ex. C, p. 30) Smith was 75% of the way to “be[ing] able to sleep without waking 
due to back and glute pain.” (Ex. C, p. 30) And he was 50% toward completing the goal 
of “be[ing] able to return to work without limitations from back pain or sciatic pain.” (Ex. 
C, p. 30) 
The defendants argue in their post-hearing brief that Smith telling his physical 
therapist that he had “no new complaints” and was “feeling pretty good” establishes that 
he had returned to his pre-injury baseline. To reach such a finding, the undersigned 
would have to ignore the other portions of those records documenting his functional 
limitations and aggravating activities as well as his ongoing symptoms, which were 
worse than before the stipulated work injury.  
On August 24, 2022, Smith saw Todd Butler, M.D., his personal physician for his 
annual physical examination. (Ex. B, pp. 14–20) Dr. Butler noted that Smith stated he 
felt well and denied new medical issues. (Ex. B, p. 17) Dr. Butler also recorded that 
Smith “has some chronic low back pain” and that he did not have sciatica. (Ex. B, p. 18) 
Dr. Butler opined Smith’s back pain “appears to be stable.” (Ex. B, p. 18)  
The defendants argue that Dr. Butler’s notes are “[m]ost telling” in this case. (Def. 
Brief p. 3) But the undersigned rejects the contention that Dr. Butler’s notes should be 
given the most weight. Dr. Butler was not an authorized physician providing Smith care 
for the work injury. Smith sustained multiple work injuries during his career and his 
testimony reflects that he had a full understanding of the fact that under Iowa law, the 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 16 
 
employer has the right to direct care for a work injury. In the undersigned’s experience, 
this dynamic leads injured employees to provide more detail about complaints relating 
to a work injury to the providers the employer has authorized to provide care for the 
work injury and less details about complaints relating to a work injury to providers not 
authorized to care for it. And the evidence in this case shows that Smith provided more 
details about complaints relating to the stipulated work injury during appointments from 
authorized providers such as Performance Therapies than Dr. Butler, whose 
examination was more far ranging because it was a comprehensive physical.  
Moreover, Dr. Butler’s notes are generally in line with Smith’s symptoms as 
reflected in the records from his PT sessions—except for his complaints of pain 
radiating into his buttocks and leg. When considered together, the medical records in 
evidence show Smith has consistently described his buttock and leg pain as intermittent 
and worsened by certain activities. The fact that Dr. Butler’s notes from his physical do 
not document such pain at the time establish it is more likely than not Smith was not 
experiencing those intermittent symptoms at the time of the appointment. 
After Smith completed physical therapy, ABF offered him no additional care for 
the stipulated injury. (Hr’g Tr. p. 28) Smith did not request any additional care until late 
2022, when he saw commercials for therapies at InMotion Pain Solutions, a chiropractic 
clinic in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 28–29, 41) Smith and his wife performed 
additional research and were satisfied that people with ongoing pain similar to him had 
received benefit from the treatment. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 28–29, 42) 
In January 2023, Smith approached Mirsch and asked how he could get care 
from InMotion through workers’ compensation for the ongoing symptoms he has from 
the stipulated injury. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29) Mirsch contacted Gallagher Bassett to inquire about 
authorization for the care. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29) Instead of processing the request under 
Smith’s existing claim, Gallagher Bassett required Smith to set up a new claim without 
explanation. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29) Mirsch helped Smith do so in his office. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 29–30)  
On August 25, 2023, Smith returned to Dr. Butler for his annual physical. (Ex. B, 
pp. 8–13) Dr. Butler notes that Smith reported “he feels well overall.” (Ex. B, p. 12) Dr. 
Butler also records that Smith “has chronic low back pain and has lumbar disc 
degeneration.” (Ex. B, p. 12) There is no note in the records from the exam referencing 
buttock or leg pain. (Ex. B, pp. 8–13) Among the progress notes, Dr. Butler documents, 
“Chronic low back pain without sciatica, unspecified back pain laterally.” (Ex. B, p. 13) 
Smith diligently followed up with Mirsch about getting additional care to manage 
his ongoing pain. (Hr’g Tr. p. 34) Smith credibly described the frequency of his inquiries 
to Mirsch as “constant” during hearing testimony. (Hr’g Tr. p. 34) But Gallagher Bassett 
did not authorize Smith to receive care from InMotion or another provider to manage his 
continuing pain. (Hr’g Tr. p. 30) Instead, Gallagher Bassett arranged an appointment 
with Dr. Abernathey. (Hr’g Tr. p. 30)  
At the appointment, Dr. Abernathey responded to Smith’s complaints of ongoing 
pain by stating that his expertise was in neurosurgery and not pain management. (Hr’g 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Tr. pp. 30–31) Dr. Abernathey further stated that this meant he could not refer Smith to 
InMotion even if he had more information for the treatments the clinic offers. (Hr’g Tr. 
pp. 30–31) In response to correspondence from Gallagher Bassett, Dr. Abernathey 
wrote a letter dated September 23, 2023, stating: 
Frankly, I do not have any opinion on the question of laser treatment by a 
chiropractor. I do not have any experience with this type of treatment and 
am unaware of any clinical trials that have documented specific 
improvement with this option. 
The patient does not require any neurosurgical intervention, which is my 
expertise. Conservative management options available through other 
providers such as his chiropractor are reasonable. 
(Ex. A, p. 1) 
In a letter dated September 29, 2023, defense counsel sent Dr. Abernathey a 
letter with questions regarding Smith’s condition and care for it. (Ex. A, pp. 2–3) In 
response, Dr. Abernathey included his opinions in a letter dated October 16, 2023: 
1. As I previously mentioned, I am unaware of any clinical trials that would 
support the use of a laser treatment for chronic back pain. Therefore, I cannot 
advocate for that procedure. 
 
2. The patient’s current complaints are causally connected to his work injury by 
oral history provided by the patient. There is no objective evidence, only 
subjective complaints. 
(Ex. A, p. 4) 
Dr. Abernathey referred Smith to the ABF company doctor, Dr. Bingham. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 31) But Dr. Bingham refused to see Smith because he had been referred to a 
specialist, Dr. Abernathey, despite the fact that Dr. Abernathey had referred Smith to 
him. (Hr’g Tr. p. 31) Ultimately, in November of 2023, Gallagher Bassett informed Smith 
that if he wished to pursue care at InMotion, he would have to pay for it himself because 
the company would not do so. (Hr’g Tr. p. 31) 
Smith received no additional care for his ongoing symptoms. (Hr’g. Tr. p. 31) 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude he notified ABF of his 
dissatisfaction with care between the appointment with Dr. Abernathey and his 
retirement. As of the hearing date, Smith had not filed a petition concerning application 
for alternate care with the agency under Iowa Code § 85.27 and Iowa Administrative 
Code rule 876—4.48 seeking additional care for the ongoing symptoms caused by the 
stipulated injury. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 18 
 
F .  
M a r c h  7 ,  2 0 2 4  O p i n i o n  b y  D r.  A b e r n a t h e y  
It is rare for the evidence in a contested case proceeding before the agency to be 
devoid of medical records from examinations of an authorized treating physician. That 
makes this case unique with respect to the appointments the defendants arranged with 
Dr. Abernathey after the stipulated work injury. There is evidence that Smith saw Dr. 
Abernathey, but there are no medical records regarding their meetings. The lack of 
medical records memorializing the goings-on at the appointments makes it impossible 
to identify the actions Dr. Abernathey took when he saw Smith. Did Dr. Abernathey 
perform an examination, any testing, any measurements, or obtain an in-person oral 
history? If so, on what dates? None of this information is in the record.  
Consequently, there is no indication in the documentary evidence regarding Dr. 
Abernathey’s opinions in this case that he performed an in-person history or 
examination of Smith after his October 16, 2023 letter and before his March 7, 2024 
letter. (Ex. A, pp. 1–7) It is more likely than not the defendants would have included any 
documentation memorializing such an examination if it had occurred. The weight of the 
evidence establishes that Dr. Abernathey did not perform an in-person history or 
evaluation of Smith between October 16, 2023, and March 7, 2024. 
The lack of documentary and testimonial evidence regarding what Dr. 
Abernathey’s appointments with Smith consisted of deprives the record of the 
information necessary to make findings on what information Dr. Abernathey based his 
opinions in this case and how he obtained such information. There is an insufficient 
basis in the record from which to find that Dr. Abernathey had an accurate or up-to-date 
understanding of Smith’s medical history, physical ability based on an in-person 
examination, or symptoms based on an in-person history when he authored his opinion 
letter of March 7, 2024. This reduces the credibility of his opinions. 
Moreover, there is no indication in the record that Dr. Abernathey reviewed the 
arbitration decision in Smith v. ABF Freight System, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r 
No. 5027176, 2009 WL 3382073 (Arb. Oct. 16, 2009), the 2015 IME report by Dr. 
Neiman, the 2016 agreement for settlement between the parties regarding Smith’s 
March 22, 2010 work injuries to his shoulder and lumbar spine, medical records from 
Smith’s PT for the stipulated work injury on or before March 7, 2024, or an updated 
medical history from Smith. Therefore, the evidence provides an insufficient basis from 
which to find it is more likely than not that Dr. Abernathey based the opinions contained 
in his March 7, 2024 letter to defense counsel in part on those documents or Smith’s up-
to-date symptoms. As a result, the evidence establishes that Dr. Abernathey rendered 
the opinions in his March 7, 2024 letter on an incomplete understanding of Smith’s 
medical history and functional limitations.  
On March 7, 2024, defense counsel sent via facsimile to Dr. Abernathey a letter 
with a series of questions. Considering the questions one by one illustrates the 
credibility problems that stem from Dr. Abernathey’s incomplete understanding of 
Smith’s medical history. Defense counsel’s first question to Dr. Abernathey is: 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 19 
 
The work incident described to you by Mr. Smith having occurred in April 
of 2022 involved using a palletjack [sic] and moving a pallet of material on 
a trailer. Do you think the work incident did any material aggravation of Mr. 
Smith’s preexisting underlying low back condition? If not, why not? 
(Ex. A, p. 6)  
The question is problematic because it misstates the causation standard under 
Iowa workers’ compensation law. Under Iowa law, a worker is not entitled to workers’ 
compensation for a pre-existing condition, but the mere existence of that condition at 
the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense to liability under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (Iowa 1962). If the work injury aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or lighted 
up a worker’s pre-existing condition, the worker is entitled to recover for the resultant 
disability. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, (Iowa 2000); Rose v. John Deere 
Ottumwa Works, 76 N.W.2d 756, 761 (Iowa 1956); Hanson v. Dickinson, 176 N.W. 823, 
824–25 (Iowa 1920). “For workers' compensation purposes a cause is proximate if it is a 
cause; it need not be the only cause.” Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 
420 (Iowa 1994).  
By using the term “material aggravation,” the question artificially reduces the 
scope of the causation standard. There is no indication in the record that Dr. 
Abernathey knew the causation standard as articulated by the Iowa Supreme Court that 
has governed Iowa workers’ compensation cases for decades when he wrote his March 
7, 2024 opinion letter. Answering the question from defense counsel as written hurts the 
persuasiveness of his opinion. 
The question also contains material misrepresentations of fact. As detailed 
above, Smith did not injure his back moving “a pallet of material on a trailer.” Smith 
sustained his back injury using a pallet jack to load six pallets of concrete weighing at 
least 4,500 pounds from one trailer to another and then unloading them from his trailer 
at the customer’s business, which did not have a loading dock. Dr. Abernathey 
accepting the false premise without correcting it in his answer shows by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he did not recall the circumstances of the stipulated 
work injury with sufficient detail to allow him to reject the false premise of defense 
counsel’s question. This fact, combined with the evidence showing it is more likely than 
not Dr. Abernathey did not conduct a records review before answering the question, 
significantly undermines the credibility of his opinion.  
In Dr. Abernathey’s letter of October 16, 2023, he answered the causation 
question, “The patient’s current complaints are causally connected to his work injury by 
oral history provided by the patient. There is no objective evidence, only subjective 
complaints.” (Ex. A, p. 4) In Dr. Abernathey’s letter of March 7, 2024, he stated, “No, 
there are no objective changes on his imaging studies or clinical presentation.” (Ex. A, 
p. 5) Dr. Abernathey does not provide any explanation for his choice to not consider 
Smith’s subjective complaints when opining on causation. Nor does he explain why his 
opinion on causation changed despite there being no evidence in the record that he 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 20 
 
considered any information to which he did not have access previously. The fact that Dr. 
Abernathey issued two conflicting opinions on causation—without explaining his 
rationale for flip-flopping—significantly undermines his credibility in this case. 
Dr. Abernathey does not define “objective changes” for purposes of his opinion in 
either of his letters. (Ex. A, pp. 4–5) In the undersigned’s experience presiding over 
workers’ compensation cases, the term means evidence that so clearly depicts physical 
damage to the body that there is no other reasonable conclusion that can be drawn 
other than the diagnosis of one specific injury. For example, the X-rays of Washington 
quarterback Joe Theismann’s right leg after he was sacked and carted off the field 
during his team’s game against the New York Giants on November 18, 1985, likely 
showed changes in the form of a fractured tibia and fibula that were so clear no 
reasonable doctor would have failed to diagnose the fractures.  
Evidence that shows objective change to a body part is a high bar to clear. Many 
injuries do not produce such easy-to-identify physical changes to an individual’s body. 
Iowa workers’ compensation law does not require imaging that shows objective 
changes to the injured employee’s body. Applying such a standard here would be a 
radical change to our system of administrative justice under the IWCA with no basis 
under the statute or precedential caselaw for doing so. The petitioner in a contested 
case proceeding before the agency does not shoulder a burden of proof higher than a 
county attorney prosecuting an alleged crime in district court and it would be legal error 
to hold that such a burden applies to Smith in this case. 
Dr. Abernathey’s statement that there is no imaging in this case that shows 
“objective changes” to Smith’s lumbar spine is accurate. But his reasoning in his March 
7, 2024 letter that the lack of such evidence proves that no physical change occurred is 
flawed—a fact he seems to recognize in his 2023 opinion letter, when he states there is 
no evidence of “objective changes” but nonetheless finds causation exists because of 
Smith’s subjective complaints. Basing one’s opinion solely on imaging and requiring 
“objective changes” viewable on such precludes consideration of other evidence. It also 
discounts imaging such as Smith’s MRI that are not clear enough to show that there is 
no injury. Neither Dr. Truhlar nor Dr. Hanawalt could not rule out structural damage 
when they reviewed Smith’s MRI of the lumbar spine, so Dr. Hanawalt referred him to 
Dr. Abernathey for his interpretation. (Ex. 3, pp. 27, 29, 32, 35–36) Dr. Abernathey then 
applied his “no objective changes” test to rule out the need for neurosurgical 
intervention.  
Requiring imaging that shows objective changes to the spine is an 
understandable standard for performing major surgery because of the risks inherent in 
such a procedure. But the question of whether neurosurgical intervention is needed is a 
far different one than whether an individual sustained an injury that is causing new and 
worse symptoms. And in Dr. Abernathey’s March 7, 2024 opinion, he conflates them.  
Smith is not seeking authorization of neurosurgery in this case. In fact, the 
evidence in this case overwhelmingly establishes the opposite—Smith does not want to 
undergo another back surgery and was relieved when Dr. Abernathey opined it was 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 21 
 
unnecessary. Applying the standard used for determining whether neurosurgery is 
appropriate care for an injury to the question of whether it is more likely than not an 
injury worsened Smith’s ongoing pain undermines the persuasiveness of Dr. 
Abernathey’s opinion. 
For these reasons, Dr. Abernathey’s causation opinion is rejected. 
 
In defense counsel’s March 7, 2024 letter, he next asks Dr. Abernathey, “Do you 
have an opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether the work 
incident of April 2022 caused Mr. Smith any new permanent impairment pursuant to the 
AMA Guides Fifth Edition over and above what Mr. Smith already had prior to Apri[]l 
2022?” (Ex. A, p. 6) Dr. Abernathey answered in his letter dated the same day, “I do not 
believe that the patient has any new permanent impairment related to the work incident 
of April 2022.” (Ex. A, p. 5) 
There is no reference to the Guides in Dr. Abernathey’s March 7, 2024 letter in 
which he opines on the question of permanent impairment. (Ex. A, p. 5) There is an 
insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude what, if any, chapter(s), 
section(s), table(s), or figure(s) in the Guides he may have used when formulating his 
opinion on the question of permanent impairment. Consequently, it is more likely than 
not that Dr. Abernathey did not use the Guides when rendering his opinion on 
permanent impairment in this case. 
The Guides direct a physician evaluating permanent impairment to perform an in-
person history and evaluation. See Guides, ch. 1, 2. Chapter 15 provides specific 
instruction on how to determine the extent of permanent impairment of the lumbar 
spine. Because the evidence does not support the finding that Dr. Abernathey 
performed an in-person history or evaluation or that he relied on Chapter 15 of the 
Guides when rendering his opinion on permanent impairment, there is an insufficient 
basis in the evidence from which to conclude that Dr. Abernathey evaluated Smith’s 
permanent impairment in accordance with the Guides, as required by Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(x), which means the undersigned must reject his opinion as 
unpersuasive.  
Defense counsel asked Dr. Abernathey whether Smith needed permanent work 
restrictions because of the stipulated work injury. (Ex. A, p. 6) In response, Dr. 
Abernathey wrote, “I do not believe the patient has any new restrictions related to the 
April 2022 work incident.” (Ex. A, p. 6) He further noted that he saw “no contraindication 
to active employment” and noted, “When I saw the patient in 2023, he was working full 
duty.” (Ex. A, p. 6)  
In doing so, Dr. Abernathey evaded the question. Dr. Abernathey did not address 
whether Smith needed work restrictions because of the stipulated work injury. Instead, 
he recounted his recollection on whether Smith had been prescribed permanent work 
restrictions and was working full duty without accommodation. Dr. Abernathey’s evasive 
non-answer is of little probative value on the question of permanent work restrictions. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 22 
 
 Defense counsel also asked Dr. Abernathey whether Smith was “capable of 
performing his normal truck driving job as [he] understood it.” (Ex. A, p. 6) There is no 
basis in the record from which to find that Dr. Abernathey reviewed Smith’s job 
description, discussed his job duties with him, or reviewed other documentation that 
might inform him about the physical demands of Smith’s job at ABF. The evidence is 
insufficient to find it is more likely than not that Dr. Abernathey had an accurate 
understanding of Smith’s job duties at ABF when he authored his March 7, 2024 opinion 
letter. 
Dr. Abernathey opined, “I see no contraindication to a truck driving job from a 
clinical, anatomic, or neurosurgical standpoint.” (Ex. A, p. 5) He did not elaborate as to 
why. (Ex. A, p. 5) The lack of detail regarding the basis for Dr. Abernathey’s opinion 
leaves only a conclusory assertion. This makes Dr. Abernathey’s opinion unpersuasive.  
G .  
M a y  2 9 ,  2 0 0 4  I M E  b y  M a r k  Ta y l o r,  M . D .  
After Dr. Abernathey opined in a letter to defense counsel dated March 7, 2024, 
that Smith had sustained no permanent impairment from the stipulated work injury, 
claimant’s counsel arranged for Smith to undergo an IME by Dr. Taylor on May 29, 
2024. (Ex. 2, p. 3) The IME included a records review, job analysis, oral history, in-
person examination, and report. (Ex. 2) The records review consisted of 67 pages from 
UnityPoint – Hiawatha, Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa, Cedar Neurological Surgeons, 
defense counsel’s law firm, Retiree Data Form, and Resignation Letter. (Ex. 2, p. 10)  
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Dr. Taylor 
reviewed Dr. Neiman’s 2015 IME report as there is no reference in Dr. Taylor’s IME 
report to him as the report author or his clinic at the time, Neurological Associates of 
Iowa City, P.C. (Ex. 2) The defendants contend that Dr. Taylor’s failure to review Dr. 
Neiman’s 2015 IME report is fatal to the credibility of his opinions. This assertion is 
unavailing because the Guides state in pertinent part: 
Although a previous evaluator may have considered a medical impairment 
to be permanent, unanticipated changes may occur: the condition may 
have become worse as a result of aggravation or clinical progression, or it 
may have improved. The physician should assess the current state of the 
impairment according to the criteria in the Guides. If an individual received 
an impairment rating from an earlier edition and needs to be reevaluated 
because of a change in the medical condition, the individual is evaluated 
according to the latest information pertaining to the condition in the current 
edition of the Guides. 
Guides, § 2.5h.  
The evidence establishes that it is more likely than not that Dr. Taylor “assess[ed] 
the current state of the impairment according to the criteria in the Guides.” Id. Moreover, 
the Guides state, “Valid assessment of a change in the impairment estimate would 
depend on the reliability of the previous estimate and the evidence upon which it was 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 23 
 
based.” Id. As found above, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to 
conclude Dr. Neiman’s previous estimate of permanent impairment to the lumbar spine 
was rendered in accordance with the Guides, which makes his opinion unreliable. This 
makes Dr. Taylor’s failure to consider Dr. Neiman’s 2015 impairment estimation of little 
consequence on the question of persuasiveness in this case. 
The Guides direct a physician to obtain the medical history directly from the 
individual who the physician is evaluating for permanent impairment. They expressly 
advise that secondhand information—like that found in medical records—should not be 
the primary source for the history. The totality of the evidence shows it is more likely 
than not that Dr. Taylor obtained an accurate history from Smith and records review.  
Dr. Taylor provided in his report an accurate recitation of Smith’s symptoms: 
Mr. Smith endorsed constant low back pain that varies in severity. The 
pain reaches 7–8/10 daily, depending on his activities. He described a 
burning-type pain across the lower back. Prior to the injury, his pain was 
intermittent and was typically 2–3/10. Presently, in addition to the burning 
pain across the lower back, he described pain that radiates into the right 
buttock, and pain that radiates down the posterior aspect of his left leg into 
the hamstring, and occasionally the ankle. The leg pain is intermittent 
compared to the lower back pain. The leg pain occurs in “waves,” but can 
persist at times. When the leg pain occurs, his leg feels weak. He can 
control his bowel and bladder function. 
(Ex. 2, pp. 5–6) 
The defendants argue in their post-hearing brief that Dr. Taylor “did not opine 
that the permanency rating he assigned was causally connected to the work incident of 
April 2022.” (Def. Brief, p. 6 (citing Ex. 2, p. 7)) But the page of Dr. Taylor’s IME report 
to which the brief cites in support of this claim covers social history and the physical 
examination. (Ex. 2, p. 7) On the next page, Dr. Taylor addresses the question of 
causation and opines: 
Given the history, and the currently available medical records, it is my 
opinion that Mr. Smith’s April 2022 incident at work represented a 
substantial contributing factor[] to his current lower back pain and left 
lower extremity symptoms. There was a change in his baseline consistent 
with an aggravation. In other words, Mr. Smith has a new baseline with 
higher pain levels as well as symptoms associated with the left lower 
extremity. 
(Ex. 2, p. 8) The undersigned finds Dr. Taylor’s reasoning persuasive against the 
backdrop of the documentary and testimonial evidence in this case. 
Dr. Taylor used the Guides to evaluate Smith’s permanent impairment thusly: 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 24 
 
Upon review of the instructions on pages 379–380, it is noted that the 
Range of Motion Methodology is utilized in several situations, including a 
recurrent injury in the same spinal region as a prior injury. Mr. Smith 
sustained two prior injuries and underwent a total of three prior surgeries. 
Therefore, with a new injury in the same spinal region, the Range of 
Motion Methodology would apply in this circumstance. 
This method begins in Table 15-7, on page 404. For his current injury, it is 
my opinion that he falls within Category II(C). He did not undergo surgery, 
but has remained symptomatic. This is a baseline rating of 7%. The range 
of motion values are then plugged into the appropriate Tables. Table 15-8, 
on page 407, pertains to lumbar flexion and extension. His sacral flexion 
angle was more than 45⁰, and his true lumbar flexion angle was 35⁰. 
Therefore, he falls between Categories, and I recommend 3%. Extension 
was 20⁰, and is assigned 2%. Table 15-9, on page 409, is utilized for 
lateral flexion, or lateral bending. Both sides were approximately 25⁰, 
which results in no additional impairment. Therefore, for the range of 
motion impairment, the 3% due to flexion is added to the 2% related to 
extension, resulting in 5%. 
The 7% from Table 15-7 is combined with the 5% related to range of 
motion, and results in 12% whole person impairment (as per the 
Combined Values Chart on page 604). 
(Ex. 2, p. 9)  
The weight of the evidence shows Dr. Taylor opined that Smith’s ongoing 
symptoms were caused by the stipulated work injury. He further stated in the report that 
the fact that the stipulated work injury was Smith’s second to the lumbar spine required 
use of the ROM method under the Guides. The weight of the evidence shows it is more 
likely than not that the evaluation of permanent impairment to the lumbar spine by Dr. 
Taylor was causally connected to the stipulated work injury because he used the ROM 
method in accordance with the Guides, which direct a physician to do just that for a 
subsequent injury to the same part of the spine. 
Further, as found above, the evidence is insufficient to a finding that Dr. 
Neiman’s 2015 impairment rating was valid under the Guides because there is 
insufficient explanation for him placing Smith at DRE Category IV under Table 15-3. But 
even assuming arguendo that Dr. Neiman’s impairment rating is valid under the Guides, 
his use of the DRE method makes it discrete from that of Dr. Taylor, which uses the 
ROM method as directed by the Guides for a subsequent injury to the same part of the 
spine. Dr. Neiman’s rating is based on the criteria for DRE Lumbar Category IV in Table 
15-3, which does not include the criteria in Table 15-7 for Category (II)(C) or ROM 
measurements.  
Comparing Dr. Neiman’s impairment rating using the DRE method to Dr. Taylor’s 
using the ROM method is comparing apples to oranges. By following the Guides’ 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 25 
 
directive to use the ROM method for Smith’s subsequent lumbar spine injury, he 
avoided any redundancy with Dr. Neiman’s Lumbar Spine DRE Category IV rating—
however questionable its foundation in the Guides may be. The permanent impairment 
Dr. Taylor found to Smith’s lumbar spine using the ROM method is new and additional 
to any previous impairment rating using the DRE method. 
 
 On the question of permanent work restrictions, Dr. Taylor opined: 
Mr. Smith retired in January 2024. Considering his chronic lower back pain 
and left lower extremity pain and paresthesias, I would recommend that he 
avoid heavy lifting, such as no more than 30 to 35 pounds on an 
occasional basis. Most lifting should preferentially occur as close to waist 
level as possible, or at least between knee and chest level. He should 
alternate sitting, standing, and walking as needed for comfort. He can 
climb stairs and stepladders on an occasional basis. He can travel 
occasionally to frequently but should be allowed to stop and get out of the 
vehicle to stretch and move around whenever needed. Should he undergo 
further treatment, then the restrictions may need to be reassessed. 
(Ex. 2, p. 9) The undersigned finds that Dr. Taylor’s permanent work restrictions most 
closely reflect the aggravating factors Smith has credibly described during the litigation 
of this case. They are therefore adopted. 
 
Dr. Taylor issued an invoice in the amount of $2,900.00 for the IME he performed 
of Smith. (Ex. 1, p. 2) He sent the invoice to claimant’s counsel, who paid the full 
amount. Claimant’s counsel sent a copy of the billing statement for the IME enclosed 
with a June 19, 2024 letter requesting reimbursement. (Ex. 1, p. 2) The defendants did 
not reimburse claimant’s counsel for the cost of Dr. Taylor’s IME before the hearing 
date. (Hr’g Rpt. § 8; Cl. Brief, p. 9)  
H . 
B e n e f i t s  P a i d  B e f o r e  H e a r i n g  
The evidence shows Smith was off work because of the stipulated injury from 
April 11, 2022, through June 26, 2022. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 24–26) There is no indication in the 
record that Smith missed work after he returned to work, either because of the work 
injury or the continuing symptoms it caused.  Since Smith’s return to work, no doctor 
has opined that he cannot work because of the stipulated injury. (Hr’g Tr. p. 50) Smith’s 
answer to Interrogatory No. 22 states, “Claimant believes that all healing period benefits 
have been paid as of the date of answering these interrogatories.” (Ex. G, p. 62) 
ABF paid Smith temporary total disability (TTD) benefits for each of the 11 weeks 
he was off work from April 11, 2022, through June 26, 2022, at the rate of $891.09 per 
week. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 26–27; Ex. I, p. 70; Hr’g Rpt. § 9) The record establishes ABF paid 
Smith a total of $9,801.99 in TTD benefits between the stipulated injury date and the 
date of hearing. There is no indication in the record that ABF paid Smith any weekly 
workers’ compensation in addition to these TTD benefits during a period of temporary 
disability, healing period, or for permanent impairment or disability. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 26 
 
I .  
P r o g r e s s i on  o f  S y m p t o m s  
In the defendants’ post-hearing brief, the defendants contend Smith sustained 
nothing more than a temporary injury with symptoms that ultimately subsided, leaving 
him back at the “baseline” he was at before the stipulated work injury and after three 
prior back injuries. (Def. Brief, p. 1) The defendants attack Smith’s credibility by 
describing his testimony as the “subjective” description of pain and “self-serving.” (Def. 
Brief, pp. 1–2 ) They contend that the hearing testimony by Smith and Martha should be 
dismissed as a “host of hyperbole.” (Def. Brief, p. 2) The defendants then quote select 
portions of Smith’s medical records to support their argument.  
There is no indication in the evidence that Smith sought care for ongoing back 
pain between the date of the parties’ agreement for settlement and April 6, 2022. Smith 
testified at hearing that he went to Mirsch “constantly” and requested care to manage 
his ongoing pain. Mirsch and defense counsel listened to this testimony and the 
defendants did not call Mirsch to provide rebuttal testimony. The weight of the evidence 
establishes that Smith experienced pain after Dr. Hanawalt released him to return to 
work that was worse than the “moderate” pain, as documented in Dr. Nieman’s 
September 5, 2015 report, of such severity that he frequently requested additional care 
from ABF in the hopes that it would lessen.  
The defendants put weight in the medical record from Smith’s final appointment 
with Dr. Hanawalt, which notes Smith agreed to follow up if he did not return to baseline. 
(Def. Brief, p. 5) They argue that Smith’s failure to follow up with Dr. Hanawalt shows 
that he returned to baseline. (Def. Brief, p. 5) But reaching such a conclusion requires 
ignoring the employer’s right to direct care under Iowa workers’ compensation law, 
Smith honoring this right by reporting his ongoing symptoms to Mirsch and requesting 
the defendants authorize additional care, the defendants arranging for an appointment 
with Dr. Abernathey instead of Dr. Hanawalt, and Dr. Abernathey referring Smith to Dr. 
Bingham, not Dr. Hanawalt. Moreover, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from 
which to conclude that the defendants arranged for Smith to follow up with Dr. Hanawalt 
after he reported his ongoing symptoms and requested additional care to treat them. 
These facts do not support the defendants’ contention that Smith’s failure to 
follow up with Dr. Hanawalt shows he returned to baseline. Rather, they establish that 
the defendants did not authorize Smith to follow up with Dr. Hanawalt or arrange for 
such an appointment despite Smith’s request for additional care to treat the ongoing 
symptoms caused by the stipulated work injury. It would be illogical to hold the 
defendants’ choices while controlling Smith’s care for symptoms caused by the 
stipulated work injury against him. 
Further, the defendants do not discuss the records from Smith’s PT sessions, 
which are discussed in greater detail above. There is no reference in the defendants’ 
brief to the activities identified as limited or aggravating in those records. Nor do the 
defendants discuss Smith’s progress toward his PT goals as described in those records. 
Therefore, the defendants do not attempt to reconcile their contention that Smith 
returned to his pre-April 6, 2022 baseline with the fact that the most recent PT medical 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 27 
 
record, dated July 28, 2022, shows Smith’s functional limitations and aggravating 
activities identified after the stipulated work injury remained the same: 
 Maintaining the body positions of sitting and standing; 
 Walking; and 
 Working. 
(Ex. C, pp. 21, 26, 27, 29, 30) And there is no discussion in the defendants’ brief of that 
same medical record showing Smith had not met the goals identified at the start of PT 
of “be[ing] able to walk and perform transfers without limitation from back/leg pain,” 
“be[ing] able to sleep without waking due to back and glute pain,” or “be[ing] able to 
return to work without limitations from back pain or sciatic pain.” (Ex. C, p. 30) 
Dr. Hanawalt released Smith to return to unaccommodated work on June 27, 
2022. After Smith’s return to work for ABF, he performed all of his job duties without 
accommodation until he retired. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 27, 32, 46) Smith never turned down a 
request from ABF for him to work overtime. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 47–48) In doing so, Smith 
worked through ongoing symptoms that certain job duties aggravated or worsened to a 
greater extent than what he experienced before the April 6, 2022 work injury. (Ex. 2, p. 
6; Hr’g Tr. pp. 28, 36) 
The weight of the evidence in this case establishes a material worsening of 
Smith’s symptoms from the baseline he experienced after reaching MMI following the 
March 22, 2010 work injuries to his shoulder and lumbar spine and the stipulated work 
injury of April 6, 2022. Before the injury at the center of this case, Smith’s baseline 
symptoms included intermittent moderate low-back pain at the level two or three out of 
ten with intermittent pain radiating into his left leg. (Ex. 2, pp. 5–6) After the injury in this 
case, he has constant burning pain across his low back that reaches seven or eight out 
of ten on a daily basis, depending on his activities, that is accompanied by radiating 
pain into his right buttock and left lower extremity that is intermittent, occurs in waves, 
can persist at times, and weakens his leg. (Ex. 2, pp. 5–6; Hr’g Tr. pp. 28, 26) 
The symptoms have affected Smith’s ability to perform activities of daily living. 
Sitting in a car while traveling aggravates his symptoms. (Hr’g Tr. p. 36) So does too 
much walking. (Hr’g Tr. p. 36) His primary activity is visiting his mother to spend time 
with her and make sure she has taken her medications properly. (Hr’g Tr. p. 37) The 
ongoing pain that is made worse by certain activities of daily living and work functions. 
(Ex. 2, pp. 5–6; Ex. C, pp. 21, 26, 27, 29, 30; Hr’g Tr. pp. 36–37) 
J .  
R e t i r e m e n t  
Smith takes pride in the training he received from other workers and his ability to 
perform his job well. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 16–17) Even though the CBA between the Teamsters 
and ABF gave Smith the right, because of his seniority, to refuse to work overtime 
hours, he never did so, and credibly testified on his mindset, “Not everybody was as 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 28 
 
dedicated as I was as far as getting the job done. And I don’t know what question you’re 
going to have for Mark, but I think he’ll tell you same the thing, that I never said no. If he 
needed something, I did it.” (Hr’g Tr. pp. 47–48) 
Smith returned to work after every work injury he sustained with ABF and 
performed all of his job duties. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 16, 27) The evidence overwhelmingly 
establishes that Smith believes strongly in being an employee ABF could depend on to 
work when needed and perform his job duties well. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 16–17, 47–48) Smith 
was highly motivated to work. 
Smith was a member of the Teamsters labor union during his employment with 
Crouse Cartage, QC Schmidt, Roadway Corporation, and ABF. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 11, 14) He 
credibly testified that it was his goal to get to full retirement in order to maximize his 
benefits under the Teamsters’ Central States pension. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 14–15) The longer 
Smith worked, the greater his pension benefit would be. (Hr’g Tr. p. 15)  
As a result, Smith planned to work until at least age 66. (Hr’g Tr. p. 15) He 
planned to work to age 66 and then assess whether he wanted to continue to work to 
further maximize his pension benefit. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 15–16) If Smith had retired at age 66 
instead of age 62, he would have received approximately $1,700 or $1,800 more per 
month from his pension. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 33–34) 
The Teamsters agreed to a new collective bargaining agreement (CBA) near the 
end of Smith’s employment with ABF that provided additional financial incentive for him 
to keep working. Under the terms of the new CBA, Smith received what he credibly 
described during his hearing testimony as “a substantial raise” of $5.00 per hour in year 
one. (Hr’g Tr. p. 47) Smith credibly testified the increase in pay under the new CBA 
“was quite the initiative to try to keep going” in his employment with ABF. (Hr’g Tr. p. 47) 
The evidence establishes Smith had substantial financial self-interest to continue 
working for ABF after turning 62 years of age. He received a significant raise in his 
hourly rate of pay under the new CBA. And continuing to work until age 66 would have 
allowed him to receive pension payments of about $1,700 or $1,800 more per month, 
which works out to around $20,400 or $21,600 more in such payments per year. The 
overwhelming evidence in this case establishes that retiring at age 62 was against 
Smith’s pecuniary interests in the short, medium, and long term. 
Smith retired at age 62 from ABF effective January 31, 2024, when he felt he 
was still in his prime as a worker. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 32–33, 36) Smith credibly testified that a 
motivating factor in his decision to retire at age 62 was his continuing symptoms caused 
by the stipulated work injury and exacerbated by his job duties. The evidence 
establishes it is more likely than not Smith would have worked until at least age 66 but 
for the stipulated work injury and the symptoms it caused. The ongoing pain resulting 
from the work injury in his back, buttocks, and leg was so excruciating that it caused him 
to retire at age 62 despite doing so being against his financial self-interest and in conflict 
with his plan to retire at age 66 or 67 in order to maximize his pension benefits. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 29 
 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
The parties stipulated that Smith sustained the work injury from which this case 
stems on April 6, 2022. The editions of the Iowa Code and Iowa Administrative Code in 
effect at the time of the work injury govern in cases before the commissioner. See Stiles 
v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5064673, 2020 WL 6037539 
*2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). Therefore, the 2022 editions of the Iowa Code and Iowa 
Administrative Code govern in this case.2 See Iowa Code (2022), Vol. I, p. iii (“This 
2022 Iowa Code includes all enactments with a January 1, 2022, or earlier effective 
date from the 2021 Regular and Extraordinary Sessions of the Eighty-ninth Iowa 
General Assembly and includes enactments from prior sessions that were effective on 
or before that date.”).3 No legislation enacted after January 1, 2022, which took effect 
on or before the stipulated injury date, applies to this case. 
A .  
C a u s a t i o n  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act (IWCA) “covers any and all personal 
injuries” relating to an employee’s work. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 
823, 824 (1920). Under section 85.3(1), an employer covered by the Act must “provide, 
secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment.” The legislature has codified a partial definition of “personal injury” in 
section 85.61(4) that is not applicable in the current case. Rather, the expanded 
definition of “personal injury” as articulated by the Iowa Supreme Court in its seminal 
Almquist v. Shenandoah Nurseries, Inc. governs: 
“an injury to the body, the impairment of health, or a disease, not excluded 
by the act, which comes about, not through the natural building up and 
tearing down of the human body, but because of a traumatic or other hurt 
or damage to the health or body of an employee.... The injury to the 
human body here contemplated must be something, whether an accident 
or not, that acts extraneously to the natural processes of nature, and 
thereby impairs the health, overcomes, injures, interrupts, or destroys 
some function of the body, or otherwise damages or injures a part or all of 
the body.”  
Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 850–51 (Iowa 1995) (quoting 
Almquist, 218 Iowa 724, 732, 254 N.W. 35, 39 (1934)) (citations omitted in Dunlavey). 
                                                 
2 The legislature enacted a bill that reorganized state government and transferred Iowa Code 
chapter 86 to Iowa Code sections 10A.303 through 10A.333, which took effect on July 1, 2023. 2023 Iowa 
Acts ch. 19, § 1477. The stipulated work injury at the center of this case occurred on April 6, 2022, before 
the effective date of this legislation. Therefore, Iowa Code chapter 86 (2022) governs in this case. All 
citations in this decision are to chapter 86, not 10A. 
3 Available online: https://www.legis.iowa.gov/law/iowaCode?year=2022 (last viewed July 31, 
2025). 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 30 
 
“In order for an injury to be compensable in Iowa, there must be ‘a connection 
between the injury and the work.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 
2007) (quoting Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 221 (Iowa 2006)). To recover, a 
claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury for which the 
claimant is seeking workers’ compensation arose: 
1) Out of the claimant’s employment; and 
 
2) In the course of the claimant’s employment. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 
143, 150 (Iowa 1996)); see also Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 
(Iowa 1996).  
“‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an 
injury to be deemed compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this 
case, the parties dispute only whether the injury arose out of employment. 
“An injury ‘arises out of’ employment if there is a causal connection between the 
employment and the injury.” Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 652 (citing Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 
N.W.2d 334, 338 (Iowa 1998)). “‘In other words, the injury must not have coincidentally 
occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to the working 
environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174. (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311).  
Taking the words themselves, one is first struck by the fact that in the 
“arising” phrase the function of the employment is passive while in the 
“caused by” phrase it is active. When one speaks of an event “arising out 
of employment,” the initiative, the moving force, is something other than 
the employment; the employment is thought of more as a condition out of 
which the event arises than as the force producing the event in affirmative 
fashion. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. 
Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law (2005) § 3.06, at 3-7 to 3-8 (emphasis in 
original)). 
“[S]ubject to ‘limited exceptions,’” the Iowa Supreme Court has “‘abandoned’ or 
‘discarded’ the increased-risk test in favor of the actual-risk test” when determining 
whether an employee’s injury arises out of employment under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 85–86 (Iowa 2018) (quoting 
Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 177, n.7). The actual risk rule holds: 
If the nature of the employment exposes the employee to the risk of such 
an injury, the employee suffers an accidental injury arising out of and 
during the course of the employment. And it makes no difference that the 
risk was common to the general public on the day of injury. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 31 
 
Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting Hanson v. Reichelt, 452 N.W.2d 164, 168 (Iowa 
1990)).  
An expert opinion on causation may not be considered in isolation; rather, it must 
be considered along with all other evidence bearing upon the causal connection 
between the injury and the disability. See Schujter v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 
N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010); see also Nellis v. Quealy, 237 Iowa 507, 512, 21 N.W. 
584, 586 (Iowa 1946). Moreover, the Iowa Supreme Court has long held that an injured 
worker’s credible testimony regarding the onset of symptoms “must be given 
considerable weight on the issue of causal connection.” Hinrichs v. Davenport 
Locomotive Works, 203 Iowa 1395, 214 N.W. 585, 586 (Iowa 1927).  
Under the IWCA, a worker is not entitled to workers’ compensation for a pre-
existing condition, but the mere existence of that condition at the time of a subsequent 
injury is not a defense to liability under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Nicks v. 
Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 812, 815 (Iowa 1962). If the 
work injury aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or lighted up a worker’s pre-existing 
condition, the worker is entitled to recover for the resultant disability. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, (Iowa 2000); Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 76 N.W.2d 
756, 761 (Iowa 1956); Hanson v. Dickinson, 176 N.W. 823, 824–25 (Iowa 1920). “If the 
employment of claimant resulted in a personal injury aggravating her already impaired 
physical condition, she is entitled to compensation to the extent of that injury.” Nicks, 
254 Iowa at 135,115 N.W.2d at 815. “For workers' compensation purposes a cause is 
proximate if it is a cause; it need not be the only cause.” Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 
525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  
As found above, Dr. Abernathey authored two conflicting opinions on causation. 
They are not credible. Dr. Taylor’s opinion on causation is more persuasive and is 
adopted. Smith has met his burden of proof on causation. The weight of the evidence 
establishes that the stipulated work injury caused Smith to sustain new and additional 
permanent impairment and disability. 
B . 
R a t e  
The parties stipulated Smith’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date were 
one thousand three hundred forty-eight and 53/100 dollars ($1,348.53) per week. They 
also stipulated he was married and entitled to two exemptions at the time of injury. 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—8.9, based on the parties’ stipulations and 
the applicable Ratebook Spreadsheet issued by the agency, Smith’s workers’ 
compensation rate is eight hundred sixty-three and 28/100 dollars ($863.28) per week. 
C . 
P e r m a n e n cy  B e n e f i t s  
The question of Smith’s entitlement to permanency benefits hinges on how 
section 85.34(2)(v) governs in this case. While there is no dispute that Smith returned to 
work with ABF at the same or greater earnings as at the time of the stipulated work 
injury, the parties disagree on the effect of his retirement between reaching MMI after 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 32 
 
the stipulated work injury and the date of hearing in this case. The defendants argue 
that he is limited to permanency benefits based solely on functional impairment because 
of his return to work at higher earnings regardless of what happened between then and 
the hearing. Smith contends he is entitled to PPD benefits based on the extent of lost 
earning capacity using the industrial disability framework because his employment with 
ABF ended before the hearing date. 
The undersigned recognizes that the Iowa Supreme Court has granted further 
review in Den Hartog Industries v. Dungan, No. 23-1402, 2025 WL 52449 (Iowa Ct. 
App. Jan. 9, 2025), a case in which the scope of the 2017 amendments to what is now 
codified at section 85.34(2)(v) is at issue. Even though this case is centered on the 
effect of Smith’s retirement before the hearing because of ongoing symptoms caused by 
the work injury, the Iowa Supreme Court’s holding in Dungan could impact his 
entitlement to permanency benefits under the IWCA. 
1 .  
S t a t u t o r y  I n t e r p r e t a t i o n  
Under Iowa’s constitutional system of ordered liberty, the legislative branch has 
the power to enact laws. Iowa Const. Art. III, §§ 1, 15, 17. When exercising this 
constitutional power, the legislature may create an executive branch agency with 
exclusive jurisdiction to decide disputes. See Hunter v. Colfax Consol. Coal Co., 175 
Iowa 245, 154 N.W. 1037 (1915). If the legislature does so, an agency’s authority is 
strictly limited to those powers expressly articulated in the statutory text. See Iowa Code 
§§ 17A.19(10); 17A.23(3); see also Renda v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 784 N.W.2d 8, 
15 n. 3 (Iowa 2010).  
The general assembly has not empowered the agency to interpret Iowa’s 
workers’ compensation statutes. Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 N.W.3d 714, 
719 (Iowa 2024). But the lack of express statutory authority does not mean the agency 
never interprets provisions of our workers’ compensation statutes. “Those who apply the 
rule to particular cases must of necessity expound and interpret that rule.” Marbury v. 
Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 177 (1803).  
The legislature has vested the commissioner with exclusive jurisdiction to hear 
and decide disputes under Iowa Code chapters 85, 85A, and 85B, as well as Iowa Code 
chapter 10A, subchapter III. Iowa Code § 85.20. As the tribunal with exclusive 
jurisdiction to decide disputes under our workers’ compensation statutes, the agency 
necessarily must interpret those statutes when performing its duty. See Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518-19 (Iowa 2012); see also Iowa Ins. Inst. v. Core 
Group of Iowa Ass'n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 68 (Iowa 2015); Martinez v. Pavlich, 
Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5063900, 2020 WL 5412838, *4 (App., Jul. 30, 
2020). “Thus, while appellate courts have the final say, statutory interpretation by this 
agency is a necessary inevitability.” Martinez, 2020 WL 5412838, *4. 
“Words have meaning,” the late Justice Antonin Scalia remarked in a magazine 
interview. Jennifer Senior, In Conversation With Antonin Scalia, New York Mag. (Oct. 4, 
2013). As simple as it is profound, this truism forms the bedrock of our democratic 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 33 
 
tradition. When crafting legislation, elected representatives choose words because of 
their meaning and the consensus necessary for passage the chosen language creates. 
See New Prime Inc. v. Oliveira, 586 U.S. 105, 120–21, 139 S.Ct. 532, 543 (2019). The 
same rationale informs the choice to exclude other words. See Campuzano v. Iowa 
Dist. Ct. for Polk Co., 940 N.W.2d 431, 437 (Iowa 2020). “[O]nly the text of a piece of 
legislation is enacted into law.” Doe v. State, 943 N.W.2d 608, 610 (Iowa 2020). 
The words our general assembly codified are therefore of “paramount 
importance” when considering the meaning of a statute. Bribriesco-Ledger v. Klipsch, 
957 N.W.2d 646, 650 (Iowa 2021). If the parties dispute the meaning of a statute, the 
first step in the interpretation process is to “consider the plain meaning of the relevant 
language, read in the context of the entire statute, to determine whether there is 
ambiguity.” State v. Doe, 903 N.W.2d 347, 351 (Iowa 2017). Can reasonable minds 
disagree as to the text’s meaning? Carreras v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., Motor Vehicle 
Div., 977 N.W.2d 438, 446 (Iowa 2022). If not, the analysis ends. See Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Strable, 14 N.W.3d 742, 748 (Iowa 2024); see also Doe, 943 N.W.2d at 
610. If so, it continues under Iowa Code chapter 4 and traditional canons for the 
interpretation of legal texts. See Doe, 943 N.W.2d at 610; see also Myers v. City of 
Cedar Falls, 8 N.W.3d 171, 180 (Iowa 2024). 
IWCA text is of particular importance because workers’ compensation is “a 
creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). 
This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' compensation is purely 
statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992).  And “it is 
the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the act’s benefits may be 
obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The legislature enacted the workers' compensation statute primarily for the 
benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents. Therefore, we apply 
the statute broadly and liberally in keeping with the humanitarian objective 
of the statute. We will not defeat the statute's beneficent purpose by 
reading something into it that is not there, or by a narrow and strained 
construction. 
Gregory v. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 399 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812, 815–16 (Iowa 2008) (citations omitted)).  
“Although the workers' compensation statute is to be liberally construed in favor 
of the worker, the statute is not to be expanded by reading something into it that is not 
there.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). “To determine legislative 
intent, we look to the language chosen by the legislature and not what the legislature 
might have said.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, (Iowa 2016) 
(citing Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 337 (Iowa 2008)).  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 34 
 
a .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  8 5 . 3 4 ( 2 )  &  t h e  G u i de s  
In 2017, the legislature amended the IWCA to change how permanent 
impairment is determined for workers’ compensation purposes. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 
23, § 9. In cases under the IWCA involving injuries on or after July 1, 2017,  
when determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, the 
extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, 
published by the American medical association, as adopted by the 
workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. 
Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss 
or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
After the 2017 amendments, section 85.34(2)(x) mandates use of the Guides as 
adopted by the Commissioner under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A (IAPA). The Commissioner has adopted the Fifth Edition of the Guides for 
use in determining permanent impairment in cases before the agency under Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—2.4. Therefore, the Fifth Edition of the Guides apply in 
this case. This includes terminology as defined for purposes of the Guides. 
The Guides continues to define impairment as “a loss, loss of use, or 
derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” 
This definition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical 
impairment can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is 
considered permanent when it has reached maximal medical 
improvement (MMI), meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change 
substantially in the next year with or without medical treatment. The term 
impairment in the Guides refers to permanent impairment, which is the 
focus of the Guides. 
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, 
and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain. Although the Guides 
emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included 
within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining 
whether an injury or illness results in permanent impairment requires a 
medical assessment performed by a physician. An impairment may lead to 
functional limitations or the inability to perform the activities of daily living. 
American Medical Association, Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, p. 2 
(5th ed., 2001) (bold-face and italics in original). 
The Guides further provide: 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 35 
 
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and 
functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either 
anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that 
specialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body 
structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ 
or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of 
heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or 
the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater 
emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measures such as range of 
motion.  Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in the mental 
and behavioral section. 
Id. at 4 (italics in original).  
Moreover, the Guides expressly state: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment 
percentages listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment 
on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, 
excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
Id. at 4 (bold-face and italics in original).  
Table 1-2, entitled “Activities of Daily Living Commonly Measured in Activities of 
Daily Living (ADL) and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) Scales,” from Page 
4 of the Guides, is recreated below. 
Activity 
Example 
Self-care, personal hygiene 
Urinating, defecating, 
brushing teeth, combing 
hair, bathing, dressing 
oneself, eating 
Communication 
Writing, typing, seeing, 
hearing, speaking 
Physical activity 
Standing, sitting, reclining, 
walking, climbing stairs 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 36 
 
Sensory function 
Hearing, seeing, tactile 
feeling, tasting, smelling 
Nonspecialized hand 
activities 
Grasping, lifting, tactile, 
discrimination 
Travel 
Riding, driving, flying 
Sexual function 
Orgasm, ejaculation, 
lubrication, erection 
Sleep 
Restful, nocturnal sleep 
pattern 
The Guides further explain their approach to impairment in pertinent part: 
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment 
percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but 
could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not 
included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several 
reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is 
highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment 
percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and 
occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors 
as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine 
the extent of work disability. For example, an individual who receives a 
30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is 
considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general 
functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities 
of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no 
decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. 
Thus, 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in 
work capability. Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impairment 
rating due to pericardial disease may be completely unable to do his or 
her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability. 
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct 
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate 
work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable 
about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the 
worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment. 
Id. at 5. “The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the 
organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations.” Id. at p. 9 (bold-
face in original). 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 37 
 
The Guides use “impairment” and “disability” as two distinct terms, each with its 
own meaning. While “impairment” encompasses ADLs and excludes work, 
The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of an 
individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational 
demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an 
impairment. An individual can have a disability in performing a specific 
work activity but not have a disability in any other social role. Physicians 
have the education and training to evaluate a person’s health status and 
determine the presence or absence of an impairment. If the physician has 
the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities and 
needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or 
absence of a specific disability. For example, an occupational medicine 
physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace 
can provide insights on how the impairment could contribute to a 
workplace disability. 
Id. at p. 8 (bold-face in original). 
The Guides further elaborate on impairment versus disability. Under the Guides, 
“The impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of disability determination.” Id. 
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work 
disability. Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria 
do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the 
Guides’ criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability. 
Id., at p. 9. 
By inserting the word “impairment” into the IWCA for the first time, deciding not to 
add a corresponding definition for purposes of the statute, and mandating that the 
extent of impairment caused by a work injury be determined in accordance with the 
Guides, the legislature necessarily incorporated the meaning of that term as set forth in 
the Guides. Impairment is “a loss, loss of use or derangement of any body part, organ 
system, or organ function.” Id., at p. 2 (internal emphasis omitted). However, 
“Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria do not measure work 
disability.” Id. at 9.  
And with respect to determining the extent of permanent disability under the Act, 
the Guides make clear that “[t]he impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of 
disability determination.” Id. at 8. After using the Guides to determine permanent 
impairment, the agency must then consider the evidentiary record as a whole to 
determine the extent of permanent disability—“alteration of an individual's capacity to 
meet personal, social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements 
because of an impairment,” Id. at p. 8—and entitlement to PPD benefits. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 38 
 
The meaning of these terms as expressly set forth in the Guides provides a 
necessary backdrop to the parties’ current dispute regarding how section 85.34(2)(v) 
applies in the current case.  
Before 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body party caused 
by a work injury was “compensated by the industrial disability method which takes into 
account the loss of earning capacity.” Id. (citing Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 
12, 14-15 (Iowa 1993)); see also Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 
(Iowa 2009) (quoting Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 831 (Iowa 
1992)). An industrial disability analysis was used regardless of whether the injured 
employee returned to work with the defendant-employer or the level of earnings at the 
time of hearing relative to the date of injury. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 
826, 830 (Iowa 2009) (quoting Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 
831 (Iowa 1992)); see also Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 158 (Iowa 1996); 
Arrow-Acme Corp. v. Bellamy, 500 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa App. 1993).  
With the 2017 amendments, the legislature carved out an exception to this 
general rule and a mandatory bifurcated litigation process on the issue of permanent 
disability under certain circumstances. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v)). The statute now articulates an exception and the 
circumstances triggering the bifurcated litigation process as follows: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee's functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee's earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee's 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee's earning 
capacity caused by the employee's permanent partial disability. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). 
The word “return” means “to go or come back, as to a former place, position, or 
state: to return from abroad; to return to public office; to return to work.” The Random 
House Dictionary of the English Language, “return,” 1645 (2d. ed. Unabridged, 1983)  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 39 
 
(italics in original).4 The relevant definitions of “work” include: “employment, as in some 
form of industry, esp. as a means of earning one’s livelihood: to look for work” and 
“one’s place of employment: Don’t phone him at work.” Id., “work,” at 2188 (italics in 
original). The definitions offer different possible interpretations to the statutory text. 
Does the text mean to return to the state of employment or the place of one’s 
employment? 
b .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  8 5 . 3 4 ( 2 ) ( v )  &  R e t i r e m e n t  
In addition to the language discussed above, the legislature added a third 
sentence to what is now section 85.34(2)(v) via the 2017 amendments. See 2017 Iowa 
Acts ch. 23, § 8. The new text states, “A determination of the reduction in the 
employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall take into account the 
permanent partial disability of the employee and the number of years in the future it was 
reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the time of the injury.” Id. (now 
codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v)). The new statutory text adjusts industrial disability 
analysis under the IWCA. 
In Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, the Iowa Supreme Court considered 
whether the Commissioner erred in reducing the amount of the claimant’s lost earning 
capacity because he was closer to retirement age than a younger worker. 544 N.W.2d 
258, 265 (Iowa 1995), as amended on denial of reh'g (Feb. 14, 1996). The court 
concluded that while a claimant’s “post-injury earnings are important evidence of 
whether the injury impaired the worker’s capacity to earn,” the Commissioner erred by 
comparing what the claimant “could earn over his remaining work life after his injury with 
what a hypothetical worker with the same characteristics, but younger, could earn.” Id. 
at 266. Such a “comparison is irrelevant in determining [the individual claimant’s] lost 
earning capacity,” which is a determination of “the ‘extent to which the injury impairs the 
employee[’s] ability to earn wages,’ . . . not the dollar amount of earnings lost.” Id. 
(quoting Simbro v. Delong’s Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886, 887 (Iowa 1983) (emphasis 
added by the Nelson court). 
 
The court elaborated: 
When the industrial commissioner concludes, as he did here, that an older 
employee's industrial disability is less because the employee has fewer 
years left to work, what the commissioner is really saying is that the total 
amount of future lost wages is a factor in setting the degree of industrial 
disability. The incorrectness of this analysis is illustrated by applying this 
                                                 
4 The late Justice Antonin Scalia and Bryan Garner, editor of Black’s Law Dictionary and author 
of Garner’s Dictionary of Legal Usage among other works, co-authored the indispensable Reading Law: 
The Interpretation of Legal Texts. The book’s insight and utility have made it ubiquitous in the legal field. 
The duo also wrote “A Note on the Use of Dictionaries,” 16 Green Bag 2d 419, another useful tool when 
considering the meaning of text because it contains principles to remember when using dictionaries and a 
list of quality dictionaries organized by the date of publication. Id., at 422–28. This decision uses the 
unabridged Second Edition of the The Random House Dictionary of the English Language in accordance 
with the article’s recommendations. See id., at 427. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 40 
 
concept in another factual context. If the total amount of future lost wages 
affects the amount of industrial disability, then highly paid workers would 
be entitled to a greater industrial disability rating than workers in lower-
paying jobs. This result would occur even though the two workers' 
capacities to be employed at the same level as they were employed 
before the injury are the same. This illustration highlights the fact that the 
comparison made in determining industrial disability is the worker's 
capacity to earn before and after the injury, not the worker's capacity to 
earn as compared to other workers. 
Id.  
The agency has long interpreted the Nelson holding to mean that “proximity to 
retirement cannot be considered in assessing the extent of industrial disability.” 
Hernandez v. Linn Co., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 1664831.01, 2021 WL 
5871906, *7 (Arb. Dec. 3, 2021) (citing Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258); see also Smith v. ABF 
Freight System, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5027176, 2009 WL 3382073 
(Arb. Oct. 16, 2009). The legislature is presumed to know about Iowa Supreme Court 
and administrative agency precedent when drafting and enacting legislation. Thus, it is 
clear that the 2017 amends tweak the Nelson rule for consideration of retirement when 
determining lost earning capacity. 
The core of the court’s holding in Nelson is that it is erroneous to determine an 
individual employee’s lost earning capacity by comparing that employee to a 
hypothetical younger worker under the same circumstances. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d at 
266. The 2017 amendments do not abrogate this rule. Rather, section 85.34(2)(v) 
requires that when determining lost earning capacity, the agency must “take into 
account . . . the number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury.”  The statutory text requires a finding 
specific to the injured worker—not in comparison to a hypothetical younger worker—of 
how long into the future the worker was reasonably anticipated to work as of the time of 
the injury. 
The fact that the statute, as amended, mandates the determination of “the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee would 
work at the time of the injury” reinforces another maxim when considering the injured 
employee’s retirement during application of the industrial disability analysis. Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v) (emphasis added). The agency has long applied the rule that “voluntary 
retirement or withdrawal from the workforce unrelated to the injury at issue” reduces the 
extent of an injured employee’s lost earning capacity. Hernandez, Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm’r No. 1664831.01, 2021 WL 5871906, *7 (citing Copeland v. Boone’s Book & 
Bible Store, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 1059319 (App. Nov. 6, 1997) (emphasis 
added). It therefore comes as no surprise that the Commissioner has continued to apply 
this rule in cases after the 2017 amendments took effect when the evidence shows the 
claimant voluntarily retired for reasons unrelated to the alleged work injury from which 
the case stems. See Hofer v. Lennox Indus., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 
20003191.01, 2023 WL 4215955, *3 (App. June 20, 2023). 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 41 
 
c .  
I o w a  C o d e  §  8 6  &  t h e  F l i n t  R u l e   
The Iowa legislature created our workers’ compensation system over a century 
ago. See 1913 Iowa Acts ch. 147; see also Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 
672, 676–80 (Iowa 2015) (discussing the history of workers’ compensation and the 
policy considerations behind it). At its inception as now, the Act “provides for work[ers’] 
compensation for injuries received in the course of employment” and “creates a special 
tribunal” in the commissioner with exclusive jurisdiction “to hear and dispose of such 
claims.” Des Moines Union Ry. Co. v. Funk, 164 N.W. 648, 649–650 (Iowa 1917); see 
also Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 275 (Iowa 2023). The legislature also 
codified a mandate that in cases before the commissioner, “Process and procedure 
under this act shall be as summary as reasonably may be.” 1913 Iowa Acts ch. 147, 
§ 25.  
The Iowa Supreme Court recognized early in its workers’ compensation 
jurisprudence, “The proceedings under the Work[ers’] Compensation Act . . . are 
intended to be simple and informal.” Fischer v. W.F. Priebe & Co., 160 N.W. 48, 50 
(Iowa 1916). And in its seminal Flint v. City of Eldon holding, the court elaborated: 
The purpose, intent, and scheme of workmen's compensation legislation is 
well understood, and its historical significance has been frequently 
expressed in decisions. 
The fundamental reason for the enactment of this legislation is to avoid 
litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize appeals, and 
afford an efficient and speedy tribunal to determine and award 
compensation under the terms of this act. 
183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921). The court then quoted from a New York case for the 
following proposition, which the court has reiterated over the subsequent decades: 
It was the purpose of the Legislature to create a tribunal to do rough 
justice--speedy, summary, informal, untechnical. With this scheme of the 
Legislature we must not interfere; for, if we trench in the slightest degree 
upon the prerogatives of the Commission, one encroachment will breed 
another, until finally simplicity will give way to complexity, and informality 
to technicality. 
Id. at 345 (quoting Rhyner v. Hueber Bldg. Co., 171 App. Div. 56, 156 N. Y. Supp. 903); 
see also Cross v. Hermanson Bros., 16 N.W.2d 616, 618 (Iowa 1944) (quoting Flint, 
183 N.W. at 345); Henderson v. Iles, 82 N.W.2d 731, 764 (Iowa 1957); Nicks v. 
Davenport Produce Co., 115 N.W.2d 812, 814–15 (Iowa 1962) (quoting Cross, 16 
N.W.2d at 618); Second Injury Fund v. Hodgins, 461 N.W.2d 454, 456 (Iowa 1990) 
(quoting Nicks, 115 N.W.2d at 814–15); Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 
130,133  (Iowa 2003) (quoting Flint, 183 N.W. at 345); Marovec v. PMX Indus., 693 
N.W.2d 779, 787 (Iowa 2005) (quoting Zomer, 666 N.W.2d at 133).  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 42 
 
Under Flint and its progeny, “the commissioner has the responsibility for deciding 
cases in an expeditious and timely manner.” Marovec, 693 N.W.2d at 787.  The rule that 
simplicity trumps complexity in workers’ compensation cases has governed procedure 
for over 100 years. This precedential standard remains good law today despite 
intervening legislation.  
After enactment of the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code chapter 
17A, and other legislative changes, the statutory mandate of speediness remains 
expressly in effect today. Iowa Code section 86.18(1) provides, “Evidence, process and 
procedure in contested case proceedings or appeal proceedings within the agency 
under this subchapter and chapters 85 and 85A shall be as summary as practicable 
consistent with the requirements of chapter 17A.” And section 86.14(1) states, “In an 
original proceeding, all matters relevant to a dispute are subject to inquiry.” This 
language echoes that of the Flint court, when it concluded, “The authority of the . . . 
Commissioner in matters coming within his jurisdiction necessarily involves the right to 
decide all questions properly arising out of the controversy before him.” Flint, 193 N.W. 
at 346. As the Marovec court observed, the language the court used in Flint is as true 
today as it was in 1921. 693 N.W.2d at 787. 
In Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130 (Iowa 2003), the Iowa 
Supreme Court considered the Commissioner's authority to reform a workers' 
compensation insurance policy. Even though this opinion construed the scope of the 
Commissioner's authority under section 85.21, its reasoning applies here. Id. at 132-33. 
The court quoted the Flint rule and concluded a “bifurcated litigation process” that is 
drawn out “is a far cry from the efficient and speedy remedy envisioned by the general 
assembly when it adopted the workers' compensation act.” Id. at 133-34. The court held 
it would be erroneous “to read into the statute a limitation on the [C]ommissioner's 
authority to decide claims for compensation, particularly when to do so would defeat 
one of the primary purposes of the statute—the provision of a prompt and adequate 
remedy.” Id. Applying Zomer here, expanding the mandatory bifurcated litigation 
process under section 85.34(2)(v) requires reading something into the statutory text that 
is not there and would result in a more drawn-out process that would hinder the 
agency's ability to provide a prompt and adequate remedy, which would defeat one of 
the primary purposes of the IWCA. 
In Martinez, the Commissioner specifically considered on appeal whether the 
statute mandates a bifurcated litigation process when the claimant quits employment 
with the defendant-employer and then gets a higher-paying job with a different 
employer. 2020 WL 5412838, *4. The Commissioner held reading the statute to require 
a bifurcated litigation process when the claimant quits employment with the defendant-
employer and obtains a new job at higher earnings before hearing would cause absurd 
results: 
For example, [such an] interpretation would seemingly “reset” claimant's 
entitlement to benefits and limit them to functional loss any time a claimant 
returns to work or is offered work at the same or greater wages by any 
employer. This would make it virtually impossible for defendants to know 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 43 
 
when to volunteer benefits using the industrial disability method. 
Furthermore, using claimant's interpretation, a claimant entitled to benefits 
under subsection 85.34(2)(v) (2019) might be better off not seeking 
employment after being terminated by a defendant-employer because he 
or she would potentially risk entitlement to benefits under the industrial 
disability analysis should a different employer offer the same or greater 
earnings than the claimant was receiving at the time of the injury. Certainly 
the legislature did not intend to discourage claimants from seeking gainful 
employment after a work injury. 
Id. at *6. 
Lastly, reading the requirement for a bifurcated litigation process to apply only 
under the circumstances expressly stated in section 85.34(2)(v) is also consistent with 
Iowa Supreme Court precedent requiring the agency and courts to “apply the workers' 
compensation statute broadly and liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective: 
the benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents.” Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. 
Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 2010). Applying the statute as written allows a 
claimant to receive a final determination on permanent disability when the issue is ripe 
for determination. Getting such a determination via a single contested case proceeding 
before the agency means the claimant will receive payment of all PPD benefits to which 
the claimant is legally entitled sooner in time and without having to go through litigation 
of a second contested case proceeding. Therefore, the result of adhering to the 
statutory text is beneficial to the injured worker and the worker's dependents. 
For these reasons, the Flint rule dictates narrowly interpreting the statutory text 
added in 2017 that creates a mandatory bifurcated litigation process under section 
85.34(2)(v) that is distinct from review-reopening under sections 85.26 and 86.14. As 
discussed above, the statutory text expressly applies to the “same employer” at the time 
of the work injury. Therefore, the mandatory bifurcated litigation is only required when 
the injured employee returns to work with the same employer as at the time of the work 
injury and remains employed there through agency approval of the parties’ settlement or 
hearing and the employer subsequently terminates the employment relationship. And 
when the injured employee’s employment with the employer at the time of the work 
injury ends before the hearing—whether by termination, retirement, or voluntary quit—it 
is appropriate for the presiding deputy to consider it when determining lost earning 
capacity under the traditional industrial disability framework.  
d .  
I o w a  C o d e  § §  8 5 . 2 6 ,  8 6 . 1 4  &  R e v i e w - R e op en i ng  
The IWCA provides parties a mechanism to reopen an agency decision or 
agreement for settlement for agency review. See Iowa Code §§ 85.26(2), 86.14(2); see 
also Green v. N. Cent. Iowa Reg’l Waste Auth., 989 N.W.2d 144, 146–47 (Iowa 2023). 
The 2017 amendments enacted by the legislature did not make any changes to either 
Iowa Code section 85.26(3) or 86.14. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23. Therefore, the raft of 
caselaw precedent governing review-reopening of workers’ compensation cases 
remains binding in such proceedings. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 44 
 
“In an original proceeding, all matters relevant to a dispute are subject to inquiry.” 
Iowa Code § 86.14(1). The “‘commissioner finds the facts as they stand at the time of 
the hearing.’” Green, 989 N.W.2d at 147 (quoting Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 
N.W.2d 387, 392 (Iowa 2009)). Therefore, the award in an arbitration decision is based 
on “the snapshot taken on the day of hearing.” Peters v. Ryder Integrated Logistics, 
Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5067874, 2021 WL 5570377, *2 (App. Nov. 18, 
2021).  
“The review-reopening proceeding . . . is a new and distinct proceeding apart 
from the original arbitration action.” Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 395. The agency's “inquiry 
shall be into whether or not the condition of the employee warrants an end to, 
diminishment of, or increase of compensation so awarded or agreed upon.”' Iowa Code 
§ 86.14(2). Because “principles of res judicata . . . apply,” the agency does not “re-
determine the condition of the employee . . . adjudicated by the former award.”' 
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 393 (quoting Stice v. Consol. Ind. Coal Co., 291 N.W.2d 452, 
456 (Iowa 1940)). Nor does reviewing-reopening “provide an opportunity to relitigate 
causation issues that were determined in the initial award or settlement agreement. Id. 
at 393. Rather, the agency “must . . . evaluate ‘the condition of the employee, which is 
found to exist subsequent to the date of the award being reviewed.”’ Id. at 391 (quoting 
Stice, 291 N.W.2d at 456).  
The party petitioning the agency for review-reopening shoulders the burden to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence the requisite change in condition compared 
to the snapshot of the claimant’s condition at the time of the initial hearing at which the 
evidentiary record was made regarding the award at issue. See id.; see also Green, 989 
N.W.2d at 147–48.  When an employee seeks more compensation, the employee must 
establish the original work injury is the proximate cause of additional impairment or 
lessening of earning capacity. E.N.T. Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 829 (Iowa 
1994) (citing Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 350 (Iowa 1980)). When 
an employee's industrial disability is at issue, “[t]he necessary showing in a review-
reopening proceeding may be made without proof of change in physical condition.” Id. 
(citing Blacksmith, 290 N.W.2d at 350). In Stuart v. Dickten Masch Plastics, LLC, our 
court of appeals delved into situations that allow for the reopening of a workers’ 
compensation award or settlement: 
The change in condition can be physical or economic. See [E.N.T. 
Assocs. v.] Collentine, 525 N.W.2d [827,] 829 [(Iowa 1994)]. So “proof of 
change in physical condition” is not required. Id. As our supreme court has 
explained, “industrial disability is the product of many factors, not just 
physical impairment.” Id. “Other factors include age, education, 
experience, and inability, because of the injury, to engage in employment 
for which the employee is fitted.” Id. 
Thus, a physician whose income was reduced after he decided he could 
no longer safely perform surgeries was entitled to increase his benefits in 
a review-reopening proceeding. See id. at 829–30. So too was a truck 
driver whose employer transferred him to a lower-paying dock job after 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 45 
 
deciding he was disqualified from driving because of his original injury. 
See Blacksmith [v. All-Am., Inc.], 290 N.W.2d [348,] 354 [(Iowa 1980)]. 
And when a worker's benefit award was originally reduced by ten percent 
expressly because of an employer's promised accommodated 
employment, and the employer instead placed him on disability retirement, 
the worker was entitled to reopen the award to receive the extra ten 
percent benefits. See Gallardo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 482 
N.W.2d 393, 396–97 (Iowa 1992). But a worker's change in condition 
caused by her personal decisions unrelated to her original injury—
including caring for grandchildren and closing her unprofitable business—
does not justify reopening. Simonson v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 588 
N.W.2d 430, 435–36 (Iowa 1999). 
998 N.W.2d 192 (Iowa Ct. App. 2023) (Table). 
In 2017, the legislature codified the requirement in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
that an injured employee is limited to permanency benefits based on impairment for 
work injuries to the whole body if they returned to or are offered work at the same or 
greater earnings as they earned at the time of the work injury. The legislature also 
included in the amendment to section 85.34(2)(v) language providing, “Notwithstanding 
section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is eligible for compensation under this 
paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is compensated based only 
upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the award or 
agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon 
commencement of reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent 
partial disability.”  
In doing so and using the word “shall,” the legislature mandates application of the 
industrial disability analysis for lost earning capacity when the following criteria are met: 
1) The injured employee returns to work with the same employer as at the time 
of the work injury and the employee’s earnings are the same or more as at 
the time of the injury; 
2) The injured employee remains employed with the employer, earning the same 
or more as at the time of the work injury, at the time the agency issues a 
decision based on the evidence collected at a hearing or approves a 
settlement; and 
3) The employer terminates the employee after the agency decision or order 
approving settlement. 
The text codified by the legislature bypasses application of the traditional review-
reopening standard discussed above and mandates “a determination of any reduction in 
the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability.” 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 46 
 
But in section 85.34(2)(v), the legislature created a presumption under the plain text of 
the statute that under the circumstances expressly identified, the employee is entitled to 
a determination of lost earning capacity because the previous agency decision or 
settlement was based solely on permanent impairment. 
Thus, the 2017 amendments create a mandatory bifurcated litigation process 
when the injured employee returns to work with the employer at the time of the work 
injury, earning the same or more as at the time of injury, and the employer terminates 
the employee before the hearing. The 2017 amendments leave the review-reopening 
process untouched. This means that under Iowa Code section 86.14(1), the agency 
must consider all matters relevant to a dispute at the time the case goes to hearing. And 
section 86.14(2) allows the parties to petition for review-reopening if there is a change in 
condition compared to the snapshot at the time of hearing on all relevant matters. This 
includes, but is not limited to, changes in employment such as a transfer to a lower 
paying job, Blacksmith, 290 N.W.2d at 354, a voluntary quit, Collentine, 525 N.W.2d at 
829–30, or retirement, Gallardo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 482 N.W.2d 393 (Iowa 
1992). It is axiomatic that if such events can trigger review-reopening under section 
86.14(2), they are relevant to the parties’ dispute in the original proceeding under 
section 86.14(1). Since there is no language in the 2017 amendments that makes a 
change impacting this dynamic such matters must be considered in the original 
proceeding since they fall outside the circumstances triggering the mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process under section 85.34(2)(v). 
e .  
C o n c l u s i on  
Based on the above analysis of the text the legislature codified in Iowa Code 
sections 85.34(2) (v) and (x) and their interplay with other statutory provisions, the 
undersigned concludes the limitation to permanency benefits based on impairment is 
limited to those circumstances expressly identified in the statutory text, which trigger the 
statute’s mandatory bifurcated litigation process. The end of Smith and ABF’s 
employment relationship before the hearing date is relevant to the question of the extent 
of the disability caused by the work injury that is outside the narrow exception to 
determining industrial disability for whole body injuries codified in section 85.34(2)(v) 
after the 2017 amendments. Smith is therefore entitled to permanency benefits based 
on a determination of his lost earning capacity using the traditional industrial disability 
analysis.  
2 .  
L o s t  E a r n i n g  C a p a c i t y  
The stipulated work injury is to Smith’s lumbar spine, a body part not listed in the 
statutory schedule. As discussed in depth above, Smith’s employment with ABF ended 
before the hearing when he retired. Therefore, under section 85.34(2)(v), his entitlement 
to permanency benefits is based on “the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee 
possessed when the injury occurred.”  

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 47 
 
The assessment of a claimant's earning capacity under the industrial disability 
framework is based on multiple factors: functional disability, age, education, 
qualifications, work experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings 
before and after the injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics of the claimant, 
the claimant's inability because of the injury to engage in employment for which the 
claimant is fitted, and the employer's inability to accommodate the claimant's functional 
limitations. Id.; IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632-33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. 
State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). 
Smith was 63 years of age at the time of hearing. He was a high school graduate 
but had not achieved a postsecondary degree or certificate. Because of his age and 
limited educational background, he is a poor candidate for retraining. 
The stipulated work injury caused Smith to sustain a 12 percent permanent 
impairment to the whole body. Dr. Taylor’s prescribed permanent work restrictions that 
this decision adopted above include: 
 No lifting more than 30 pounds on an occasional basis; 
 Most lifting should occur as close to waist level as possible, or at least 
between knee and chest level; 
 Alternate sitting, standing, and walking as needed for comfort; 
 Climb stairs and stepladders on an occasional basis; and 
 Travel occasionally to frequently but should be allowed to stop and get out of 
the vehicle to stretch and move around whenever needed.  
Smith earned a commercial driver’s license (CDL). His employment history 
consists of manual labor and driving. Dr. Taylor’s work restriction of no lifting more than 
30 pounds would preclude Smith from returning to work to most jobs similar to the ones 
he held in his working life. 
Under section 85.34(2)(v), the lost earning capacity analysis must “take into 
account . . . the number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury.”  The stipulated work injury occurred on 
April 6, 2022, when Smith was 60 years of age. The evidence establishes it is more 
likely than not that on that date, Smith intended to work until he was at least 66; or, for 
approximately five and one-half more years.  
It is reasonable to anticipate Smith would have achieved his goal but for the work 
injury interfering with his employment at ABF by causing worse symptoms than those 
pre-dating the injury. Hofer, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 20003191.01, 2023 WL 
4215955, *3. It was in Smith’s pecuniary interest to do so and he took pride in his work. 
Because of the stipulated work injury, Smith retired at age 62, four years earlier than he 
otherwise would have. Due to the fact that Smith’s union negotiated a new contract with 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 48 
 
a significant pay increase that took effect in his final year of employment with ABF, 
Smith’s retirement because of the work injury caused him to miss out entirely on the 
four years of employment during which he would have earned the highest hourly rate of 
pay in his working life. 
As discussed above, Smith takes pride in being a dependable worker who 
performed his job well. He was highly motivated to work to at least age 66 before the 
stipulated work injury caused him ongoing, significant pain aggravated by activities such 
as sitting, standing, and lifting. Despite the fact that working worsened his pain, he 
reported to work after Dr. Hanawalt released him to do so and performed his job duties 
without accommodation. The evidence shows it is more likely than not Smith would still 
be working for ABF because of his motivation to be a dependable employee who works 
hard and does his job well had he not sustained the stipulated work injury and 
experienced the increased symptoms it caused. 
A factor particular to this case is the nature of Smith’s pension. The evidence 
shows that he cannot work and receive his pension benefits simultaneously. Therefore, 
the fact that Smith retired because of the stipulated work injury and is receiving his 
pension benefits precludes him from working. This limits the extent of lost earning 
capacity caused by the stipulated work injury to a degree, meaning his industrial 
disability percentage is lower than it would be without such a limitation. 
Under section 85.34(2)(v), an injured employee’s entitlement to permanency 
benefits is based on “the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the 
disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed when 
the injury occurred.” And section 85.34(7) provides in pertinent part, “An employer is 
liable for compensating only that portion of an employee’s disability that arises out of 
and in the course of the employee’s employment with the employer and that relates to 
the injury that serves as the basis for the employee’s claim for compensation.” Thus, the 
text of the IWCA prohibits double recovery by an injured employee for successive 
disabilities. 
The determination of industrial disability in this case is not based on Smith’s 
earning capacity before he sustained the first or any of the subsequent work injuries 
pre-dating the stipulated work injury at the center of this case. Under the plain text of the 
statute, the determination of industrial disability in this case is based solely on the effect 
the stipulated work injury had on Smith’s earning capacity as it existed when the injury 
occurred. Based on the industrial disability factors, the weight of the evidence in this 
case establishes Smith has sustained a 75 percent loss in earning capacity because of 
the stipulated work injury in relation to his earning capacity when the injury occurred. 
PPD benefits for lost earning capacity are paid based on the percentage of 
industrial disability out of 500 weeks under section 85.34(2)(v). The parties do not 
dispute that previous work injuries caused Smith to sustain a reduction in earning 
capacity of 46 percent before the time of the stipulated injury in this case. Multiplying 46 
percent by 500 equals 230 weeks. And 500 minus 230 equals 270 weeks. Therefore, 
the work injuries Smith sustained prior to the stipulated work injury that lowered his 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 49 
 
earning capacity by 46 percent have correspondingly reduced the denominator for 
purposes of calculating entitlement to PPD benefits for lost earning capacity in this case 
from 500 to 270 weeks.  
Under section 85.34(2)(v), 270 weeks represents “the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred.” Using 270 weeks serves as the 
denominator and ensures the stipulated work injury in this case results in the 
defendants paying for “only that portion of an employee’s disability that arises out of and 
in the course of the employee’s employment with the employer and that relates to the 
injury that serves as the basis for the employee’s claim for compensation,” as required 
under section 85.34(7). Using 270 as the denominator when calculating lost earning 
capacity caused by the stipulated work injury eliminates the possibility of double 
recovery by Smith in this case. See Rife, 2 N.W.3d at 865–66. 
The stipulated work injury in this case caused Smith to sustain a 75 percent loss 
to “the earning capacity that the employee possessed when the injury occurred.” Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2)(v). Multiplying 75 percent by 270 equals 203 weeks. This constitutes 
the number of weeks representing “only that portion of an employee’s disability that 
arises out of and in the course of the employee’s employment with the employer and 
that relates to the injury that serves as the basis for the employee’s claim for 
compensation.” Id. at § 85.34(7). Smith is entitled to 203 weeks for the lost earning 
capacity caused by the stipulated work injury in this case under sections 85.34(2)(v) and 
85.34(7). 
3 .  
C o m m e n c e m en t  D a t e  
In 2017, the legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.34(2) to change when 
the IWCA requires payment of permanency benefits to commence. 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 
23, § 6. The legislature struck language requiring commencement of permanency 
benefits “at the termination of the healing period” provided in section 85.34(1) and 
replaced it with “when it is medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from 
the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined by use of the [Guides].” Id. (now codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(1)). Thus, under the plain language of the statute, as amended, the 
commencement date for permanency benefits is when the injured worker has reached 
MMI from the work injury and a physician can evaluate permanent impairment using the 
Guides. 
Smith contends the commencement date for any permanency benefits awarded 
should be January 31, 2024. The defendants argue the correct commencement date is 
June 27, 2022. Because the evidence establishes Smith reached MMI on June 27, 
2022, that is the date on which permanent impairment could be evaluated under the 
Guides. Therefore, June 27, 2022 is the commencement date under section 85.34(2)(v). 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 50 
 
D . 
H P  B e n e f i t s  
The parties indicated in Section 4 of the Hearing Report that Smith is seeking 
TTD or HP benefits for the time periods from April 11, 2022, through July 1, 2022, and 
January 31, 2024, through the date of hearing and continuing. ABF disputes Smith’s 
entitlement to such benefits. Smith did not address entitlement to TTD or HP benefits in 
his post-hearing brief. ABF did, so this decision addresses the issue. 
Under the IWCA, the distinction between TTD and HP benefits is whether the 
work injury causes permanent impairment or disability. An injured employee is entitled 
to TTD benefits if the work injury does not cause a permanent disability and HP benefits 
if it does.  In this case, Smith has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
stipulated work injury is a cause of permanent impairment or disability. Therefore, his 
prayer for benefits from April 11, 2022, through July 1, 2022, must be considered under 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1), which governs HP benefits. 
An injured employee is entitled to HP benefits starting on the first day of missed 
work until the first of the following three alternative events occurs: 
1) The employee returns to work; 
2) “[I]t is medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not 
anticipated”; or 
3) The employee is “medically capable of returning to employment substantially 
similar to the employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of 
injury.” Iowa Code § 85.34(1). 
In this case, Smith missed work starting on Monday, April 11, 2022. Dr. Hanawalt 
released Smith to return to unaccommodated work effective June 27, 2022. No doctor 
took Smith off work between June 27, 2022, and the date of hearing.  
The parties stipulated in Section 9 of the Hearing Report that the defendants paid 
Smith 11 weeks of workers’ compensation benefits before the hearing. Smith testified 
ABF paid him benefits from April 11, 2022, until he returned to work after Dr. Hanawalt 
released him to return to full duty on June 27, 2022. The record shows it is more likely 
than not ABF paid Smith 11 weeks in HP benefits from April 11, 2022, through June 27, 
2022, which means he received the benefits to which he was entitled under the law 
during those 11 weeks. 
Dr. Hanawalt releasing Smith to return to full-duty work on June 27, 2022, 
terminated his right to HP benefits under Iowa Code section 85.34(1) on that date. No 
doctor has taken Smith off work due to the stipulated work injury since he reached MMI. 
Because Smith does not have a subsequent healing period to trigger additional HP 
benefits under the statute, he is not entitled to HP benefits in addition to that which the 
defendants paid before the hearing. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 51 
 
E . 
C r e d i t  
Iowa Code section 85.34(5) governs recovery of employee overpayment. This 
provision provides that if an employer overpays an employee weekly compensation 
under the IWCA, “the excess paid by the employer shall be credited against the liability 
of the employer for any future weekly benefits due for an injury to that employee, 
provided that the employer or the employer’s representative has acted in good faith in 
determining and notifying an employee when the temporary total disability, healing 
period, or temporary partial disability benefits are terminated.”  
In Section 6 of the Hearing Report, the parties stipulated to Smith’s gross 
earnings, marital status, and exemptions to which he was entitled at the time of the 
stipulated injury. Based on those stipulations, they agreed that Smith’s compensation 
rate is $863.28 per week. The parties further stipulated in Section 9 of the Hearing 
Report that the defendants paid Smith 11 weeks of compensation at the rate of $891.09 
prior to hearing. Under Section 10, “Additional Issues, Stipulations, and/or Explanation,” 
they wrote, “CREDIT OVERPAID RATE.”  
As found above, Smith’s workers’ compensation rate is $863.28 per week. The 
parties stipulated the defendants paid Smith 11 weeks of HP benefits under section 
85.34(1) at the rate of $891.09 per week. $891.09 minus $863.28 equals $27.81, the 
amount the defendants overpaid in benefits each week. That amount multiplied by 11, 
the number of weeks during which this overpayment was made, equals $305.91.  
The record shows the defendants overpaid Smith weekly compensation totaling 
$305.91 before the hearing date. Smith does not allege bad faith by the defendants and 
the record contains no indication of such. The defendants are therefore entitled to a 
credit in the amount of $305.91 toward permanency benefits under section 85.34(5). 
F .  
M e d i c a l  B e n e f i t s  
The parties stipulated that Smith sustained a back injury arising out of and in the 
course of his employment with ABF. Under Iowa Code section 85.27(1)(a), the 
defendants are responsible for promptly providing reasonable care for the work injury. 
And section 85.27(4) ties the obligation “to furnish reasonable services and supplies to 
treat an injured employee” with “the right to choose care.” Section 85.27(4) also gives 
Smith the right to apply for alternate care if he is dissatisfied with the care (or lack 
thereof) chosen by the defendants. 
In Smith’s hearing testimony, he detailed his dissatisfaction with the care the 
defendants provided for the stipulated work injury. In particular, Smith continues to 
experience pain. Smith believes the defendants have not offered sufficient care to 
address his ongoing pain. After the defendants arranged for an appointment with Dr. 
Abernathey, he opined that Smith did not require neurosurgical intervention and that, 
“Conservative management options available through other providers such as his 
chiropractor are reasonable.” In a follow-up letter to defense counsel a few weeks later, 
Dr. Abernathey clarified that he did not have enough information to refer Smith to 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 52 
 
InMotion for his desired care but he also did not rescind his opinion on the 
reasonableness of future conservative care such as that provided by a chiropractor. 
Before the arbitration hearing, Smith did not file with the agency a petition 
concerning application for alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27 and Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—4.48 seeking a decision ordering the defendants to 
provide alternate care because of his dissatisfaction with the care, if any, being offered 
by the defendants. Section 8 of the Hearing Report does not identify alternate care as a 
disputed issue. Therefore, this decision does not address the question of Smith’s 
entitlement to alternate care. 
G .  
I M E  
The parties indicated in Section 8 of the hearing report that reimbursement for 
the reasonable costs of the IME performed by Dr. Taylor was in dispute. Smith 
addressed the issue in claimant’s post-hearing brief. (Cl. Brief, p. 9) The defendants did 
not. (See Def. Brief)  
In this case, Dr. Abernathey opined in a letter to defense counsel dated March 7, 
2024, that Smith had sustained no permanent impairment from the stipulated work 
injury. In response to Dr. Abernathey’s opinion, claimant’s counsel arranged for Smith to 
undergo an IME by Dr. Taylor in Cedar Rapids on May 29, 2024. Claimant’s counsel 
paid the full amount of the $2,900.00 invoice for Dr. Taylor’s IME. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 governs examinations of injured employees to 
determine the extent of permanent impairment or disability caused by a work injury. Mid 
American Const. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 847-48 (Iowa 2024). Under subsection 
1, the employee must attend an examination by a physician of the employer's choice or 
be disqualified from benefits for the period of refusal. An opinion on causation or the 
extent of permanent impairment or disability by a doctor retained by the employer 
triggers the injured employee's right to an IME under subsection 2. 
“In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the employer 
and the employee.” Id. 2 N.W.3d at 848. “The statutory process balances the competing 
interests of the employer and employee and permits the employee to obtain an 
independent medical examination at the employer's expense.” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). Subsection 2 entitles the 
employee to receive an examination if the employee believes the evaluation made by 
the employer's physician was too low. Iowa Code § 85.39(2); Young, 867 N.W.2d at 
844. The employee's own examination “is known as an IME because the examination is 
independent of the examination done by the physician selected by the employer.” 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 843-44. 
Subsection 2 further provides, “A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination ... shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to 
perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” 
Under the Iowa Supreme Court's holding in Sandlin, “The reasonableness of the fees 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 53 
 
will be analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically charge to perform the 
impairment rating examination—which may include ‘the costs of reviewing medical 
records, conducting a physical examination, opining on causation, assessing permanent 
impairment, assigning restrictions, and addressing further treatment recommendations.”’ 
2 N.W.3d at 851-52 (quoting Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers' Comp. 
Comm'r No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022)). 
This analysis under the statute “effectively necessitates fact-finding by the 
commissioner on the fees typically charged in the local area where the examination is 
performed. Parties may offer evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to 
support or challenge the fee charged in a particular case.” Id. at 849. The court 
concluded “‘many IMEs come before the agency, which allows the [commissioner] to 
use agency experience and expertise to conclude that [the physician's] charges are in 
line with those of an occupational medicine doctor with a practice in the . . . [local] area 
performing an evaluation of permanent impairment in accordance with the [AMA] 
Guides.” Id. (quoting Nguyen v. Hy-Vee, Inc., Iowa Workers' Comp. Comm'r No. 
21003118.03, 2023 WL 7128682, at *32 (Arb. Oct. 20, 2023)). 
The introductory chapter of the Guides states the following with respect to the 
process it details for evaluating permanent impairment or disability: 
Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides 
as comprehensive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing 
the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed 
in Chapter 2. A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable 
information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a 
discussion about the person's abilities and limitations, including the ability 
to perform common activities listed in Table 1-2. Combining the medical 
and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about 
essential work activities, if requested, is a basis for improved 
understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the 
individual's work ability. 
Guides, § 1.12, p. 15. 
Chapter 2, “Practical Application of the Guides,” provides the following with 
respect to the examiners' roles and responsibilities: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 54 
 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. Moreover, the Guides state, “A clear, accurate, and complete report is 
essential to support a rating of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
To that end, the Guides lay out a list of elements that “should be included in all 
impairment evaluation reports. Id. (emphasis in original). The first is a narrative history 
of medical condition(s) consisting of 
the onset and course of the condition, symptoms, findings on previous 
examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse 
effects. Include information that may be relevant to onset, such as an 
occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any 
relevant investigations. Include detailed list of prior evaluations in the 
clinical data section. 
Id., § 2.6a.1, p. 21. 
In addition, the Guides direct a physician to “[a]ssess current clinical status, 
including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of 
contemplated treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.” Id., § 2.6a.3, 
p. 21. They also direct inclusion of discussion of diagnostic study results and 
outstanding pertinent diagnostic studies, whether the injured employee is at MMI, and 
diagnoses and impairments. Id., §§ 2.6a.4-2.6a.6, pp. 21-22. Moreover, the Guides 
state a report should discuss impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and 
limitations; calculation of the impairment rating; and discussion of how the impairment 
rating was calculated. Id., §§ 2.6a.8, 2.6b, 2.6c. p. 22. 
The Guides also state that other elements may be included in an impairment 
evaluation that include “a work history with detailed, chronological description of work 
activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, 
any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity and 
duration of exposure and activities, and any protective measures” as well as “discussion 
of causation and apportionment.” Id., §§ 2.6a.2, 2.6a.7, pp. 21-22. As discussed above, 
an Iowa Court of Appeals panel has opined that causation is effectively a zero percent 
impairment rating and therefore opinions on causation are reimbursable and the agency 
has followed this holding. 
The Guides provide a “Sample Report for Permanent Medical Impairment” for 
physicians to follow to help ensure they adhere to the process in the Guides. Id., pp. 23-
24. The sample includes a section entitled “Identifiers” with information about the injured 
employee and examination. Id., p. 23. The next section is entitled, “Introduction,” and 
consists of, “Purpose (impairment or IME evaluation, personal injury, workers' 
compensation) and procedures (who performed the exam, patient consent, location of 
examination).” Id. Following that is the “Narrative history,” which includes, “Chief 
complaints, history of injury or illness, occupational history, past medical history, family 
history, social history, [and] review of symptoms.” Id. After that is the section entitled, 
“Medical record review,” which is described as, “Chronology of medical evaluation, 
diagnostic studies, and treatment for the injury or illness.” Id. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 55 
 
Next is a section detailing the physician's physical examination. Id. After that, a 
section discussing diagnostic studies. Id., p. 24. Then the section, ““Diagnoses and 
Impairments,” with the note, “If requested, discuss work relatedness, causation, 
apportionment, restrictions, accommodations, assistive devices.” Id. 
The report then has a section entitled, “Impairment Rating Criteria,” which 
includes, “MMI residual function, limitations of activities of daily living, [and] prognosis.” 
Id. This is followed by the “Impairment Rating and Rationale,” which includes the body 
part or system being rated, the chapter number of the Guides used, the table number of 
the Guides used, the percentage impairment of the whole person, and “[d]iscussion of 
rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination.” Id. 
The report template concludes with a section entitled, “Recommendations,” 
which is for, “Further diagnostic or therapeutic follow-up care.” Id. Then there is a 
section labeled, “Work ability, work restrictions.” Id. This final section includes the 
explanatory note, “If requested, review abilities and limitations in reference to essential 
job activities.” Id. 
Unsurprisingly, every section of the “Sample Report for Permanent Medical 
Impairment” in the Guides is relevant to the determination of permanent disability or 
impairment in workers' compensation cases before the agency. As discussed above, 
the rationale for directing a physician to write a report contained in the Guides is 
accurate: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. “A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating 
of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
The Guides reflect what agency experience and expertise reinforces: The IME 
report is important in the determination of an employee's entitlement to workers' 
compensation benefits, especially in contested cases before the agency. The AMA has 
established criteria in the Guides so that doctors are providing the information injured 
workers, employers, insurance carriers, and tribunals such as the agency need to 
equitably determine an individual's entitlement to workers' compensation benefits based 
on the injury they sustained and the disability the injury has caused. Presumably, this is 
why the legislature mandated use of the Guides when determining permanent 
impairment. Consequently, this mandate cannot be ignored when determining what is 
reimbursable as a reasonable cost under section 85.39(2). The costs that stem from a 
physician following the Guides in accordance with the requirement in section 85.34(2)(x) 
when performing an IME under section 85.39(2) are therefore reasonable. 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 56 
 
The weight of the evidence in this case shows that Dr. Taylor’s IME substantially 
complied with the requirements in the Guides regarding evaluation of permanent 
impairment and the resultant report. Moreover, based on the undersigned’s experience 
with the costs of IMEs that include a records review, in-person evaluation, and report 
from non-treating physicians in the Cedar Rapids area, the costs of Dr. Taylor’s IME in 
this case are reasonable. Therefore, Smith is entitled to reimbursement for the entire 
amount listed on Dr. Taylor’s invoice for the IME he performed in this case. The 
defendants must pay to Smith $2,900.00 for the reasonable costs of Dr. Taylor’s IME. 
H . 
C o s t s  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting City of Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 
660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are 
strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Because Smith prevailed on multiple disputed issues, the $128.75 cost in filing 
fees, including the convenience fee incurred by using the Workers’ Compensation 
Electronic System (WCES) payment gateway, are taxed against the defendants under 
rule 876—4.33(7). Smith has also prayed for taxation of the costs of service of original 
notice by certified U.S. mail, but there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which 
to determine those specific costs. Therefore, the cost of servicing the original notice is 
not taxed against the defendants. 
VI.  
OR D ER  
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to Smith two hundred three (203) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of eight hundred sixty-three 
and 28/100 ($863.28) per week from the commencement date of June 27, 
2022. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants are to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the 
amount of three hundred five and 91/100 dollars ($305.91). 
5) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 

SMITH V. ABF FREIGHT SYSTEM, INC. 
Page 57 
 
6) The defendants shall pay to Smith two thousand nine hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($2,900.00) for the reasonable costs of Dr. Taylor’s IME. 
7) The defendants shall pay to Smith one hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 
dollars ($128.75) as a taxed cost for the filing fee and convenience fee 
incurred when electronically filing the petition that initiated this case on 
WCES. 
Signed and filed this 6th day of August, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Matthew J. Petrzelka, Attorney for Claimant 
Stephen W. Spencer, Attorney for Defendants 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
