Case Number: 21012191.01
Case Title:  DOTY, JERRY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Doty Jerry-21012191.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JERRY DOTY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No. 21012191.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  ARBITRATION DECISION        
ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
     Head Notes: 1402.40; 1803; 2206; 
 
Defendant. 
  :                   
     2502; 3001; 3002 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Jerry Doty filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits against Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., self-insured employer, for a stipulated 
work injury date of August 29, 2021. The case came before the undersigned for an 
arbitration hearing on June 7, 2024. Pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, 
with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded 
without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through K.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Arlen Steines testified on behalf of 
defendant. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
June 7, 2024. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on August 2, 2024, and the 
case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. Whether the stipulated injury caused permanent disability, and if so, the 
extent of claimant’s entitlement to benefits; 
 
2. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-18  09:54:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 2 
 
 
3. Claimant’s gross earnings and the proper rate of weekly compensation;  
 
4. Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39;  
 
5. Whether defendant is entitled to a credit for benefits previously paid; 
 
6. Payment of medical mileage; and 
 
7. Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 60-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
10) Claimant is a high school graduate, and served in the United States Army from 1987 
to 1990. (Claimant’s Exhibit 6, pp. 29-30) After the Army, he worked as a laborer at 
Drives, Inc., for about ten years. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 30; Tr., p. 29) He was hired to work at 
Archer Daniels Midland (ADM) in April of 2000. (Tr., pp. 10, 29)  
 
Claimant started at ADM working in the sugar house. (Tr., p. 31) After about two 
years, he started working as an oil loader, which is the position he remained in until the 
date of injury. (Tr., pp. 30-31) His job as an oil loader involved loading oil railcars, fuel 
railcars, and oil trucks. (Tr., p. 12) Claimant described it as a physically demanding job, 
with a lot of heavy lifting up to 50 pounds. He also had to do a lot of climbing up and 
down off the railcars. (Tr., pp. 31-32)  
 
Claimant sustained a stipulated left shoulder injury while working on August 29, 
2021. (See Hearing Report, pp. 1-2) Claimant had a prior left shoulder injury in 2010. 
(Tr., p. 10) At that time, claimant was using a riding lawn mower and rolled it while 
mowing the side of a hill. He went to urgent care and had an x-ray, but did not have an 
MRI or any other medical treatment at that time. (Tr., pp. 10-11) He did not have any 
surgery or physical therapy, and he testified that his recovery was “pretty good, 100 
percent.” (Tr., p. 11) He did not have any problems with his left shoulder after that 
incident, and did not have any permanent restrictions or impairment.  
 
At the time of the August 29, 2021 work injury, claimant was taking samples to 
the lab, and he tripped on a step and caught himself with his left arm, injuring his left 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 3 
 
shoulder. (Tr., p. 13) Claimant testified that he initially reported to ADM that he slipped 
and fell on some oil and landed on a pump below, which is not what actually happened. 
(Tr., p. 23) He said that he falsified the original story because there had been an oil leak 
for some time, and he wanted the problem fixed. It was about a month later that 
claimant told his employer the real story of how he was injured, which eventually lead to 
his suspension and termination from employment. (Tr., pp. 23-24) 
 
 After claimant tripped on the stairs, he continued to the lab to deliver the 
samples, and then sat at the north gate for a little while before going to the oil shed. (Tr., 
p. 13) When he got to the oil shed, his coworker Keith Hein called the foreman Steve 
Gerdes, because he could see claimant was in pain. When Mr. Gerdes arrived, he 
called 911, and an ambulance took claimant to MercyOne Medical Center. (Tr., pp. 13-
14; Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-4) 
 
Emergency room records note that claimant presented with left shoulder pain, 
exacerbated by movement. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) Moderate swelling was observed, along with 
limited range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 5-6) X-rays showed no fracture, but did show 
osteoarthritic and degenerative changes in the acromioclavicular joint. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 6, 
8) Claimant was discharged with a diagnosis of left shoulder contusion, and told to use 
an arm sling and over-the-counter medications. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 7) He was also told to 
follow up with an orthopedic clinic in one or two days.  
 
Claimant saw Suheil Barakat, M.D., on August 30, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 12) He 
reported severe pain that morning, and was unable to move his shoulder. On physical 
examination, Dr. Barakat noted tenderness to palpation, and very limited and painful 
range of motion. His assessment was traumatic tear of left rotator cuff, and he ordered 
an MRI of the left shoulder to confirm. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 12-13) He allowed claimant to 
return to work as tolerated with no use of the left arm. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) He noted “left 
shoulder pain secondary to fall.”  
 
The MRI took place on September 9, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) The results indicated 
advanced rotator cuff tendinopathy with tears of the supraspinatus and anterior 
[infraspinatus] tendon. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) The notes state the subscapularis tendon might 
have also been partially torn. The MRI also showed biceps tendinopathy, glenohumeral 
joint degenerative arthritis with chondromalacia, and labral degeneration with probable 
tearing of the labrum. Claimant followed up with Dr. Barakat on September 14, 2021, 
who reviewed the MRI and referred claimant to the orthopedic surgeon. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) 
With respect to restrictions, he was to continue to work with no use of the left arm. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 17) 
 
Claimant participated in a meeting at ADM on September 17, 2021, in which he 
admitted that he did not slip in oil when he injured his left shoulder, as he originally 
reported. (Tr., pp. 49-50) Rather, he had tripped on the metal steps while going to 
deliver samples to the lab. (Tr., p. 50) He was then placed on suspension. 
 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 4 
 
ADM sent claimant for an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Abdul 
Foad, M.D., which took place on October 13, 2021. (Defendant’s Exhibit A, p. 1) Dr. 
Foad noted that claimant described tripping on stairs and falling onto his knees and 
outstretched left hand on August 29, 2021. (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) He admitted that he had 
initially told ADM about slipping on an oil patch because he wanted the oil cleaned up. 
He told Dr. Foad he had been suspended and off work since September 17, 2021, due 
to the false claim.  
 
Claimant told Dr. Foad that since the injury, he had experienced an intermittent 
ache that kept him awake some nights. His pain was worse when raising his arm or 
trying to reach out in front of him. The pain was both in the front and back of the 
shoulder and into the biceps. He also complained of weakness. He told Dr. Foad about 
the 2010 shoulder injury when he rolled his riding lawn mower. He said that he went to 
urgent care that day, but no x-rays or MRI was ordered, and he recovered from the 
incident.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Foad noted some pain and decreased range of 
motion in the left shoulder. (Def. Ex. A, p. 3) Specifically, his active forward flexion and 
abduction was 90/80 degrees, respectively. External and internal rotation was 70/75 
degrees respectively. Extension was 45 degrees. Passively, he was able to achieve 155 
degrees of forward elevation. With respect to strength, Dr. Foad recorded 4-/5 with 
Jobe’s test; 4/5 with resistive external rotation; 4/5 with belly press; and 4+/5 with 
abduction and resistive external rotation with breakthrough weakness.  
 
Dr. Foad reviewed the MRI, and made the following findings based on his 
interpretation of the results: 
 
1. Chronic massive rotator cuff tear with tendon retraction; 
2. Bicep tendon intact; 
3. Moderate to large-sized partial tear of the subscapularis tendon; 
4. Small SLAP (superior labral anterior to posterior) tear; 
5. Severe acromioclavicular (AC) joint degenerative/cystic changes; 
6. Greater than 50% atrophy of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscle 
bellies; 
7. Cystic changes over the superior glenoid; 
8. Glenohumeral joint arthritis with inferior osteophyte formation; 
9. Essentially a panlabral degenerative tear. 
 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 4) 
 
 
Based on his evaluation, Dr. Foad opined that claimant had chronic pre-existing 
left shoulder rotator cuff tear and age-related tendinopathy. He also noted significant 
impingement at the AC joint that most likely contributed to the eventual tear. He opined 
that claimant’s work injury on August 28, 2021 was a temporary aggravation of his 
preexisting condition, but he did not believe it would have aggravated the preexisting 
condition beyond normal age-related progression. In other words, he opined that the 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 5 
 
work injury was not a substantial contributing factor for the need of surgical repair to 
claimant’s current left shoulder condition. He did not believe the work injury caused a 
material aggravation or significant change to claimant’s preexisting condition. Rather, he 
stated it was more “personal in nature.” Dr. Foad stated he expected claimant’s age-
related progression to continue with time. He also stated that in his opinion, claimant 
“must have had some limitation of use of the left shoulder, but may have learned to 
compensate.”  
 
 
Dr. Foad stated that there is little evidence that one specific factor is responsible 
for rotator cuff syndrome. More likely, a variable mixture of both intrinsic and extrinsic 
factors can create such pathology. Dr. Foad said the rotator cuff tear “may or may not” 
be repairable, but he recommended attempted surgery of the torn rotator cuff and 
decompression of the AC joint, done on claimant’s personal insurance. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 
4-5)  
 
 
Dr. Foad felt no further treatment was necessary for the left shoulder related to 
the work injury, but then noted his “fairly poor functional range of motion.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 
5) He indicated claimant may benefit from 4 to 8 supervised physical therapy sessions 
to work on scapular and rotator cuff strengthening in order to get him back to baseline. 
He did not feel claimant would be capable of overhead work in the foreseeable future 
due to progression of his rotator cuff pathology, but based on claimant’s description of 
his regular job duties, felt he would return to work with no restrictions after a few 
sessions of physical therapy, as long as he was able to work at waist level. Finally, he 
placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of the date of his report. 
 
 
Claimant next saw Robert Magnus, M.D., on October 21, 2021, upon the referral 
of Dr. Barakat. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 18) Incidentally, he was also officially terminated from 
employment at ADM that day, due to his falsification of the original injury report. (Tr., p. 
50) Dr. Magnus noted claimant’s prior shoulder injury in 2010, and stated that claimant 
did reasonably well after that until his work injury at ADM when he fell on the steps and 
caught himself with his left hand, jamming his left shoulder. He noted claimant had seen 
Dr. Barakat, who ordered an MRI, and had an IME with Dr. Foad. His complaints at that 
time were persistent pain and weakness, and limited active range of motion. 
 
 
Dr. Magnus reviewed the diagnostic studies and performed a physical 
examination. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 18-19) He noted decreased range of motion in the left 
shoulder, along with pain and weakness. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 19) His impression was chronic 
rotator cuff tear of left shoulder with superior migration of the humeral head; mild to 
moderate degenerative change of the glenohumeral joint; and moderate degenerative 
changes of AC joint with recent aggravation secondary to work-related injury. He opined 
that the tear that preexisted the injury that occurred at ADM on August 29, 2021 with 
this injury aggravated his preexisting disease.  
 
 
With respect to treatment, Dr. Magnus was not optimistic about an attempted 
rotator cuff repair. He opined that the more predictable procedure would be reverse left 
total shoulder arthroplasty with resection of the lateral clavicle, which would leave him 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 6 
 
with permanent work restrictions. After discussion, claimant agreed to first try a 
cortisone injection, which Dr. Magnus provided that day. Claimant was to return in one 
week for follow up, and remain completely off work during that time.  
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Magnus on October 28, 2021, at which time Dr. Magnus 
noted claimant had a recent aggravation of his preexisting condition after a fall at work 
on August 29, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) He noted claimant had been off work since 
September 17, 2021, and had since been terminated from employment at ADM. He 
reported on 10 percent improvement with the cortisone injection, and that claimant 
continued to have weakness of the rotator cuff and pain with active and passive range 
of motion. They again discussed surgery, and claimant indicated he would like to 
proceed and asked Dr. Magnus to work on approval for surgery.  
 
 
Claimant testified that he never had the left shoulder surgery, as it was not 
approved by workers’ compensation. (Tr., p. 17) He was, however, approved for 
physical therapy, as recommended by Dr. Foad. (Tr., pp. 17-18) His first therapy 
session was December 30, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 23) At that time, he stated that he 
thought his shoulder was getting better for a while but now it was back to how it felt after 
the fall at work. He did relay his left shoulder injury from 2010, and again stated that he 
did not have any residual deficits after that incident. He had not been working since his 
suspension and termination from ADM. 
 
 
The physical therapist noted limited ability to test range of motion due to pain and 
range of motion deficits. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 23-24) It was also noted that due to the time 
since the initial injury, severity of symptoms, and nature of the condition, the claimant 
may be slower to progress with physical therapy interventions. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 25) 
Claimant had a total of 8 physical therapy sessions, with the last session taking place 
on February 17, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 23-46) At his last session, the therapist noted he 
was feeling decent, and thought the e-stim had been helping. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 43) She 
noted claimant had reduced “catching” in his shoulder but still had aching. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
45) He had also had some improvements in his range of motion, but he was still limited 
due to pain, catching, and weakness. It is noted claimant would benefit from a follow up 
with the referring provider to determine the next course of action.  
 
 
Claimant testified that the physical therapy was helpful and improved the 
condition of his left shoulder. (Tr., p 18) He estimated his shoulder got about 50 percent 
better following the treatment. (Tr., pp. 19-20) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Foad for a second IME on September 15, 2022. (Def. Ex. 
A, p. 8) Dr. Foad reviewed Dr. Magnus’s records and the records from claimant’s 
physical therapy. He noted that claimant had been terminated from ADM since his prior 
IME, but had since gotten a job running forklifts at Scotts. 1 (Def. Ex. A, p. 9) He did not 
have any restrictions and was able to do his job, but complained of shoulder soreness 
when restacking pallets overhead. Claimant told Dr. Foad that he did get some strength 
                                                                 
1 Scotts Miracle-Gro (Tr., p. 24; Def. Ex. F) 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 7 
 
from physical therapy, but not to his satisfaction. He noted that he was sleeping fairly 
well, but could not sleep on his left side. 
 
On physical examination, claimant’s range of motion was virtually unchanged 
from the first IME. (Def. Ex. A, p. 10) His active forward flexion and abduction was still 
90/80 degrees, respectively. External and internal rotation was still 70/75 degrees 
respectively. Extension was still 45 degrees. Passively, he was able to achieve 165 
degrees of forward elevation, which was symmetrical to his right shoulder and an 
improvement from the first IME. Claimant’s strength seems to have declined somewhat 
since the first IME. Dr. Foad recorded 4-/5 with Jobe’s test and 4/5 with resistive 
external rotation, both of which are the same as the first IME. He recorded 4-/5 with 
belly press and 4-/5 with abduction and resistive external rotation, both of which are 
lower than the first IME. 
 
Dr. Foad opined that claimant has chronic massive preexisting left shoulder 
rotator cuff tear and age-related tendinopathy, along with developing signs of rotator 
cuff arthropathy. (Def. Ex. A, p. 11) He also noted significant impingement at the AC 
joint, which most likely contributed to the eventual tear. He opined that claimant’s work 
injury on August 29, 2021 was a temporary aggravation of the preexisting condition, but 
he did not believe it would have aggravated the preexisting condition beyond normal 
age-related progression. In other words, he opined that the reported workplace injury 
was not a substantial contributing factor for the need for surgical repair to claimant’s left 
shoulder. He stated that the work injury did not cause a material aggravation or 
significant change to claimant’s preexisting condition, but that it was more personal in 
nature. He stated that the lack of marrow signal and other MRI findings were strong 
indicators of a “chronic picture well beyond six weeks duration.” He stated that he 
expects the age-related progression to continue with time. Finally, he opined that 
claimant “must have had some limitations of use of the left shoulder, but may have 
learned to compensate.” 
 
With respect to treatment, Dr. Foad agreed that a reverse total shoulder 
replacement would be reasonable, but with claimant’s relatively young age and the fact 
that the procedure is a “salvage procedure” with nothing to fall back on if it fails, he 
would recommend attempting a repair first, with someone who has experience with 
complex pre-existing rotator cuff disease. (Def. Ex. A, p. 12) He again noted that the 
surgery would be done on claimant’s personal insurance. Otherwise, he did not believe 
any further treatment was necessary as it relates to the work injury. 
 
He still opined that claimant was at MMI as of the first IME, October 13, 2021. He 
did not feel claimant was capable of overhead work because of continued progression 
of the left rotator cuff pathology. However, based on his description of his job duties as 
a forklift operator, he felt he could return to that job with no restrictions. 
 
Dr. Foad provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation 
of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. Using Tables 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46, he 
assigned 12 percent permanent impairment of the left upper extremity. He later clarified 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 8 
 
that the rating is not causally related to the work injury, but rather claimant’s preexisting 
left shoulder condition. (Def. Ex. A, p. 14) 
 
Claimant attended an IME with Richard Kreiter, M.D., on November 22, 2022. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Kreiter noted claimant’s 2010 left shoulder injury, and claimant 
denied any problems with the left shoulder following that injury until the work injury of 
August 29, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) He reviewed the rest of claimant’s history, and current 
symptoms at the time of his examination. At that time, claimant reported a frequent dull 
ache in the left shoulder, and inability to sleep on his left side. He felt he had reached a 
plateau in April of 2022, with his shoulder not getting any better or worse. He was still 
working at Scotts at that time, as a forklift operator.  
 
Dr. Kreiter’s physical examination revealed “obvious” deltoid atrophy. He 
observed no rotator cuff strength and weakness in all rotator muscle groups. There was 
significant tenderness over the AC joint. Range of motion was limited, and Dr. Kreiter 
measured abduction to 45 degrees; flexion of 60 degrees; external rotation to 30 
degrees; and internal rotation to 30 degrees. His impression was left shoulder rotator 
cuff tear, with degenerative changes in the AC and glenohumeral joints, biceps 
tenosynovitis, labral degeneration, and limited range of motion and weakness. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 4)  
 
Dr. Kreiter opined that the work injury on August 29, 2021, aggravated and 
accelerated claimant’s preexisting, asymptomatic condition in his left shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 1) He stated that claimant’s previous left shoulder injury was not relevant in his 
assessment, noting that claimant was seen at urgent care and x-rays showed no 
fracture. He was not seen by an orthopedic surgeon, and gradually recovered. 
Following that event, he denied any problems with the shoulder until the 2021 work 
injury. 
 
Dr. Kreiter opined that claimant reached MMI in April of 2022, when he 
plateaued. He felt conservative treatment would be appropriate, with his family 
physician monitoring anti-inflammatories. He felt periodic cortisone injections could be 
helpful. Should conservative treatment not be of benefit, he felt a reverse total shoulder 
arthroplasty could be considered in the future.  
 
Dr. Kreiter provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. 
Using figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46, his range of motion measurements resulted in a 
19 percent upper extremity impairment. He also, initially, used table 16-18 to add 10 
percent impairment for the AC joint. Later, however, he reviewed his rating and opined 
that there should be no additional impairment due to the AC joint. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5) As 
such, his final impairment rating was 19 percent of the upper extremity, based on 
decreased range of motion. 
 
Finally, with respect to restrictions, Dr. Kreiter noted that claimant had been able 
to self-limit his activity. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) He said that claimant avoids overhead work, and 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 9 
 
lifts with both arms close to the side, rather than extended out from the body. He did not 
make any other comments regarding restrictions. 
 
Claimant’s attorney wrote to Dr. Barakat on March 27, 2024, and Dr. Barakat 
replied and signed the letter on April 2, 2024. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 13-14) Dr. Barakat agreed 
that based on his examination of claimant on August 30, 2021, he suspected a left 
rotator cuff tear and ordered an MRI. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 13) He further agreed that after 
reviewing the MRI, he referred claimant to an orthopedic surgeon. Finally, he agreed 
that he referred claimant to an orthopedic surgeon to evaluate his left shoulder pain 
from his fall at work on August 29, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 14) 
 
Claimant started working at Scotts Miracle-Gro on April 11, 2022. (Def. Ex. F, p. 
49) He testified that his work at Scotts was less physically demanding than his job at 
ADM. (Tr., p. 24) His job involved picking up and moving pallets with a forklift. He 
primarily used his right arm, but at times would have to use his left arm as well. (Tr., p. 
56) For example, he said if he dumped a pallet, he would have to use both arms to pick 
it up and restack it. He testified that empty pallets weighed around ten pounds. (Tr., p. 
57) He did not have any problems performing his job duties, but at times his shoulder 
would be sore after working all day. (Tr., p. 58) He was terminated from Scotts in 
August 2023 due to “incidents” with the forklift. (Tr., pp. 24-25; 58)  
 
After that, claimant worked at River Valley Cooperative as a grain elevator 
operator. (Tr., p. 25) He started working there on October 4, 2023. (Def. Ex. G, p. 73) 
His job was seasonal, and he “ran a board” and “moved stuff from one silo to the other.” 
(Tr., p. 25) The job description for his position at River Valley indicates it was a light to 
medium demand position. (Def. Ex. G, p. 71) He testified the job was less physically 
demanding than his job at ADM, and he did not have any problems performing his job 
duties. He was required to pass a pre-employment physical assessment before starting 
there, which he passed. (Tr., p. 59; Def. Ex. G, p. 69) His total score indicated he was 
capable of work in the heavy category, which surprised claimant when he was told this 
information at hearing. (Tr., p. 60)  
 
Claimant left River Valley Cooperative for a job at SGS Consulting, where he 
remained employed at the time of hearing. (Tr., pp. 25-26) His job is in distribution, and 
he works out of Genesis East Medical Center in Davenport, Iowa. His job duties involve 
picking parts and supplying the other hospitals, boxing up parts, and sending them out. 
(Tr., p. 26) Claimant testified that he sometimes has problems performing his job duties. 
He struggles if he has to get boxes from the top shelf, because he has to use his right 
arm to help lift his left arm overhead. Claimant testified that the top shelf is taller than 
him, as he is approximately 5’2” tall. (Tr., pp. 26-27) He testified that he gets someone 
to help him if he is unable to get something off a top shelf. (Tr., p. 27) The boxes he 
packs up are generally fairly light, and he testified he has never had one weigh over 50 
pounds. (Tr., p. 64) He has not missed any work from his current job due to his left 
shoulder.   
 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 10 
 
Claimant has not had any additional medical care related to his left shoulder. (Tr., 
pp. 27; 52-54) He does not have any medical appointments scheduled, and does not 
take any prescription medication related to his left shoulder. (Tr., p. 65) He does take 
two over-the-counter Aleve every morning. He does not have any physician-imposed 
restrictions. He testified that he still has problems with his left shoulder, including pain. 
(Tr., p. 20) He has difficulty getting his arm above his head without using his other arm 
to assist. He also has trouble with lifting items off shelves or above waist level, and 
sometimes needs help with heavier items. He testified he feels he lost about 50 percent 
of his range of motion and strength in his left shoulder since the work injury. (Tr., p. 21) 
He has problems pushing his lawn mower and washing his hair. He also testified that at 
times he has difficulties playing with his daughters, when it gets physical. (Tr., p. 22) He 
testified that he has good days and bad days, and on good days he has very little pain. 
(Tr., pp. 22-23) However on bad days, he has a lot of aching pain.  
 
Arlen Steines also testified at hearing. (Tr., p. 68) Mr. Steines is the health and 
safety manager for ADM in Clinton, Iowa, and was also in that position at the time of 
claimant’s injury. (Tr., p. 69) Mr. Steines was called at home when claimant was injured, 
and went to the hospital to see how he could help and get his statement, as his job 
required. (Tr., p. 72) Mr. Steines also drove him back to the ADM plant when he was 
released from the hospital. (Tr., p. 75) Mr. Steines testified that claimant did tell him 
while at the emergency room that he had previously injured the left shoulder. (Tr., p. 77) 
Mr. Steines attended all of claimant’s medical appointments with him, and discussed his 
treatment and diagnosis with the medical providers. (Tr., p. 78) 
 
Mr. Steines was also involved in the investigation of claimant’s claim, and 
interviewed coworkers regarding claimant’s injury. (Tr., pp. 78-84) All three of the 
coworkers interviewed noted that claimant seemed fine earlier in the day, but those who 
saw him after the fall noted he looked like his left shoulder was in pain. (Def. Ex. H, p. 
80; I, p. 81; J, p. 82) 
 
Having reviewed the evidence and the parties’ briefs, I find that claimant’s August 
29, 2021 work injury caused a permanent aggravation of his preexisting left shoulder 
condition, resulting in permanent disability. Claimant credibly testified that his shoulder 
was asymptomatic before the work injury. He completely recovered following the 2010 
injury, with only one medical appointment at an urgent care clinic, the record of which is 
not in evidence. He was not referred to orthopedics. No MRI was ordered, and no 
surgery recommended. He did not have any injections or physical therapy. He did not 
have any lingering problems with his left shoulder after he recovered, and did not have 
any permanent restrictions or impairment from the 2010 incident. (Tr., pp. 10-22) He 
was able to continue his physically demanding work at ADM for another 11 years, until 
the 2021 injury occurred.  
 
Shortly after the traumatic work injury on August 29, 2021, claimant was sent for 
an MRI. The MRI showed a large rotator cuff tear, along with degenerative changes. 
The medical providers appear to agree that the tear preexisted the work injury, but Dr. 
Mangus and Dr. Kreiter both opined that the work injury aggravated the preexisting 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 11 
 
disease. Dr. Foad also agrees there was an aggravation, but feels it was temporary in 
nature, and did not aggravate his preexisting condition “beyond normal age-related 
progression.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 4) In his opinion, the work injury was not a substantial 
contributing factor to the need for surgery, and did not cause a material aggravation or 
significant change to his preexisting condition.  
 
The problem with Dr. Foad’s opinion is that all of the evidence, including 
claimant’s credible testimony and his work history, tends to prove that claimant’s left 
shoulder was asymptomatic prior to the August 28, 2021, work injury. However, 
immediately after the injury, claimant had pain and difficulties, which continue to this 
day. Claimant credibly testified that he was able to continue his job and daily activities 
with no problems or pain following the 2010 injury. He now has deficits in range of 
motion and strength, which have resulted in functional impairment. Dr. Foad’s statement 
that claimant “must have had some limitations of use of the left shoulder” before the 
work injury, but “learned to compensate” is pure speculation and is not given any 
weight. (Def. Ex. A, p. 11)  
 
Additionally, Dr. Foad’s explanation of the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that likely 
combine to set up a rotator cuff tear do little to support his causation opinion. The 
extrinsic factors he lists (prior trauma and bony impingement, i.e., bone spurs, acromial 
morphology, multiple cortisone injections, cyst formation, chronic nicotine use, and 
chronic muscle weakness) do not apply to this claimant. (See Def. Ex. A, p. 12) There is 
no evidence that he had any bone spurs, acromial morphology, cysts, or chronic muscle 
weakness prior to the work injury. He does not use nicotine. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5; Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
18; Def. Ex. A, pp. 2, 10) He has only had one cortisone injection, which took place after 
the work injury. Rather, the traumatic work injury appears to be the only extrinsic factor 
that had a role in claimant’s symptoms manifesting.  
 
The weight of the evidence does not support Dr. Foad’s opinion that the work 
injury only caused a temporary aggravation. The condition of claimant’s left shoulder 
has significantly changed since the work injury, resulting in disability. As such, claimant 
is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
There are two impairment ratings in the record, Dr. Kreiter’s 19 percent upper 
extremity rating, and Dr. Foad’s 12 percent upper extremity rating. The difference 
between the ratings comes from the differences in the range of motion measurements 
obtained by each physician. Dr. Kreiter’s measurements were taken most recently, on 
November 22, 2022, so I find his rating to be the most accurate picture of claimant’s 
current condition. As such, claimant is entitled to 19 percent impairment of the left 
shoulder. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 12 
 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  
In this instance, the parties stipulate that the injury arose out of and in the course 
of claimant’s employment. The first issue to determine is whether the injury was the 
cause of permanent disability. The claimant has the burden of proving by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on 
which the claim is based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about the result; it need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists 
when the causal connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel 
& Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa 
App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, the parties agree that claimant had a preexisting condition in his left 
shoulder. While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956). If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
 Defendant argues that claimant’s work injury only caused a temporary 
aggravation of his preexisting condition, and did not cause any permanent disability. 
Defendant relies on the opinion of Dr. Foad. Claimant disagrees, based on the opinions 
of Dr. Magnus and Dr. Kreiter, as well as claimant’s lack of symptoms prior to the work 
injury. As explained above, I found that the work injury caused a material aggravation of 
claimant’s preexisting left shoulder injury, such that it resulted in disability. 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 13 
 
I found claimant is entitled to compensation for 19 percent permanent impairment 
of the left shoulder, based on Dr. Kreiter’s rating. Permanent partial disability 
compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based on a maximum of 400 weeks. Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2)(n). Having adopted Dr. Kreiter’s 19 percent rating, I conclude claimant 
is entitled to 76 weeks of permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits. 
The parties disagree as to the proper date for commencement of PPD benefits. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2), as amended in 2017, states: 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is 
medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury 
has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined by use of the guides to the evaluation of 
permanent impairment, published by the American medical association, as 
adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to 
chapter 17A. 
MMI is reached upon a “stabilization of the condition or at least a finding that the 
condition is ‘not likely to remit in the future despite medical treatment.’” Bell Bros. 
Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (quoting AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 27 (6th ed. 2008)); see Armstrong 
Tire & Rubber v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa App.1981) (defining MMI as “that 
condition in which healing is complete and the extent of the disability can be 
determined”).  
Defendant argues that claimant reached MMI on October 13, 2021, based on Dr. 
Foad’s opinion. However, Dr. Foad recommended physical therapy, which claimant had 
after his October 13, 2021 evaluation. Claimant testified that the physical therapy 
improved his condition. As such, I reject October 13, 2021 as the date of MMI. 
Claimant argues that MMI was reached on either February 17, 2022, which was 
the date of his final physical therapy session, or on April 1, 2022, as claimant stated he 
felt his condition plateaued in April of 2022. Based on that, Dr. Kreiter found MMI in April 
2022.  
Claimant did not have any additional medical treatment after his physical therapy 
ended. The therapist assigned a home exercise program and recommended he follow 
up with the referring provider, but ADM did not authorize any additional treatment. There 
is no testimony or other evidence in the record as to whether claimant proceeded with 
his home exercise program and if so, whether that further improved his condition. As 
such, the evidence supports February 17, 2022, as the date of MMI. Therefore, PPD 
benefits will commence on that date. 
The next issue to determine is whether defendant is entitled to a credit for 
benefits previously paid. Defendant paid temporary total disability benefits from 
September 18, 2021, through March 17, 2022, at the rate of $1,116.04. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 14 
 
26-28) Based on the date of commencement of PPD, defendant is entitled to a credit for 
4.13 weeks of benefits, for a total credit of $4,623.75. 
The next issue to determine is the proper rate of compensation. Claimant 
believes the weekly rate should be $1,143.43, based on average gross earnings of 
$1,798.00. (See Hearing Report) Defendant believe the rate should be $1,116.04, 
based on gross earnings of $1,751.00. 
Iowa Code section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings 
of the employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the 
gross salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had 
the employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment.  
Both parties used section 85.36(6) to calculate claimant’s rate. That section 
states that if the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly 
earnings are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings, including shift differential pay but 
not including overtime or premium pay, over the 13-week period immediately preceding 
the injury. However, any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, and replaced with the closest previous week with earnings that 
fairly represent the employee’s customary earnings. 
The main difference in the rate calculations comes from the week ending July 4, 
2021, and week ending June 6, 2021. (See Cl. Ex. 5, p. 15; Def. Ex. C, p. 30) Both 
weeks include holiday and/or vacation pay. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 31-32)  Claimant included 
those weeks in his rate calculation, while defendant excluded them. Defendant argues 
that the weeks do not fairly reflect claimant’s earnings, as they include premium and 
holiday pay, making them higher than what he more commonly earns. Claimant argues 
that these weeks had similar work hours to other weeks defendant included.  
 The Commissioner has held that pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.36(6), all 
weeks that contain 40-hours or more should be included in the rate calculation. Ratliff v. 
Quaker Oats, File No. 5046704 (App., Jan. 5, 2017) In Ratliff, the Commissioner held 
that 40 hours per week is considered full time employment. As such, he held that any 
week of 40 hours or more is a representative week under Iowa Code section 85.36(6), 
regardless of how little or how much overtime is worked during that week, and 
regardless of how many other weeks are worked with overtime. Ratliff, p. 6. He further 
stated: 
If a 40-hour week with no overtime is not a representative week, then it 
could also be argued that the occasional or solitary week with far more 
overtime than usual also is not representative and also should be 
excluded from a rate calculation, which is another argument I specifically 
reject.   

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 15 
 
Given the Commissioner’s holding in Ratliff, I find that all weeks prior to the date 
of injury in which claimant worked at least 40 hours are representative, and should be 
included in the rate calculation. As such, I find claimant’s rate calculation to be correct. 
Accordingly, all benefits shall be paid at the rate of $1,143.43. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 15) 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for 
his IME with Dr. Kreiter, as well as medical mileage. Iowa Code section 85.39 permits 
an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee’s choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023). An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for 
the cost of an examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which 
the employee is being examined is determined to be compensable. Iowa Code § 
85.39(2) (2017). 
Defendant argues the work injury did not result in compensable permanent 
disability, so claimant is not entitled to reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
The same argument is made with respect to medical mileage under Iowa Code section 
85.27. I found the injury was the cause of permanent disability. As such, claimant is 
entitled to reimbursement for both the IME and medical mileage. Defendant shall 
reimburse claimant $1,000.00 for Dr. Kreiter’s IME. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 37) Defendant shall 
also reimburse claimant $107.95 for related medical mileage. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 34)  
The remaining issue is costs. Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of 
this agency. Iowa Code § 10A.328. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 
IAC 4.33. The only remaining cost for which claimant seeks reimbursement is the filing 
fee, in the amount of $125.30. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 36) Because claimant was generally 
successful in his claim, I use my discretion and award this additional cost. Defendant 
shall reimburse claimant $125.30 in costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant seventy-six (76) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing February 17, 2022, at the rate of one thousand one 
hundred forty-three and 43/100 dollars ($1,143.43). 
 
Defendant shall be entitled to a credit in the amount of four thousand six hundred 
twenty-three and 75/100 dollars ($4,623.75) for benefits previously paid. 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.  

DOTY V. ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO. 
Page 16 
 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Kreiter’s IME in the amount of one 
thousand and 00/100 dollars ($1,000.00). 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for medical mileage in the amount of one 
hundred seven and 95/100 dollars ($107.95). 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred twenty-
five and 30/100 dollars ($125.30) 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___18TH ____ day of March, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Matthew Leddin (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
