Case Number: 24700243.01
Case Title:  HAM, BETHANY V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH - DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ham Bethany-24700243.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BETHANY HAM, 
  : 
 
File No. 24700243.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :   
        
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
UNITYPOINT HEALTH - DES MOINES,  : 
      
 
 
  :                            
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
             Head Note No. 1108 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Bethany Ham, filed a petition for arbitration on March 22, 2024, 
and seeks workers’ compensation benefits from UnityPoint Health, a self-insured 
employer.  The claimant was represented by Christopher Spaulding.  The defendants 
were represented by Jennifer Clendenin.  Alexis Roberts of UnityPoint was present for 
the hearing as the employer representative. 
The matter came on for hearing on May 29, 2025, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 9; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 4; and Defense Exhibits A through L.  The claimant 
testified at hearing and was the only witness.  Jane Weingart served as the court 
reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on July 7, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the stipulated work injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability. 
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from April 19, 2024, 
through May 22, 2024.  The defendants have asserted the affirmative defense 
that claimant refused suitable work during the period of her disability. 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to any permanent partial disability benefits, 
and if so, the nature and extent of such disability. 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to the medical expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Nov-19  11:52:44     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 2 
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate care and/or future medical 
treatment for her alleged disability. 
6. The defendant contends apportionment of claimant’s disability is appropriate 
under Iowa Code Section 85.35(7), and further asserts that she was 
noncompliant with medical treatment. 
7. The defendant has specifically placed the claimant’s credibility in question. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on October 17, 2023. 
3. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is December 
10, 2024. 
4. The parties are in agreement that if claimant in fact sustained a permanent 
disability resulting from the work injury, the disability is industrial. 
5. The parties have stipulated to all of the elements comprising the weekly rate 
of compensation and assert that the appropriate rate is $374.25. 
6. Credit is not in dispute. 
7. Affirmative defenses have been waived with the exception of Section 
85.33(3). 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Bethany Ham was 38 years old as of the date of hearing.  She testified 
live and under oath during the video hearing.  Her appearance was professional and 
appropriate.  She stood for her testimony.  I find her to be a highly credible witness.  Her 
answers were short, responsive and straightforward.  Her testimony is consistent with 
other relevant portions of the record, including her previous sworn deposition.  There 
was nothing about her demeanor which caused me any concern for her truthfulness.  In 
fact, the opposite is true.  Her presentation was forthcoming and honest.  The 
defendants have placed Ms. Ham’s credibility at issue and these facts will be discussed 
further in the body of this decision. 
Ms. Ham is well-educated.  She graduated from Newton High School in 2005 and 
earned an AA degree from DMAAC.  She attended Santa Monica College in California 
in approximately 2019.  In 2020, during the Covid-19 pandemic, she returned to Iowa 
and finished her Bachelor of Science degree in Biology at Grandview College in Des 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 3 
 
Moines.  Her plan was to attend graduate school at Des Moines University to obtain a 
degree as a Physician’s Assistant (P.A.).   
She has enjoyed good health for most of her life and was active with activities 
such as running, weightlifting and yoga.  She testified that she had occasional medical 
treatment with a medical provider who performed adjustments or physical manipulation 
mainly for neck symptoms prior to her work accident.  Her treatment notes for these 
conditions are in the record.  (Jt. Exs. 2, 3, 4 and 5)  Generally Ms. Ham had undergone 
some treatment for her neck, mid and low back pain for some activity related symptoms 
by a medical provider in Newton.  While it may be fair to say Ms. Ham downplayed the 
significance of this prior treatment, she did not deny any of it.  I believe Ms. Ham that 
she did not associate any of this prior treatment with her current work injury. 
It appears much of her past work history has been in the service industry, 
bartending and bar management, in particular.  She also worked as a food and 
beverage director in California for about four years.  She secured employment with 
UnityPoint Health as a patient care tech in January, 2022.  She passed her physical 
exam for this position and was allowed to work with no restrictions.  (Tr., p. 49)  She 
testified her regular schedule was to work every Tuesday from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m.  She 
testified she was considered a PRN employee and was able to pick up additional shifts 
beyond this.  She testified that she needed to secure patient contact hours as part of 
her effort to secure admission to P.A. School at Des Moines University.  She testified 
that she was accepted to Des Moines University in approximately November 2023.  She 
simultaneously worked at a neighborhood bar in the East Village in Des Moines, Iowa, 
as a bartender.  She worked a couple days per week at this job and again was able to 
pick up additional shifts as desired. 
On October 17, 2023, Ms. Ham sustained a fairly serious and undisputed work 
injury which is well-documented.  While assisting a co-worker with moving an obese 
patient, there was an accident.  She was pulled hard into the patient’s bed as the patient 
dropped between the bed and an unsecured cart.  (Defendant’s Exhibit E)  She testified 
she was pulled across the bed quickly.  (Transcript pages 17-18)  She testified that she 
was injured and her body initially froze.  She immediately and accurately filled out an 
injury report listing her injury areas as lower and upper back.  (Def. Ex. E)  She testified 
she received treatment that day of ibuprofen, ice and rest, but worked the remainder of 
her shift. 
Ms. Ham first received treatment for her condition on October 30, 2023, with a 
P.A. named Laura Allison, PA-C.  The following is documented: 
Bethany Ham is a patient care tech for UnityPoint Health Des Moines 
here for an injury that occurred almost 2 weeks ago on 10/17/2023, 
around 4:30 PM.  She was helping transport of a bariatric patient who 
weighed over 500 pounds. She was on the opposite side assisting in the 4 
person transport and upon sliding the patient, the patient slipped in 
between the EMS cart on the other side of the bed that she was on and 
she had gotten pulled down across the bed while the patient fell before 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 4 
 
she let go.  Afterwards, she talked to her house supervisor and reports 
feeling a little bit stiff in the low back and in the back in general but had no 
other significant pain until later on.  Later that day, she felt increased back 
pain.  She describes the pain on both sides of her neck as well as the left 
thoracic region radiating to the frontal rib cage.  She also reports some 
stiffness in her low back as well.  Since then she has been using ibuprofen 
and Tylenol and alternating these.  She does not feel like the Tylenol 
helps her much but does not like to take too much medicine, and 
sometimes in the past she had gastritis issues and did not like to take a lot 
of ibuprofen although she tolerates ibuprofen okay now, so she has been 
taking between 400 and 600 mg once or twice a day which seems to help.  
She normally jogs 2 miles 3 times a week but has not been doing that.  
She does yoga daily but mostly has just been doing stretches and not 
intense exercise given her recent symptoms. She reports symptoms 
lingering 2 weeks, she feels like they should be getting better at this point. 
Patient does report about a year and a half ago of a similar work-
related injury where a patient fell on her and she developed the left 
thoracic back pain that radiated to her front just under her breast into her 
left rib cage.  She states this kind of comes and goes in her current illness 
and is similar to previous injury.  She states that it is a sharp pain when 
she does certain movements and sometimes it takes rest and a heating 
pad to go away, but it is usually brief and resolves.  She states when this 
happened a year and a half ago, she twinged her back at work and went 
to see work comp and had a few visits, but physical therapy was not 
ordered and she was prescribed baclofen but honestly did not really feel 
like taking the baclofen due to not wanting to take medications, and she 
felt like it made her groggy the following day.  She tried ice and heat at 
that point and conservative measures, activity modifications, and work 
restrictions which seemed to resolve things in a matter of 1-2 weeks she 
reports.  Past surgical history involves breast augmentation surgery, and 
otherwise she does not have any concerns with that and no other 
surgeries. … 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 37, emphasis added)  In this remarkably thorough narrative report, it 
appears to me that Ms. Ham related all relevant medical history to Ms. Alison.  She 
consistently and accurately described the injury.  She disclosed relevant past treatment, 
including her breast augmentation surgery.  And she accurately described her 
symptoms at the time, which included low and mid back pain which radiated to the left 
frontal rib cage as well as pain on both sides of her neck.  She even documented the 
prior work injury which impacted the front ribcage just under her breast.  Ms. Ham 
testified credibly that she did not realize at this point that she may have damaged her 
breast implant.  (Tr., pp. 57-59)  In the medical note, Ms. Alison diagnosed (1) neck 
strain; (2) thoracic back strain on the left; (3) and low back strain.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 37-38)  
On the patient status report, she diagnosed (1) neck strain and (2) chest wall strain.  (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 39)  She prescribed a muscle relaxer, medical restrictions and home exercises.  

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 5 
 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 38) 
Ms. Ham continued to work within her restrictions at UnityPoint thereafter.  Ms. 
Ham returned to Ms. Alison on January 8, 2024.  The following is documented: 
Bethany is an employee of UnityPoint Health Des Moines here for a 
followup from an injury that occurred on 10/17/23 leading to a neck strain, 
left-sided thoracic back strain and low back strain.  Bethany had to cancel 
her 1 week followup appointment, last seen 10/30/23, and she is here 2-
1/2 months later for a rescheduled followup.  She states her symptoms are 
about the same range between 0-4/10 on a pain scale.  She states her 
most bothersome complaint is her left-sided thoracic pain.  She also has 
some persisting neck pain, but it is no longer radiating up into her head or 
causing her headaches.  She states that the midback strain and pain is in 
line with the left-sided scapula.  After activity, it seems to be more 
bothersome.  She also has bilateral low back pain after the incident.  
Mostly, this is more bothersome after her work shifts.  She works one time 
a week, a scheduled 8-house shift, however, usually ends up being a 10-
hour shift.  She denies radicular symptoms in the upper or lower 
extremities.  No radicular pain, tingling or numbness bilaterally.  She takes 
400 mg of ibuprofen when she needs it.  Usually takes it when she is 
working.  She works, again, the one day a week as a hospital tech and 
then bartends other days but it is not strenuous.  She did try a relaxation 
massage which did help temporarily, although overall the past 1-1/2 
months she does not feel like she has made much progress.  She has 
been following work restrictions well.  She has been doing her home 
exercises that I provided for her.  She states the muscle relaxer helps her 
sleep but it does not overall help much more.  She normally does a 
strenuous yoga and jogging 2 miles 3 times a week, but she has just 
basically been doing stretch-type yoga and walking 3 times a week 
instead of running due to her ongoing symptoms. 
A year and a half ago she had a similar work-related injury and 
developed left-sided thoracic back pain that radiated into the front under 
her breast and her left rib cage.  She had rib x-rays at that time that were 
negative but no back x-rays or imaging.  She denies prior imaging on her 
back or her neck.  She denies prior back or neck surgeries. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 40)  At this time, Ms. Alison took x-rays and diagnosed (1) neck strain, (2) 
left side thoracic back strain and (3) low back strain.  She ordered formal physical 
therapy for these conditions and maintained her restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 41-42) 
Ms. Alison next evaluated Ms. Ham on March 1, 2024.  Her neck and low back 
had improved some at this time, however, her most bothersome symptom was in the 
“left lateral ribcage”.  The following is documented: 
Bethany is an employee of UnityPoint Health Des Moines for a 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 6 
 
followup after completing physical therapy.  She completed 5 reported 
sessions at physical therapy.  Of note, I see only 4 sessions of therapy:  
01/18/2024, 01/23/2024, 02/05/2024, and 02/20/2024.  Bethany tells me 
physical therapy has not been beneficial.  She does “the same 4 exercises 
that she does at home daily” and it has not provided her with any relief.  
She tells me her most bothersome symptom is the left lateral rib cage pain 
that goes into her frontal radiating near her sternum.  She states over the 
past few months it has slowly progressed to radiating more in the front.  It 
started out more in the back scapula into her lateral side.  She reports it 
feels like a “bruised sensation.”  She “cannot figure out what is hurting it.”  
She does have a history of breast implants and has even thought about 
questioning if the breast implant was damaged.  She does not notice any 
difference in the breasts bilaterally.  She has less pain in her neck and 
back; however, she has “been babying” these areas, not doing much 
workout, not lifting much.  If she does, then she will have increased neck 
and back pain.  She denies radiating numbness or tingling pain in her 
upper or lower extremities bilaterally.  She denies ever having an MRI in 
the past. 
In the past, she was seen for a similar work-related injury that occurred 
10/11/22.  She was seen with similar symptoms of neck and thoracic pain 
as well as left rib pain.  She had left rib x-rays at that time that were 
negative for acute fracture.  She has also been seen by sports medicine 
provider Dr. Christopher Ketter in the past in 2021 as well as early 2022 
for OMT evaluations for “acute right-sided thoracic back pain and somatic 
dysfunction of the rib cage region as well as somatic dysfunction of the 
thoracic region and cervical region.”  According to Dr. Ketter, this occurred 
while patient was working in the cadaver lab at Grand View University and 
trying to roll the cadaver over with her table mates, thought she was 
handling most of the weight, felt a strain or pull in the upper right shoulder 
and some tightness there as well.  She was also having low back pain at 
the same time. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 43)  This is the first mention in the records that her symptoms were 
possibly caused by damage to her breast implants.  Ms. Alison also documented Ms. 
Ham’s previous treatments to her neck and back in this note, reviewing records from Dr. 
Ketter.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 43-44)  The diagnoses at this time were (1) thoracic back pain 
with left rib cage pain; (2) neck pain and (3) low back pain.  Ms. Alison further 
documented the “left rib cage pain and back pain has gotten worse.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 44)  
She recommended an MRI.  The defendants contend Ms. Ham was noncompliant with 
physical therapy.  Ms. Ham testified that the physical therapy was painful and not 
helpful and I find this testimony believable particularly given that she had an 
undiagnosed injury to her breast implant. 
On her own, Ms. Ham sought out an evaluation from Tracy Kayan, M.D., in 
Minnetonka, Minnesota.  (Tr., p. 27)  Dr. Kayan is a plastic surgeon.  Ms. Ham sought to 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 7 
 
find out if she had damaged her implants.  Dr. Kayan opined that “her symptoms consist 
of having an acute work injury that has led to chronic ribcage pain.  She noted that her 
implants seem to sit lower (bottomed out) since the injury.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70)  She 
recommended “breast implant removal and complete ‘en bloc’ capsulectomies.”  (Jt. Ex. 
8, p. 71) 
On March 29, 2024, she returned to Ms. Alison to review the MRI.  The following 
is documented: 
Bethany is an employee of UnityPoint Health Des Moines for a follow-
up after an MRI of her cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine.  She reports 
she is the same today, no significant improvement in her symptoms.  She 
continues to have left-sided thoracic pain that radiates to her left rib cage.  
It is now going across her entire chest.  It is worse on the left than the 
right.  Previously did not have any right sided thoracic symptoms, has 
gradually developed right thoracic symptoms going under her right breast 
as well.  She continues to have bilateral low back pain and SI joint pain.  
She denies numbness, tingling, or radicular pain in her upper or lower 
extremities bilaterally.  Sitting for prolonged periods of time causes her 
symptoms to be worse.  She is taking ibuprofen 400 mg several times a 
day usually, especially on the days that she works and having significant 
pain despite this.  She completed 4 documented sessions of physical 
therapy earlier in January and February without significant improvement.  
She had reported they did the same stretches she did at home and it 
wasn’t overly helpful. 
She saw her primary care provider last week due to not being able to 
get in with us and reports they suggested some therapy.  She has also 
since seen a plastic surgeon to discuss breast implant removal.  She tells 
me today her bilateral breasts appear to be different at this time.  Her first 
notice of this according to my notes was when she returned to us 
03/01/2024, she was questioning whether the breast implant was 
damaged but had not noticed any difference to the breasts bilaterally.  
Now she tells me that she notices a difference and requires a 
compressions bra all the time with pain and trouble sleeping.  She denies 
any new injuries.  She believes it to be associated with the injury back in 
October.  She reports her neck pain is much better, and her midback pain 
is much better.  She continues to “baby” the areas, not working out or 
lifting quite as much as she would like.  She does mainly yoga-type 
stretching, but anytime she does any type of “chaturangta” or chest wall 
exercises, she has pain.  The pain in bilateral breasts is causing a difficult 
time for her to sleep. 
I was able to question Bethany regarding her visits with Dr. Ketter in 
sports medicine previously.  She had some OMT treatments done 
previously.   She reports they were for bilateral neck and upper back pain 
or if she lifted something wrong.  She states she used this as a type of 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 8 
 
chiropractor because she does not feel super comfortable with 
chiropractors and felt more comfortable with OMT treatments.  She no 
longer sees Dr. Ketter, he is no longer at the practice, but she states at the 
time it did seem to help with her upper back and neck straining. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 46)  The MRI showed mild focal kyphosis in the cervical spine.  (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 46-47)  Ms. Alison then diagnosed (1) thoracic back pain with left rib cage pain; (2) 
worsening right rib cage pain; (3) neck pain, improved; (4) lumbar disc bulging with 
ongoing low back pain and (5) breast implant injury/bilateral contractures.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
47)  Ms. Alison opined that the breast implant injury was not work-related.   
The patient’s evaluation today is consistent with the above diagnoses and 
rather complicated due to recent reports for concern of breast 
augmentation injury.  I have reviewed all of my prior dictations beginning 
initial visit 10/30/2023 with mechanism of injury, as well as patient’s past 
medical history, reviewing notes from Dr. Ketter, sports medicine provider, 
as well as Dr. Tracy Kayan, plastic surgeon.  I do not have her complete 
past medical records from prior breast augmentation surgery or from 
primary care.  Based on patient’s presentation her breast implant injury is 
not work related.  Discussing this with patient does create her to be quite 
tearful today.  I did encourage her to follow up for non-work-related injury 
with her personal provider. 
In regards to her work-related thoracic strain, rib cage pain, it appears this 
has been intermittent and present previously, likely exacerbated and 
associated to her chronic Kyphosis as well.  It appears in the past she has 
been seeing Dr. Ketter, sports medicine, for OMT treatments which 
treated ‘acute right-sided thoracic back pain and somatic dysfunction of 
the rib cage region as well as somatic dysfunction of the thoracic region 
and cervical region.’  Her MRI findings confirm cervical and thoracic 
kyphosis with no radiculopathy. 
For her thoracic back pain and rib cage pain, I recommend seeing 
physical therapist Kate Maurer at Iowa Clinic for consideration of dry 
needling as well as additional physical therapy.  In regards to patient’s 
ongoing low back pain, she has an exacerbation of chronic back pain with 
disk herniations.  No spinal cord compression or stenosis noted.  
Therefore, I recommend seeing Kate Maurer, PT to treat for further low 
back pain. … 
(Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 47-48)  Ms. Ham testified that Ms. Alison told her that “she did not know 
anything about breast implants …” (Tr., p. 26)   
Ms. Alison also modified Ms. Ham’s restrictions to allow her to do more activities 
and lift more.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 51)  Ms. Ham testified that she knew she could not lift more 
and decided to stop working at UnityPoint.  (Tr., pp. 19-20)  On March 31, 2024, Ms. 
Ham texted her supervisor and informed her that her last shift caused her chest to be 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 9 
 
sore and that she was afraid to work in such conditions.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 41)  Ms. Ham 
had her remaining shifts covered and stopped working at UnityPoint altogether.  She 
continued bartending on a part-time basis and then secured employment with the State 
of Iowa Department of Health and Human Services in December 2024, as a benefits 
specialist.  Ms. Ham testified that she quit this position in April 2025, to prepare for P.A. 
classes at Des Moines University.  She testified that she began increasing her home 
exercises to build up strength. 
Ms. Ham continued to follow up with both Laura Alison and Dr. Kayan.  She 
eventually underwent surgery to remove her damaged implants on April 19, 2024.  (Jt. 
Ex. 8, pp. 74-75)  She documented that she placed activity restrictions on her.  (Jt. Ex. 
8, p. 76)  On May 22, 2024, Dr. Kayan released Ms. Ham without any specific medical 
restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 77)  Dr. Kayan documented that the procedure healed well 
and Ms. Ham had no concerns.  Ms. Ham testified that the sharp ribcage pain that she 
had since the injury went away.  (Tr., p. 29)  This lay testimony, if true, strongly 
suggests that Ms. Ham’s “rib cage pain” diagnosed by Ms. Alison was caused by 
damage to her breast implant from the injury.  Having reviewed all of the evidence in 
this file, I believe her testimony which is supported by the medical notes of Dr. Kayan. 
Ms. Ham did not follow through with all of the physical therapy recommended by 
Ms. Alison.  Initially there was a great deal of miscommunication between the parties in 
June and August 2024, none of which I find to be particularly probative in this case.  I do 
find that it was likely that Ms. Ham was not particularly interested in pursuing the 
physical therapy because it had not helped previously.  (Tr., pp. 30-31)  Ms. Ham took a 
leave of absence from Des Moines University and stopped attending classes on June 
14, 2022.  (Def. Ex. H, p. 54)  She testified that she did not feel as though she could 
physically handle the schooling.  She was eligible to return to the program by the terms 
of this leave.  In any event, Ms. Ham returned to Ms. Alison on August 12, 2024, and 
had only partially completed her physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 52)  At that visit, Ms. 
Ham reported that her low back symptoms were worsening and she was having some 
new, radicular symptoms including some tingling in her feet.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 52)  She was 
referred to John Rayburn, M.D., at Iowa Ortho 
Dr. Rayburn evaluated Ms. Ham on August 21, 2024.  She reported low back 
pain with numbness.  Dr. Rayburn offered to perform a lumbar injection, however, Ms. 
Ham requested to hold off on this, and allow her to continue home exercises.  (Jt. Ex. 9, 
pp. 83-85)  Ms. Ham followed up with Dr. Rayburn in September 2024, and was 
scheduled for trigger point injections.  (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 87-88)  She did not follow up for 
these injections until December 2024.  She testified they did not help.  (Tr., p. 31)   
On February 28, 2025, Joseph Chen, M.D., performed an independent medical 
examination for the defendants.  He took a history of the injury, reviewed relevant 
medical records and examined Ms. Ham.  Dr. Chen did not provide any diagnosis for 
Ms. Ham’s low back.  He did document the following regarding her present condition: 
Ms. Ham reports that she didn’t think she could go back to her studies 
after having her breast implant removal surgery, so she is on a leave of 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 10 
 
absence from her PA studies at Des Moines University.  She will be 
returning next year bur [sic] reports she will have to complete her first 
semester again. 
She reports that her left sided chest wall pain has improved greatly after 
her surgery but is still bothered mainly by low back pain.  She is worried 
that she can no longer run even minimally without having increased low 
back pain.  She also reports back pain with prolonged sitting and driving 
more than 30 minutes.  She reports occasional pain radiating into her left 
leg but is still not interested in trialing gabapentin due to hearing about 
side effects.  She takes Tylenol or ibuprofen if needed.  She also has 
some baclofen that she uses if she cannot sleep consistently.  She uses 
heat, ice and lidocaine patches at times to help her pain too. 
(Def. Ex. B, pp. 10-11)  Dr. Chen then opined, in conclusory fashion, that the admitted 
work injury “did not cause, materially aggravate or accelerate or was a substantial 
contributing factor causing any need for future medical treatment for her low back.”  
(Def. Ex. B, p. 13)  He assigned a zero impairment rating and recommended no 
restrictions accordingly.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 14)  He rendered similar opinions regarding her 
breast implant removal.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 14-15) 
On March 26, 2025, Dr. Rayburn placed Ms. Ham at maximum medical 
improvement for her low back condition, effective December 10, 2024.  (Def. Ex. A)  He 
opined that she does not need any further treatment and she has no impairment and no 
restrictions.  (Def. Ex. A) 
Ms. Ham was evaluated by Brian Crites, M.D., for an IME on April 15, 2025.  He 
took history, reviewed appropriate records and examined Ms. Ham.  He documented 
her primary complaint at that time as low back pain.  “The pain is worse with sitting and 
running.  She has modified her activity level in order to minimize her symptoms.  She 
will get numbness/tingling in the left leg if she sits for a long time.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5)  He 
diagnosed low back pain with radicular complaints and lumbar degenerative disc 
disease.  He provided a thoughtful causation opinion as follows: 
It is my opinion as a board-certified orthopaedic surgeon that the work-
related injury on 10/17/23 was a substantial contributing factor in the 
permanent material aggravation of Bethany’s pre-existing lumbar 
condition.  It is clear that the lumbar DDD/spondylosis shown on the x-rays 
obtained in occupational medicine was pre-existing.  Bethany also had 
one prior episode of low back pain which resolved quickly with time.  She 
did not have numbness and tingling with her prior episode of low back 
pain.  After the work-related injury on 10/17/23 she complained to multiple 
providers of having numbness/tingling in her feet and continues to 
currently have these symptoms with prolonged sitting.  Thus her 
symptoms did worsen after the work injury.  This represents a permanent 
material aggravation. 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 11 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6)  He assigned a 5 percent impairment rating per the AMA Guides, 5th 
edition (DRE category II), and recommended some commonsense preventative 
restrictions of no lifting in excess of 50 pounds and no prolonged sitting.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) 
For her part, Dr. Kayan provided three separate “check box” reports on attorney 
letterhead.  (See Def. Ex. D; Cl. Ex. 2)  On February 23, 2025, Dr. Kayan described the 
claimant’s condition as a “double bubble deformity” and noted that this can be caused 
by trauma, but it is “not uncommon in a non-traumatic setting.”  (Def. Ex. D, p. 30)  She 
further agreed with defense counsel that she could not state with a reasonable degree 
of medical certainty that the work injury was a substantial cause of her surgery.  (Def. 
Ex. D, p. 31)  On May 14, 2025, she signed off on a letter from claimant’s counsel that 
“it is more likely than not the work-related injury is the cause for the need for the surgery 
you performed.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19)  On May 27, 2025, in response to defense counsel, 
she checked the box that she could not state to a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty when or how the double bubble deformity occurred that led to the need for the 
surgery.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 34d)  She added the following caveat.  “I can only take her word 
that the injury led to the appearance of a new double bubble deformity, but the 
mechanism of the injury would have been forceful enough to cause stretching of a 
breast implant capsule to cause bottoming out.”  (Id.)  I interpret this to mean that if Ms. 
Ham was honest about what occurred, then she could state to a reasonable degree of 
medical certainty that the injury is in fact a cause of the need for surgery. 
For her part, Ms. Ham testified at hearing that she continues to have pain in her 
low back.  Her low back symptoms are worsened by attempting to run or sitting for 
periods in excess of 30 minutes.  She stood for her hearing testimony.  She continues to 
do yoga stretches and she walks regularly.  She continues to bartend and, thus far, has 
not completed any further medical training. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the stipulated work injury is a cause of 
any temporary or permanent disability in her low back. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 12 
 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. U.S. Gypsum Co., 252 
Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1961). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
I find that the claimant has met her burden of proof that she sustained an 
impairment to her low back which was substantially aggravated by her work injury.  This 
is based upon the opinion of Dr. Crites, as well as her credible testimony, as well as the 
contemporaneous medical notes.  The evidence in the record suggests that the injury 
substantially aggravated these conditions in her low back. 
The next issue is the extent of permanent partial disability.  I find that her 
disability is appropriately assessed under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v). 
I find that the claimant has sustained a five percent whole body disability as a 
result of her work injury.  She is young, bright, and highly motivated.  I find she is highly 
employable.  I conclude this entitles her to twenty-five weeks of compensation 
commencing on December 11, 2024. 
The next issue is medical expenses and temporary total disability benefits for her 
breast reduction surgery.  This requires a causation determination, using the standards 
set forth above, as well as an analysis of Iowa Code Section 85.27 and 85.33(1) (2023).   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 13 
 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Iowa Code § 85.33(1) (2015).  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar to the 
work performed at the time of injury.  Id.  
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that the claimant damaged her breast 
implants during the stipulated work accident.  Ms. Ham described her injury in detail at 
hearing.  She was assisting the transport of a 500-pound patient when the patient fell 
between the cart and the bed.  Ms. Ham was suddenly pulled across the bed.  She was 
stretched and jerked in the process.  This seems to me to be exactly the type of 
traumatic injury which would be likely to cause “stretching of a breast implant capsule”.  
Dr. Kayan is the only medical expert in this file who is truly qualified to provide a 
medical causation on this point.  She provided three such opinions, which on their face, 
are both summary and contradictory.  In her last opinion, however, wherein she stated 
to defense counsel that she could not state within a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty that the work injury was a substantial causal or aggravating factor, she 
provided additional written analysis which I find is critical.  “I can only take her word that 
the injury led to the appearance of a new double bubble deformity, but the mechanism  
of the injury would have been forceful enough to cause stretching of a breast implant 
capsule to cause bottoming out.”  (Def. Ex. D, p. 34d)  I interpret this additional analysis, 
particularly when read in conjunction with her initial office visit in March 2024, to mean 
that if Ms. Ham was honest about what happened to her during the injury that Dr. Kayan 
does, in fact, believe that the work injury is a substantial cause of her need for the 
surgery.   
The other fact in evidence which is critical here is that approximately four weeks 
after she underwent the implant removal surgery, her ribcage/chest symptoms were 
essentially entirely resolved.  This evidence strongly suggests that the frontal ribcage 
pain that Ms. Ham complained of at her very first visit with Ms. Alison, was, in fact, an 
injury to her implants.  The only evidence of any other injury or damage to her implants 
which is in evidence, is a prior work injury, which had temporarily caused nearly 
identical symptoms on an intermittent basis.  It is certainly possible that something else 
happened to Ms. Ham that caused these symptoms or that it simply occurred 
spontaneously, however, given this record, I find it is more likely than not that the work 
injury, at a minimum, aggravated her condition and necessitated her need for surgery.  
While it certainly would be an easier case if Ms. Ham had immediately raised the 
concern of her implants “bottoming out” at her initial visit with Ms. Alison, this did not 
happen.  On the other hand, Ms. Ham did disclose to Ms. Alison that she had breast 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 14 
 
implants and that she had ribcage pain.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 37) 
The defendants have placed claimant’s credibility at issue and, in fact, 
specifically listed this as an issue for determination at hearing.  (See Hearing Report, 
par. 10)  The defendants waged this credibility battle on numerous fronts, but primarily 
focused on the fact that Ms. Ham never told Ms. Alison about any injury to her breast 
implants at the initial visit and instead waited until March 2024, to raise the possibility 
that the implants had been damaged.  Again, however, Ms. Ham reported ribcage/chest 
pain at her very first visit and specifically informed Ms. Alison about her implants.  I am 
uncertain whether Ms. Ham was in some sort of denial about possibly having damaged 
her implants, but it is noted that Ms. Alison also failed to consider the possibility that the 
implants were damaged in spite of all this documented knowledge.  In this record, I 
specifically find that Ms. Ham’s testimony is credible.  Her testimony was generally 
consistent with the other credible evidence in the record.  Her hearing testimony is 
generally consistent with her deposition testimony.  Her demeanor, while somewhat 
irritated and indignant, was overall appropriate. 
For the foregoing reasons, I find that Ms. Ham is entitled to temporary total 
disability benefits from the date of her surgery, April 19, 2024, through May 21, 2024, 
when she was released without restrictions.  Further, I find she is entitled to 
reimbursement of her out-of-pocket medical expenses as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
3, in the amount of $7,475.00. 
I reject the defendants’ defenses to the medical expenses.  The claim was 
denied which eliminates the authorization defense as a matter of law.  The treatment 
was necessary and reasonable as evidenced by Dr. Kayan’s reports as well as the fact 
that it healed her. 
I also reject the defendants’ affirmative defense to the temporary total benefits 
under Iowa Code Section 85.33(4), as there is no evidence in the record that the 
defendants ever submitted a written job offer.  The defendants were actually aware that 
Ms. Ham was preparing for implant removal surgery by at least April 1, 2024, but made 
no written offer of suitable work.  This is most likely because the defendants had already 
denied this condition as being causally related to the work injury.  (Def. Ex. G) 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant twenty-five (25) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of three hundred seventy-four and 25/100 dollars ($374.25) 
per week from December 10, 2024. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 

HAM V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-DES MOINES 
Page 15 
 
Defendants shall pay the claimant temporary total disability benefits at the rate of 
three hundred seventy-four and 25/100 dollars ($374.25) per week from April 19, 2024, 
through May 21, 2024. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3 in the amount of $7,475.00. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of $547.55, as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 4. 
Signed and filed this _19th __ day of November, 2025. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Christopher Spaulding  
(via WCES) 
 
Jennifer Clendenin   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
 
