Case Number: 5059762
Case Title:  ROGERS, JOEL V. WALDINGER CORP
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Rogers Joel-5059762D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOEL ROGERS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5059762 
THE WALDINGER CORPORATION, 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LIBERTY INSURANCE CORP., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :           Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1402.40 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Joel Rogers, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from The Waldinger Corporation, employer and Liberty 
Insurance Corp., insurance carrier as defendants.  Hearing was held on November 5, 
2019, in Des Moines, Iowa. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  In their post-hearing brief defendants state that they are 
not asserting a notice defense.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Claimant, Joel Rogers was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record also includes Joint Exhibits JE1-JE5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-2, and Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-M.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The evidentiary record 
closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  On December 3, 2019, defendants 
filed a motion to reopen the hearing record because an October 24, 2018 letter from 
Dr. Smith was inadvertently left out of the exhibits.  Claimant filed a notice of non-
resistance.  The motion was granted on December 18, 2019.  Dr. Smith’s letter was 
admitted into the record and is marked as Defendants’ Motion to Reopen Hearing 
Record.       
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-18  16:14:50     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 2 
 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on December 6, 2019, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUE 
The parties submitted the following issue for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the stipulated 
December 31, 2014, work injury?  If so, the extent of industrial disability 
claimant sustained. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Joel Rogers, injured his back when he assisted in lifting a 5’ x 8’ sheet 
metal damper at a construction site in Altoona, Iowa on December 31, 2014.  As soon 
as Rogers grabbed the damper and picked it up, his back gave out instantly.  He had 
two knots in the middle of his back, approximately 4 or 5 inches below his shoulder 
blades.  Rogers was taken to the onsite paramedic.  He was then directed to see doctor 
Richard S. Bratkiewicz, M.D.  (Testimony)   
On December 31, 2014, Rogers saw Dr. Bratkiewicz at Methodist Occupational 
Health and Wellness.  He reported that he injured his midback at the Facebook jobsite 
while lifting a large object weighing over 100 pounds.  Rogers felt as though he was not 
making progress.  His pain was mainly in the paraspinous thoracic back, an area that he 
had never injured.  The doctor’s assessment was midback strain injury.  Dr. Bratkiewicz 
recommended physical therapy.  He also prescribed Flexeril, an injection, and 
ibuprofen.  Rogers was restricted to lifting no more than 5 pounds and he was to avoid 
twisting his back.  (JE1, pages 1-2)    
On January 27, 2015, Rogers went to Iowa Ortho where he saw Todd J. 
Harbach, M.D.  His pain was in his middle back, lower back, and gluteal area.  He 
denied any radiation of pain.  Rogers reported that he had back pain off and on his 
entire life.  His most recent injury was December 31, 2014 when he was lifting a 
damper.  His pain was now worse with kneeling, lifting, drilling, or climbing.  Physical 
therapy had not helped much.  He admitted to not doing his home exercises.  His pain 
was described as a constant ache with some sharper episodes and tingling that went 
into his thoracic spine and radiated around his chest wall on occasion.  His pain was 90 
percent back and 10 percent bilateral lower extremity pain.  Dr. Harbach recommended 
an MRI of the lumbar and thoracic spines.  He restricted his activities until after the MRI.  
(JE2, pp. 3-4)    

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 3 
 
The lumbar MRI was performed on January 29, 2015.  The radiologist’s 
impression was mild degenerative disc bulging at L4-5 and L5-S1.  There was no frank 
disc herniation, spinal stenosis or lumbar nerve root impingement.  (JE3, pp. 79-80) 
Rogers returned to see Dr. Harbach on February 3, 2015 for follow-up on the 
MRI.  He continued to have a tremendous amount of mid and low back pain.  He begins 
his construction job at 6:30 a.m. and by the 9:30 a.m. break he is hurting pretty badly, 
and by lunchtime he is pretty much finished.  The assessment was degenerative disc 
disease lumbar, lumbar spondylosis, thoracic spondylosis, back pain, and obesity.  
Dr. Harbach stated, “He has degenerative changes that are chronic in nature and would 
not predominantly be caused by his work-related injury.  I am sure that his work related 
injury made things worse, but not the predominantly causing factor.”  (JE2, p. 5)  Dr. 
Harbach recommended strengthening and aerobic conditioning and anti-inflammatories.  
He restricted him to light duty for two weeks in the office and then planned to release 
him to full duty.  He wanted to see Rogers back in one month for a final rating.  
Dr. Harbach noted that surgery was not a good solution.  (JE2, pp. 5-6) 
On February 13, 2015, Rogers reported to physical therapy that he was feeling 
better.  Rogers indicated he was ready to return to full duty work next week.  He rated 
his pain as a 3 out of 10 at best and 10 out of 10 at worst.  (JE4, pp. 81-82) 
Rogers returned to see Dr. Harbach on February 18, 2015.  He noted that his 
back pain was getting better until an intense therapy session and now his pain was 
worse.  He was going to return to work on February 17, 2015, but was unable to due to 
his pain.  The plan was to send him for an epidural steroid series and continue him on 
light duty, preferably office work.  The doctor noted that surgical options were not good 
because fusing his entire lumbar spine together for back pain almost certainly would 
guarantee that he would never return to the same level of work.  Because therapy 
seemed to make him a lot worse, Dr. Harbach discontinued the therapy.  He 
recommended a home program of core strengthening.  (JE2, pp. 8-9)   
On March 5, 2015, Rogers saw Anthony Stark, D.O., a colleague of 
Dr. Harbach’s at Iowa Ortho, for a pain management consultation.  Dr. Stark reviewed 
the MRI and noted Rogers had degenerative disk disease at multiple levels in his 
lumbar spine, worse at L4-5 and L5-S1.  His assessment was lumbago, degeneration of 
lumbar or lumbosacral intervertebral disc, and obesity.  He was scheduled for an L5-S1 
interlaminar epidural steroid injection.  Rogers continued to follow-up with pain 
management.  (JE2, p. 7; Claimant’s Exhibit 1) 
Rogers returned to see Dr. Stark on March 27, 2015.  He continued to have 
lumbar spine mild tenderness to palpation.  The doctor also noted mildly decreased 
active range of motion of the lumbar spine.  He had good pain relief with the first 
epidural injection.  Dr. Stark recommended a complete epidural series.  (JE2, p. 10) 

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 4 
 
Rogers reported back to Dr. Stark on May 28, 2015.  He received about two 
weeks of pain relief after injections.  Rogers reported that 90 percent of his pain was in 
his back.  Dr. Stark felt that if his pain was coming from his degenerative disk disease 
and/or potential nerve root irritation of the lumbar spine, then he would have hoped for 
longer pain relief from the epidural steroid injection series.  He recommended treating 
the facet joints.  (JE2, p. 12)   
Rogers saw Dr. Harbach on February 19, 2016.  He reported middle back pain 
that radiated to the back and right thigh.  Dr. Harbach noted that Rogers had received 
some relief from the epidurals and the next step was facet blocks; however, he never 
received those.  The notes indicate that he fell at the beginning of February while 
walking down icy steps because of a sharp pain in his back.  He ended up breaking his 
foot.  He recommended a return to Dr. Stark to discuss possible interventions to 
decrease his pain and return him to work.  He had been laid off last April 2015 and had 
not been back to work for a year.  He cannot sleep well or do anything that he wants to 
do.  (JE2, p. 15) 
Dr. Stark saw Rogers on February 25, 2016.  He was scheduled for bilateral L2-
L5 diagnostic facet medial branch blocks.  (JE2, pp. 17-18)  The L2-L5 facet blocks 
were performed on February 29, 2016.  On April 15, 2016, Rogers reported significant 
symptom relief, so Dr. Stark felt it was reasonable to move forward with radiofrequency 
ablation (RFA).  The ablation was done in May of 2016.  (JE2, pp. 19-23)   
On August 17, 2016, Rogers saw John W. Rayburn, M.D. at Iowa Ortho.  He 
presented for an initial evaluation of low back pain and for follow up of bilateral RFA.  
Overall he was better, but some of his pain had shifted to just the right side.  He had 
occasional pain going up his back.  Dr. Rayburn’s assessment was low back pain at 
multiple sites, sacroiliitis, and chronic pain syndrome.  He recommended physical 
therapy, medications, and consideration for lumbar trigger point injections.  Rogers was 
to call for any follow-up appointment.  (JE2, pp. 24-27) 
On September 1, 2017 Rogers saw Kurt Smith, D.O. at Iowa Ortho.  He reported 
that he was able to complete activities of daily living without an increase in symptoms.  
However, he did note an increase in symptoms when he attempted to increase his 
activity.  (JE2, pp. 28-29) 
Rogers saw Dr. Smith on October 18, 2016.  Dr. Smith described his problem as 
severe and noted that it had worsened.  His pain was constant and located in his left 
lateral neck and upper back.  He also reported radiation of pain to the left arm and 
hand.  Increased pain with C7 distribution weakness and sensory loss in the left upper 
extremity.  He was given a Medrol dosepak and an MRI of the cervical spine was 
recommended.  (JE2, p. 34) 
In December of 2016, Rogers underwent trigger point injections.  (JE2, p. 37)   

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 5 
 
In February of 2017, Rogers saw Dr. Rayburn and Dr. Smith.  Most of his pain 
was in the low back musculature soft tissue.  The plan included trigger point injections 
and physical therapy.  The injections were done on March 23, 2017.  (JE2, pp. 38-44)  
On March 31, 2017, Rogers returned to Iowa Ortho.  His low back pain continued 
to limit his mobility and functional status.  He had not started the physical therapy that 
Dr. Rayburn recommended.  If he did not have a response to the additional physical 
therapy then he would likely be placed at MMI.  His restrictions continued.  (JE2, pp. 45-
46)    
In May of 2017 Dr. Rayburn stopped his physical therapy because it seemed to 
be flaring his problems more than helping.  An RFA was recommended.  On May 30, 
2017, a left L2-L5 medial branch RFA was performed.  (JE2, pp. 48-53) 
Rogers saw Dr. Smith on August 3, 2017.  He was participating in physical 
therapy for one month and was to follow-up with Dr. Rayburn.  (JE2, p. 54)   
On September 1, 2017 Rogers participated in a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) at Athletico Physical Therapy.  (JE4)  Rogers demonstrated the physical 
capabilities and tolerances to function in at least the heavy physical demand level.  The 
report stated: “Variable Performance/Questionable effort indicates that the client’s 
perceived limitations and return to work confidence are mildly to moderately affecting 
symptom expression, consistency of effort, reliability of pain, and/or quality of effort.  
The client likely could have performed at higher levels than willing during 
musculoskeletal and functional testing.”  (JE4, p. 86)     
By September 20, 2017, Dr. Smith felt that Rogers had plateaued in his 
treatment.  He reviewed the FCE and noted that Rogers could perform at the heavy 
category of work.  He placed Rogers at MMI and assigned work restrictions pursuant to 
the FCE.  Dr. Smith did not recommend any further treatment relating to the December 
31, 2014 work injury.  (JE2, p. 56) 
On September 28, 2017, at the request of his attorney, Rogers saw Sunil Bansal, 
M.D. for an IME.  Rogers provided Dr. Bansal with a description of the December 31, 
2014 lifting injury.  Dr. Bansal diagnosed Rogers with “L4-L5 and L5-S1 disc bulges, 
with annulus tears, and an aggravation of lumbar facet arthropathy.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
He opined that the described mechanism of injury was consistent with his lumbar disc 
bulging.  He placed Rogers in the DRE Category II and assigned 8 percent whole 
person functional impairment.  He agreed with the restrictions as set forth in the 
September 1, 2017 FCE.  Additionally, he restricted Rogers to no frequent bending or 
twisting based on the increased aggravation to the disc bulging and annular tearing.  
(Cl. Ex. 1)     
On October 31, 2017, Dr. Smith assigned 5 percent impairment of the whole 
body due to muscular spasms.  Dr. Smith later clarified that this was for the lumbar 

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 6 
 
spine.  He noted Rogers had underlying degenerative changes of the lumbar spine 
which preexisted the December 31, 2014 injury.  (JE2, pp. 57-58, 60)  On January 10, 
2018, Dr. Smith reiterated his opinion that Rogers did not need any additional treatment 
as the result of the work injury.  (JE2, p. 59)    
Rogers returned to Iowa Ortho on April 13, 2018 with increased arm numbness 
and tingling and weakness, left greater than right.  They felt he was a candidate for 
epidural steroid injection, as well as surgical intervention.  He recommended an MRI of 
his cervical spine and EMG/NCS.  He was to continue with therapy.  (JE2, pp. 62-63) 
On April 17, 2018, Rogers saw Timothy G. Kenney, M.D. at Iowa Ortho.  A 
discussion was held regarding the order of treatment.  He was most symptomatic from 
his left shoulder and might need surgical treatment for a rotator cuff tear and some 
labral treating.  He is going to discuss this with Dr. Galles.  In the meantime, he was to 
continue with Dr. Harbach.  He was also to continue his restrictions and his stretching at 
home.  (JE2, pp. 64-65) 
On May 4, 2018, Rogers saw Dr. Harbach for follow up on his cervical MRI and 
EMG/NCS studies.  The nerve conduction study showed bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome.  His MRI showed a herniated disk at C4-C5 and C5-C6, but the EMG portion 
was negative.  He recommended a hand surgeon.  (JE2, pp. 69-73)   
Rogers saw Ze-Hui Han, M.D. at Iowa Ortho on May 7, 2018, for an initial 
evaluation of bilateral hand numbness.  The notes indicated he owns a logging 
company.  He reported numbness and tingling in his left thumb and index finger the last 
couple of years.  His numbness and tingling had been worsening over the last couple 
years.  Rogers elected to proceed with right carpal tunnel release surgery.  For his left 
lateral epicondylitis, Dr. Harbach recommended ice, heat, over-the-counter pain 
medication, activity modifications, and soft tissue massage.  (JE2, pp. 74-76) 
Dr. Smith issued a letter with his opinions on August 1, 2018.  Dr. Smith had 
reviewed video surveillance of Rogers dated September 26, 2017.  Dr. Smith noted that 
Rogers was clearly identified and driving a motor tractor grabbing logs.  He stated, “He 
is twisting, turning frequently without obvious distress, bouncing over rough terrain, 
rapidly turning the steering wheel and walking on uneven ground, bending and twisting.  
He is doing this freely.  He does not stop and demonstrate any evidence of distress.”  
(JE2, p. 77)  The doctor also noted that Rogers had an FCE which demonstrated 
inconsistent effort.  That FCE indicated Rogers could function at least at the level of 
heavy duty labor.  Based on the FCE and the video, Dr. Smith opined that Mr. Rogers 
did not require any restrictions.  (JE2, pp. 77-78)   
On October 24, 2018, Dr. Smith authored a missive to defendants.  Dr. Smith 
stated that he had reviewed surveillance video of the Rogers logging business.   
 
 

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Smith stated: 
It is my opinion that he had a temporary exacerbation of an underlying 
degenerative process of his lumbar spine.  Any ongoing muscular pain, 
limitations in range of motion or skeletal pain would be the result of the 
degenerative process and not the work injury of December 31, 2014.  
Certainly, the injury of December 31, 2014 could have caused back 
symptoms, but within a temporary exacerbation of his underlying 
degenerative disease. 
(Def. Mot. to Reopen R.)         
With regard to restrictions and permanent impairment, Dr. Smith stated: 
On examination, the patient indeed did have ongoing muscular spasms 
and limited range of motion of the lumbar spine.  In light of the surveillance 
video and inconsistencies identified in the functional capacity evaluation, it 
is my opinion that he has a 0% impairment of the lower body as it relates 
to the work injury of December 31, 2014, and his present limitations and 
pain complaints are the result of the degenerative process of his lumbar 
spine and not the work injury of December 31, 2014. 
(Def. Mot. to Reopen R.) 
Rogers contends that he sustained permanent disability as the result of the 
December 31, 2014 injury.  In support of his position, claimant relies heavily on the 
September 28, 2017 opinions of Dr. Bansal.  Dr. Bansal opined that Rogers sustained 
permanent functional impairment and required permanent restrictions as the result of 
the December 31, 2014 injury.  In October of 2017, Dr. Smith also felt that Rogers had 
sustained permanent impairment and required permanent restrictions.  However, after 
Dr. Smith was provided additional information, including surveillance footage, he 
amended his opinions.  In October of 2018, Dr. Smith opined that Rogers had sustained 
0 percent impairment and no longer related his lumbar problems to the work injury.  
Rather, Dr. Smith related any limitations and pain complaints Rogers had to the 
degenerative process of his lumbar spine.  Based on the record, it appears that 
Dr. Bansal did not have the benefit of observing Rogers at his logging business.  If he 
did have access to the surveillance footage, he failed to comment on it in his report.  
Additionally, Dr. Bansal did not address the inconsistencies noted in the FCE report.  
Thus, I find Dr. Bansal’s opinions were based on an incorrect or incomplete history.  For 
these reasons, I find the opinions of Dr. Smith to be more persuasive than those of 
Dr. Bansal.  I find Rogers sustained a temporary exacerbation of an underlying 
degenerative process of his lumbar spine.  I further find that he has failed to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained any permanent 
disability or has any permanent restrictions as the result of the December 31, 2014 

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 8 
 
injury.  I find Rogers has not demonstrated entitlement to any permanent partial 
disability benefits.          
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of 
Appellate Procedure 6.14(6)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant failed to carry his burden 
of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained any 
permanent disability as the result of the December 31, 2014 injury.  I conclude that 
Rogers failed to prove that he sustained any permanent functional impairment as the 
result of the injury.  I further conclude that he failed to demonstrate that he has any 
permanent restrictions as the result of the alleged injury.  I further conclude that Rogers 
has failed to prove that he has sustained any industrial disability as the result of the 
December 31, 2014 injury.  Thus, claimant has failed to show entitlement to any 
permanent partial disability benefits.   
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy hearing the case.  I find that claimant was generally not 
successful in his claim.  Therefore, I exercise my discretion and do not assess costs 
against either party; rather, each party shall bear their own costs. 

ROGERS V. THE WALDINGER CORPORATION 
Page 9 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs.   
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this      18th     day of February, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Anita Dhar Miller (via WCES) 
Ryan Beattie (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
