Case Number: 20700923.01
Case Title:  WENNING, JASON V. ERJ DINING D/B/A CHILI'S GRILL & BAR
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Wenning Jason-20012604.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JASON WENNING, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File Nos. 20012604.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
20700923.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND   : 
BAR,  
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ZURICH AMERICAN INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :             Head Note Nos.:  1803, 2500 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
On October 12, 2020, the claimant, Jason Wenning, filed two petitions for 
arbitration and seeks workers’ compensation benefits from ERJ Dining (d/b/a “Chili’s 
Grill and Bar”), employer, and Zurich American Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  
The claimant was represented by Gregory Taylor.  The defendants were represented by 
Timothy Wegman. 
The matter came on for hearing on January 10, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 
7; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7; and Defense Exhibits A through I.  The claimant 
testified at hearing, in addition to Huge Jimenez.  Stephanie Cousins was appointed and 
served as the court reporter for the proceeding.  The matter was fully submitted on 
February 14, 2022, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
Through the hearing report, the parties submitted the following issues and 
stipulations with regard to File No. 20012604.01. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination with regard to File 
No. 20012604.01: 
1. Whether the claimant has sustained any temporary or permanent disability as 
a result of his stipulated workplace injury. 
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to a running award of healing period as a 
result of his stipulated workplace injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jun-28  16:35:38     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 2 
3. Whether the claimant has reached maximum medical improvement. 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to any permanency benefits. 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to the medical expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination (IME) 
under Section 85.39. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following with regard to 
File No. 20012604.01: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship at the time of the injury. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on March 4, 2019. 
3. The elements comprising the rate of compensation are stipulated and the 
parties contend the weekly rate of compensation is $1,020.46. 
4. Credit is not in dispute. 
5. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
Through the hearing report, the parties submitted the following issues and 
stipulations with regard to File No. 20700932.01. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination with regard to File 
No. 20700923.01: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on March 9, 2019.  The parties did stipulate on the record 
that, if claimant sustained an injury on this date, it was to his right leg. 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability. 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to a running award of healing period benefits. 
 
4. Whether the claimant has reached maximum medical improvement. 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 3 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to any permanency benefits, and, if so, the 
nature and extent. 
 
6. Whether the claimant provided timely notice of his alleged work injury. 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to the medical expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 
8. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
9. Whether the claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination (IME) 
under Section 85.39. 
10. Whether claimant is entitled to costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following with regard to 
File No. 20700923.01: 
1. Affirmative defenses have been waived other than timely notice. 
 
2. The parties had an employer-employee relationship at the time of the injury. 
 
3. The elements comprising the rate of compensation are stipulated and the 
parties contend the weekly rate of compensation is $1,020.46. 
 
4. Credit is not in dispute. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Jason Wenning was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  He testified 
live and under oath at hearing.  I do not find him to be entirely credible.  He was not a 
great historian.  Many of his answers were vague and general.  Some of his testimony is 
inconsistent with other evidence in the record.  Specific inconsistencies shall be 
discussed further below. 
Mr. Wenning is a high school graduate.  He had been the general manager of 
Chili’s in Cedar Rapids since approximately 2007.  His duties included all aspects of 
running a restaurant and training other managers.  It appears that he was quite good at 
this.  He worked long hours and some of the work was fairly heavy.  His job description 
is in evidence.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 5, page 44)  His working background involved 
restaurant management and training. 
Mr. Wenning testified that prior to his work injuries, he was in a state of good 
health.  (Transcript, pages 28-29)  The record reflects, he was active and athletic prior 
to March 2019.  He was diagnosed with psoriatic arthritis in approximately 2014.  He 
testified that his primary symptoms from this condition were pain and tingling in his 
hands and feet.  (Tr., pp. 25-26)  He testified that this condition never interfered with his 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 4 
ability to work.  His psoriatic arthritis was treated with a medication called Enbrel which 
controlled his condition well.  (Joint Exhibit 5, page 85)  By 2017, his doctor declared his 
psoriatic arthritis was in remission and stopped prescribing Enbrel.  (Tr., p. 27) 
Mr. Wenning testified that he sustained an injury while working for Chili’s on 
March 4, 2019.  This injury itself is stipulated.  Mr. Wenning testified that on that date, 
he traveled through winter weather to another Chili’s location in Coralville, Iowa, to 
retrieve product for his store in Cedar Rapids.  He placed a number of heavy boxes on a 
3-tier cart and wheeled it to his vehicle.  He slipped on the ice and fell forward.  The cart 
toppled and the boxes fell on top of him.  (Tr., pp. 31-32)  Mr. Wenning’s account of the 
injury is not disputed. 
Mr. Wenning testified that he had immediate and severe pain in his right arm.  He 
thought it was broken.  (Tr., p. 33)  He also testified that he had pain in his back, left 
arm and right knee but was mostly concerned about his right arm due to the severity of 
the pain.  (Tr., p. 33)  He immediately reported this incident and sought treatment from 
his family practitioner within hours.  His family clinic documented a right wrist injury, in 
addition to right elbow and knee pain, as well as a knot on his head.  There is no 
mention of back pain.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 8-9)  X-rays of the right arm initially revealed no 
fractures. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Following the injury, Mr. Wenning returned to work at Chili’s.  He testified that he 
assigned his employees to perform the heavier work of unloading boxes and so forth.  
(Tr., p. 67)  On March 9, 2019, he was performing a line check in the kitchen at Chili’s.  
As he was walking in the kitchen with a clipboard, he stepped in an open drain hole and 
hyperextended his right leg.  (Tr., p. 35)  Mr. Wenning immediately contacted his 
superior, Dan Debert, and reported the incident.  (Tr., p. 36)  While I have found Mr. 
Wenning’s testimony overall to be only marginally credible, I believe him that this 
incident happened and that he reported it to his supervisor.  The incident itself 
corroborated generally by one of his staff members, Hugo Jimenez, who testified live 
and under oath.  (Tr., pp. 15-16)  The defendants denied liability for this alleged injury. 
Mr. Wenning’s first medical appointment, other than his primary physician, was 
with Brian Wills, M.D., on March 21, 2019.  Mr. Wenning testified that Dr. Wills told him 
he could only treat the right arm.  (Tr., p. 34)  Mr. Wenning testified that he told Dr. Wills 
about pain in his left arm, right knee, and low back (on the right side).  (Tr., pp. 37-38)  
He also testified that he had bilateral locking in his ring finger, as well as pain in both 
elbows and shoulders.  (Tr., pp. 34-35)  Dr. Wills documented the following: 
He was up at Cedar Rapids at the restaurant they are getting 
additional supplies that are placed into paln size cans [sic].  He was 
loading these into the truck when he lost his balance due to the fact he 
was standing on ice in the parking lot and fell forwards landing on 
outstretched hands and also on his knees.  The cart that the cans were on 
then flipped and ended up hitting him on the forehead.  He was able to 
stand back up and finished loading the cans into his truck and able to 
drive back to Iowa City.  He had persistent pain and sought medical care 
later that day.  He was evaluated and x-rays were obtained of the right 
elbow and right wrist.  There was a fracture but there was concern for 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 5 
some possible widening at the scapholunate interval.  He was placed in a 
wrist splint.  He notes he has been wearing the splint somewhat, but has 
been taking off as he is needed to in order to be able to perform his duties 
as the general manager at Chilis restaurant.  He is not having any 
numbness or tingling.  In addition to the pain in the right wrist, he is also 
noted some bruising and pain in the knees.  All of the symptoms seem to 
be getting better.  No numbness or tingling. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25)  While it is true that Dr. Wills focused mostly on his right arm at this 
visit, Dr. Wills clearly documented his knee pain and various symptoms in other body 
parts.  There is, however, no mention of back pain, finger or hand pain or any 
numbness or locking of the fingers.  Dr. Wills diagnosed right wrist contusion.  He 
recommended conservative management and use of a wrist splint. 
Dr. Wills reexamined Mr. Wenning on April 24, 2019, documenting the following 
at this time: 
He is now about 7 or half [sic] weeks out from his injury.  He notes that his 
symptoms tend to be very ‘hit or miss’.  He does feel better when he is 
resting.  His symptoms were much improved while he was on vacation for 
a week.  He knows if he overdoes things, the pain gets worse.  He can 
have an episode where his will seem to flare up his symptoms and then 
they will last for several hours.  He is not able to do a pushup due to 
placing the wrist in an uncomfortable position.  No significant numbness or 
tingling.  No nocturnal symptoms.  He has been taking anti-inflammatory 
medication on and off.  Aspirin has been some benefit.  He is wondering 
about switching to ibuprofen. 
He is noting some aching and pain that seems to go from the wrist up 
into both proximal forearms.  It seems to be more on the back of the wrist 
on each side.  He is also noting some discomfort around the outside of the 
left elbow. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 29)  There is no documentation of any other symptoms at this visit, 
including locking in his fingers or back pain.  Mr. Wenning testified that he was confident 
he told Dr. Wills about these other symptoms.  (Tr., p. 38)  Mr. Wenning testified that Dr. 
Wills told him that his symptoms would improve with time.  (Tr., p. 31)  Dr. Wills though, 
actually recommended occupational therapy.  “As pain decreases and motion and 
strength improve, he can begin a work hardening program.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 31)  He 
prescribed two times per week for six weeks and asked him to return upon completion 
of the treatment.  It appears that his only restriction at this time was to wear the wrist 
splint. 
Mr. Wenning testified that the therapy was initially denied, however, other than 
his own testimony, there is no evidence of this in the record.  (Tr., pp. 79-80)  Mr. 
Wenning also testified that his work schedule made it difficult to attend appointments.  
(Tr., p. 41)  He testified he only went one time after Dr. Wills prescribed therapy.  “I  
 
 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 6 
worked a lot.  And it was pretty much just squeezing a ball, but I figured I could do that 
anywhere.”  (Tr., p. 41)  This was Mr. Wenning’s last medical treatment until November 
2019. 
In June 2019, Mr. Wenning was terminated from Chili’s.  There are no 
employment records or other evidence in the record documenting the basis for his 
termination.  Mr. Wenning testified that he was told he was terminated for painting 
bathroom stalls without authorization, unauthorized use of cameras and using a 
manager training comp card.  (Tr., p. 65)  He was eventually awarded unemployment 
compensation.  His unemployment payment records are in evidence.  (Def. Ex. H) 
The record is somewhat unclear as to why Mr. Wenning did not receive any 
treatment between June and November 2019.  He testified that he did not seek 
treatment because the physicians told him he would improve with time.  He did not 
apply for unemployment until November or December 2019.  He was not getting any 
treatment.  He testified that he did not try to get any treatment during this period of time 
because Dr. Wills told him his condition would improve with time.  (Tr., p. 41)  He also 
did not have any insurance following his termination. 
He first returned to his primary clinic in November 2019.  Sarah von Harz, M.D., 
documented the following:  “He reports he is still suffering from bilateral hand and wrist 
pain, as well as neck and back pain which he believes are a result of the fall he had.”  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11)  Dr. von Harz noted that psoriatic arthritis symptoms had returned.  She 
documented severe hand pain, triggering in his fingers that is painful, and pain in his 
shoulders neck and back.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11)  Upon examination she noted swelling in his 
bilateral hands and locking in his ring fingers.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 12)  Dr. von Harz 
reexamined him in December 2019, and documented many of the same issues. 
[H]e continues to have bilateral hand pain and trigger digits. He reports 
that these have been a problem since a fall at work.  I had seen him for 
this one month ago.  I advised that he pursue splinting for the time being, 
and ice but recommended that he stop ibuprofen and nsaids as well as 
apap for now because I was concerned about liver and kidney function, he 
has a history of psoriatic arthritis. The only active psoriasis now is a spot 
on the left forearm, he hasn’t been on immunosuppressives for many 
months now and states that his sxs have not returned the same as they 
were.  He reports that the hand pain and foot pain has been present since 
he fell on ice at work. He did see ortho.  When he went there, he was told 
that they expected his sxs would get better, but they have not.  He is now 
still struggling with left foot pain, which is plantar aspect; in one area 
specifically, he has tried inserts, changed shoes, massage and ice but the 
pain is pinpoint and severe.  He feels it is getting worse, and now he feels 
a small bump in the most painful area, the lower leg swelling continues 
although he reports it is somewhat better. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 14)  She referred him back for orthopedic consultation and recommended a 
hand and foot specialist.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 16) 
 
 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 7 
For the orthopedic consultation he returned to Dr. Wills on January 16, 2020.  (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 35)  Mr. Wenning’s clinical presentation in January 2020, was significantly 
different from what Dr. Wills had documented in April 2019. 
He notes that it is now difficult for him to feel items in his pocket.  He 
has difficulty pulling change out as he does not feel it.  He also notes that 
driving exacerbates the numbness and tingling in the hands.  He is not 
having nocturnal awakening due to the symptoms.  He notes that the 
symptoms have been going on for about 5 months.  He notes that the 
fingers will be stiff in the morning and it is difficult for him to make a tight 
fist.  He has tried wearing copper gloves that he finds are very beneficial 
as is using a powerful magnet.  He has also noted some clicking and 
catching involving the ring finger.  This has also been going on for several 
months.  He describes a history of the finger getting stock [sic] in flexion 
and he will have to use his other hand to pull it out into extension.  He has 
not had any electrodiagnostic testing. 
He tells me that he does have similar symptoms that occurred on the 
left side and that he injured his left upper extremity as well when he fell 
back in March of 2019.  He is currently having the left side be evaluated 
as part of the workers’ compensation claim.  He understands that I can 
only evaluate his right side today as the left side has not been approved 
as a workers’ compensation injury. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 35)  There is no mention whatsoever of any back pain in this record.  Dr. 
Wills thoroughly examined both upper extremities and hands and he suspected carpal 
and/or cubital tunnel.  He ordered electrodiagnostic studies and placed him on a five-
pound lifting restriction.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 38-39) 
 
In February 2020, Mr. Wenning gave a recorded statement to the insurance 
carrier.  (Cl. Ex. 3)  In his statement, he made no mention of injuring his back in the 
March 4, 2019, work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 32)  He indicated he hurt his right hand and 
arm.  When asked what other body parts were injured, he answered, “My knees and 
my, my ankles.  Was when I fell on fell on all fours.”  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 32)  He did mention 
that the boxes hit him in his back and the back of his legs.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 33) 
For reasons not apparent in this record, Mr. Wenning did not immediately have 
electrodiagnostic testing or any follow-up with Dr. Wills.  In fact, he did not return to any 
physician until August 2020.  At some point prior to July 2020, Mr. Wenning filed for 
Social Security Disability (SSD).  Through that process, Disability Determination 
Services authorized radiographic evaluation of his low back and knee.  The following 
conditions were listed as needing evaluation: “Hand/Wrist Arm Problem; Knee Problem; 
High Blood Pressure; Psoriatic Arthritis; Foot Problems; Stomach Problems”.  (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 65)  On August 5, 2020 lumbar x-rays showed mild chronic multi-level disc 
degeneration.  Knee x-rays demonstrated osteoarthritis and moderate-sized 
tricompartmental osteophytes and mild medial compartment joint space narrowing, and 
joint effusion.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 70-71) 
 
 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 8 
Mr. Wenning returned to his primary physician, Dr. von Harz in August 2020 for a 
rash on his right upper arm.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 17)  Dr. von Harz documented the following: 
History of Present Illness 
Patient’s here today because he was concerned about a potential 
allergic reaction centered around a patch on his left arm.  This patch has 
been present for a week now.  He states it is there because he had DHS 
called on him and they placed a patch on his arm in order to see if he is 
using drugs or not.  I have never seen a patch like this before.  Is a small 
patch, 2 cm x 3 cm placed on the left lateral upper arm.  It is covered with 
clear adhesive.  The skin surrounding adhesive is very irritated, red and 
excoriated.  Patient also states that he was working fixing his car and 
spilled break [sic] fluid on this.  He thinks that exacerbated skin irritation.  
He was supposed to drive to Cedar Rapids to have this removed 
yesterday but he felt too tired and run down to do so.  He plans to go 
today.  
He does have a diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis.  He is not following with 
rheumatologist for this.  He stopped doing so when medications became 
too expensive and follow up appointments also became problematic.  He 
was taking Enbrel which he felt helped both his skin and joint pain.  Since 
stopping that medication he has had chronic problems with polyarthralgia 
mostly centered in the hands.  He is currently reporting hand swelling 
that’s worse in the morning, tends to get somewhat better during the day 
but he continues to have trouble using his hands, decreased grip strength, 
chronic problems with redness and swelling.  He now has insurance and is 
willing to seek rheumatological help again.  He is not currently taking his 
blood pressure medicine.  His blood pressure today is within normal limits.  
He has not been taking it for quite some time.  He denies current drug and 
alcohol use.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 17)  Dr. von Harz did lab testing and referred Mr. Wenning to 
rheumatology.  “I discussed the importance of the patient’s having control over his 
psoriatic arthritis.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 19) 
On September 4, 2020, Mr. Wenning was evaluated at an urgent care clinic in 
North Liberty complaining of back pain.  Other than his visit to Dr. von Harz, this is the 
first office note I can locate in the record of evidence which documents Mr. Wenning 
specifically complaining of back pain.  “This is a new problem.  The current episode 
started yesterday (yesterday, heavy lifting furniture/tires and ‘tweaked’ his low back.”  
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 72)  The pain was documented as severe.  He was diagnosed with acute 
right-sided low back pain without sciatica.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 72)  He was prescribed some 
medications and told to follow up with his primary physician if necessary.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
74)  Claimant filed the petition in this matter on October 12, 2020. 
 
 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 9 
In March 2021, claimant’s counsel requested further treatment for claimant’s 
back and arms.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 40)  On March 26, 2021, defense counsel wrote to 
claimant’s counsel denying liability for any condition other than claimant’s right arm 
injury.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 41) 
On March 23, 2021, Mr. Wenning was evaluated by a rheumatologist at the 
University of Iowa for his psoriatic arthritis.  His history of psoriatic arthritis was 
documented as follows: 
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS 
History comes from the patient: 
- 
has been seeing Dr. Bagheri for 1-2 years.  
- 
he put him on Enbrel – got the arthritis in remission (was on it for 1.5 or 
2 years), stopped it in 2015/2016 methotrexate – unable to tolerate 
(pills) 
- 
sulfasalazine – did not help. 
- 
the pain came back within two to three months after stopping the 
Enbrel 
- 
joint pain: 
Hands: ring finger on both hands and middle finger on the right.  
Swollen in the same areas.  Morning stiffness for couple of hours.  The 
worst time for his hands in morning.  
Right shoulder:  The pain started about 9 months and has gotten much 
worse in the last two months.  The shoulder hurts any time.  If feels like 
it is out of place.  
Right knee: started hurting since the accident in 2019. This was when 
he already stopped the Enbrel.  Denies swelling.  Does hear clicking. 
Walking upstairs is difficult.  The pain is present all the time.  He 
denies morning stiffness. 
Low back: started in the last 6-8 months.  It was there before but not as 
bad as before the fall in 2019.  It hurts with driving and has to stop and 
get out of the car.  The pain comes down on the back of the left leg.  
When he coughs, it hurts on the right leg in the front.  Sitting makes it 
worse.  Lying down is fine.  
Toes: always numb.  The pain came back after stopping the Enbrel.  
Denies sausage toes.  This does hurt more in the mornings.  
- takes aspirin, Advil and that does help 
- does feel tired “all the time” for almost a year 
- skin mainly involves the scalp and some on his arms. Enbrel helped 
the skin too.  
- drinks water at night, and sleeps with mouth open 
- right arm feels weak 
- numbness and tingling in hands and feet since 2015.  It got better 
while on Enbrel.  
- shower does help a lot 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 10 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 109)  The rheumatologist did a full arthritis workup and diagnosed psoriatic 
arthritis.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 114-115)  Enbrel was prescribed.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 115) 
 
In June 2021, Mr. Wenning returned to Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa and began 
seeing physicians for his left arm, back and right knee.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 88)  This is the 
same clinic which had previously treated his psoriatic arthritis (Dr. Bagheri).  James 
Huber, D.O., evaluated his low back and hip in June 2021.  Peter Chimenti, M.D., 
examined his left ring finger in September 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 102)  Dr. Chimenti noted 
that the finger issue may “be possibly contributed by the psoriatic arthritis.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
102)  This record reflects the difficulty in sorting out the precise causal relationship 
between any work injury and his ongoing condition. 
Mr. Wenning finally obtained electrodiagnostic testing in July 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 
44-47)  This is presumably the testing Dr. Wills recommended in January 2020.  He 
followed up with Dr. Wills a few days later.  Dr. Wills documented the following: 
History of Present Illness 
Mr. Wenning is a 49 year old gentleman seen today for the the [sic] 
above.  He returns today independently having been last seen on January 
17, 2020.  He has been seen for the above.  He has recently had 
electrodiagnostic testing that was recommended when he last saw me on 
January 17. He does note that overall he is doing “better”.  He does note 
still some numbness and tingling just in the tips of the fingers, but the 
symptoms of numbness and tingling seem to have improved overall.  His 
main concern today is the left ring finger and the fact that he is not able to 
fully extend at the DIP joint and he has difficulty fully flexing the finger as 
well.  This finger has been evaluated by several other care providers it 
seems though I do not have access to the records.  He tells me he was 
recently at PCI for what sounds to have been a possible IME.  He told me 
x-rays were obtained of the finger at that appointment and that he was told 
there was no evidence of fracture.  The right ring trigger finger that he had 
at his last appointment has not resolved.  He is related to me that he has 
not returned to work since I saw him last.  
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 48)  Dr. Wills again recommended a course of occupational therapy.  (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 51)  He provided work restrictions and asked to follow up in six weeks. 
On July 8, 2021, Mr. Wenning was evaluated by Charles Wenzel, D.O., for an 
independent medical evaluation and prepared a report dated August 18, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 
2)  Dr. Wenzel reviewed appropriate records and examined Mr. Wenning.  (Cl. Ex. 2, 
pp. 3-11)  He diagnosed low back pain and right knee pain.  He did not make any 
diagnosis for either of claimant’s arms, wrists or hands.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 11)  Regarding 
medical causation, he stated the following: 
If the incident occurred as Mr. Wenning states (he states that he did 
not have any low back pain until after the 03/04/2019 work injury when he 
slipped on ice), the low back pain could be related to his employment with 
Chili’s, assuming the history presented today is accurate. 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 11 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 11-12)  Dr. Wenzel rendered a similar opinion regarding Mr. Wenning’s 
right knee pain.  He assigned a 5 percent whole body rating for the low back and 
recommended orthopedic evaluations for both the low back and the right knee.  Dr. 
Wenzel did fully evaluate the condition in claimant’s bilateral hands and arms, but 
provided no conclusions regarding diagnosis, causation, impairment or disability. 
After his IME, Mr. Wenning began therapy in August 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 106)  It 
appears the therapy focused on his low back and right hip.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 107)  Dr. Wills 
examined Mr. Wenning on August 24, 2021.  At that time, Mr. Wenning reported 
significant improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 55-57)  He was given an injection. 
Dr. Wills electronically signed a statement prepared by claimant’s counsel on firm 
letterhead in August 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  Dr. Wills agreed that claimant had complained of 
pain in his bilateral wrists, forearms, knees, left elbow, right and left ring fingers, but he 
was only authorized to treat the right arm.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1)  He went on to opine that the 
March 2019, work injury was a substantial factor in causing Mr. Wenning’s bilateral 
forearm tendonitis.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1)  He further opined that Mr. Wenning had not 
reached maximum medical improvement for this condition and that he had been under 
restrictions for this condition since January 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
Dr. Wills examined Mr. Wenning on a final occasion on October 5, 2021.  The 
following is documented: 
Mr. Wenning is a 49 year old gentleman seen today for the above.  He 
returns today independently in scheduled follow-up having been last seen 
on August 24, 2021 at which time he had a right ringer finger A1 sheath 
injection for trigger digit.  He notes his triggering has resolved and he has 
no further triggering.  He does still notes [sic] some pain and stiffness in 
the mornings that gets better after about an hour.  He additionally tells me 
that he has had an injection into the left ring finger is well by a no other 
[sic] physician that he is seeing for this and that this has helped his left 
ring finger. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 58)  This was the last visit he had with Dr. Wills.  On December 7, 2021, 
Dr. Wills documented the following: 
Mr. Wenning has not presented to his last 2 scheduled appointments.  
At this point, I will not plan to see him back.  I am happy to provide a letter 
as needed.  At this point, I will assume that he has responded very well to 
the injection performed at his last appointment and that he has recovered 
and does not need any further treatment as he has not presented to his 
last two appointments. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 61) 
Defendants had Mr. Wenning evaluated by Peter Matos, D.O., on October 19, 
2021.  (Def. Ex. A)  He reviewed appropriate records and examined Mr. Wenning.  (Def. 
Ex. A, pp. 2-11)  Dr. Matos opined that “I do not find any work-related injury to Mr. 
Wenning occurring on or about March 4, 2019, and/or March 9, 2019.  His ongoing 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 12 
complaints are more personal in nature related to degenerative joint disease and 
psoriatic arthritis.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 3)  He assigned no impairment or restrictions and did 
not recommend any treatment.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 4) 
After the evaluation by Dr. Matos, Dr. Wenzel provided a supplemental report 
addressing the opinions of permanency from Dr. Matos in addition to reviewing records 
from PCI and Dr. Wills.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 14-21)  Dr. Wenzel reached largely the same 
conclusions as his earlier report.  He still provided no opinion on diagnosis, causation, 
impairment or disability for the bilateral upper extremities.  He added a diagnosis of right 
knee pain and opined that this condition would require further medical testing and 
evaluation.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 19-20) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
File No. 20012604.01 (Date of Injury, March 4, 2019) 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant’s stipulated work injury is a 
cause of any temporary disability during a period of recovery.  The claimant contends 
that he injured his low back and both arms and hands in this accident.  The defendants 
dispute that claimant’s injury caused disability in any part of his body other than the right 
arm.  The claimant further contends he has been in a healing period since January 
2020, when he was placed on restrictions by Dr. Wills and seeks a running award of 
benefits through the date of hearing and continuing.  The defendants assert that Mr. 
Wenning is not entitled to a running award of healing period benefits. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 13 
As an initial matter, I find that the claimant has failed to prove that his low back 
condition is causally connected to this injury.  The claimant testified that he has had low 
back pain continually since his date of injury.  This assertion is simply not supported by 
the contemporaneous medical records in evidence.  While Dr. Wills and other medical 
providers documented a host of physical complaints following his March 4, 2019, work 
injury, there is nothing at all documented in the initial records regarding his low back.  
The first mention of low back pain in any of his medical records is recorded in 
November 2019, by his family doctor, six months after the work injury.  Then, in 
September 2020, a full year and a half after the injury the following is documented.  
“This is a new problem.  The current episode started yesterday (yesterday, heavy lifting 
furniture/tires and ‘tweaked’ his low back.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 72)   
Mr. Wenning explains this by suggesting that Dr. Wills was not allowed to treat 
any condition other than his right arm.  This appears to be true.  Nevertheless, Dr. Wills 
had documented a host of other physical complaints that he was apparently not allowed 
to treat in his notes, but not the low back.  Moreover, none of Mr. Wenning’s other 
physicians documented the condition either.  While it is possible that he really did have 
back pain since that time, the weight of the evidence simply does not support this 
finding in the record.  It is noted that claimant’s own expert opined that if his history was 
accurate, his low back pain “could be” related to the work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 12)  He 
also did not mention this condition in his recorded statement taken nearly a year after 
the accident.  (Cl. Ex. 3) 
It does, however, appear from this record that Mr. Wenning sustained an injury to 
his bilateral arms and hands on March 4, 2019.  This is well-documented in the early 
medical records.  Initially, his most immediate concern was the right arm, which he 
believed was fractured.  Claimant’s IME physician, Dr. Wenzel, however, did not render 
any opinion on diagnosis, disability or causation as it relates to his bilateral upper 
extremities.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 11) 
Mr. Wenning’s authorized treating physician, Dr. Wills provided sporadic 
treatment for the bilateral upper extremities.  He initially provided treatment in March 
and April 2019.  Dr. Wills recommended occupational therapy at that time and asked 
Mr. Wenning to return.  Then there is an insufficiently explained six-month gap in 
treatment.1  When he returned to Dr. Wills in January 2020, after having been off work 
since June 2019, his documented symptoms were significantly different from his 
March/April 2019 symptoms.  Dr. Wills provided treatment again in January 2020, and 
then there is another significant gap in treatment.  Dr. Wills had again recommended 
treatment but there was no follow-up by Mr. Wenning.  When Mr. Wenning returned in 
July 2021, his symptoms were again, significantly different.  From July 2021, through 
                                                 
1 Mr. Wenning did attempt to explain this treatment gap.  He testified that the doctors told him his condition 
would get better, so he waited.  He also testified that he lost his medical insurance after he was terminated.  The 
problem is that this is not supported by the records.  Dr. Wills may have told him his condition may improve with 
time, however, Dr. Wills clearly instructed him to do occupational therapy and return to him.  Mr. Wenning chose 
not to do this.  Importantly, Dr. Wills documented that his condition had been improving in the spring of 2019, 
particularly when he was allowed to rest.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 29)  Yet, after he had been off work for six months, his 
complaints had become more specific and worse.  In short, Mr. Wenning’s attempt to explain this treatment gap 
does not make sense. 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 14 
September 2021, however, Mr. Wenning’s symptoms seemed to come under control.  
Prior to this, claimant had started taking Enbrel again to control his psoriatic arthritis. 
I find that while claimant did sustain injury to his bilateral arms and hands from 
his work injury, he has failed to meet his burden of proof that this condition caused any 
temporary or permanent disability.  It is impossible to sort out in this record, the precise 
cause of the symptoms he was experiencing in his upper extremities from January 
2020, through the date of hearing.  I do not find either the report from Dr. Wills, nor the 
report of Dr. Matos to be particularly convincing, and Dr. Wenzel did not provide 
opinions regarding the arms and hands.  From this record, however, it does appear that 
his symptoms are more related to his condition of psoriatic arthritis than to any ongoing 
effects of his stipulated work injury.  Since the claimant has failed to meet his burden of 
proof, he shall take nothing further for this claim by way of indemnity benefits. 
The claimant has also made a claim for past and future medical.  The defendants 
also dispute these claims. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by section 17A.14.  
The agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge 
may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in 
the courts are not controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of 
evidence on which reasonably prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of 
serious affairs.  Health care is a serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 124 N.W.2d 548 
(1963).  
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 15 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
The claimant has presented past medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
6.  I find that the defendants are responsible for the outstanding medical expenses from 
Steindler Orthopedic Clinic, Corridor Radiology and North Liberty Family Health.  These 
were authorized treating physicians performing treatment on Mr. Wenning’s bilateral 
upper extremities.  The remainder of the expenses appear to conditions which claimant 
has failed to prove are related to his work injury. 
The claimant also seeks alternate medical care for future medical treatment.  He 
seeks an order authorizing Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa (PCI) to treat his ongoing 
conditions in his bilateral upper extremities.  I find that claimant has failed to meet his 
burden of proof that the treatment recommended by PCI is causally connected to his 
work injury. 
File No. 20700923.01 (Date of Injury, March 9, 2019) 
The claimant also alleged that he sustained an injury to his right knee on March 
9, 2019, just a few days after his first work injury.  The defendants dispute this, 
contending the injury was never reported.  The defendants have asserted a notice 
defense. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 16 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 
N.W. 91 (1940). 
Mr. Wenning testified that he stepped in a hole at work, hyperextended his right 
leg and immediately told his supervisor following the injury.  In this instance, his 
testimony is supported by an independent witness, Hugo Jimenez, who observed Mr. 
Wenning immediately following the alleged injury.  Mr. Wenning testified that when he 
told his superior of this incident, he was told it would look bad if he reported another 
work injury and suggested that he pursue treatment under his own insurance. 
While I have not found Mr. Wenning to be a particularly credible witness, I do find 
it is more likely than not that he did sustain an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment on March 9, 2019.  I further find that the employer has failed 
to meet its burden as it relates to the notice defense.  The defendants presented no 
evidence on this topic. 
To date, Mr. Wenning has had no real workup at all on the condition in his right 
knee.  It is impossible to award any benefits to the claimant with this record.  Since I 
have found that Mr. Wenning did sustain an injury to his right knee which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment, I find that he is entitled to medical treatment for 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 17 
this condition.  The defendants shall authorize a physician to evaluate claimant’s right 
knee and provide treatment if requested. 
For Both Files 
Claimant also seeks assessment of his independent medical evaluation fees 
from Dr. Wenzel, including his supplemental report dated December 8, 2021.  He 
alternatively seeks these expenses as a cost. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 18 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009). 
At the time Dr. Wenzel initially evaluated Mr. Wenning, there had been no 
evaluation of “permanent disability” on either of claimant’s injuries.  The employer did 
not seek an evaluation of permanent disability until October 2021 with Dr. Matos.  Dr. 
Wenzel, however, provided a supplemental report in December 2021, specifically 
addressing the evaluation of disability by Dr. Matos.  I find that claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of Dr. Wenzel’s December 2021 supplemental IME report in the amount 
of $3,162.00.  I further find that claimant is entitled to a reimbursement of costs in the 
amount of $2,689.15.  This amount includes the cost of Dr. Wenzel’s initial October 
2021 report (not the evaluation), in the amount of $2,020.90, the report from Dr. Wills in 
the amount of $400.00, the filing fee ($200.00) and the claimant’s deposition ($68.25). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
File No. 20012604.01 
Claimant shall take nothing further by way of indemnity benefits. 
Defendants shall pay the unpaid medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
6, from the following providers only: Steindler Orthopedics, Corridor Radiology, North 
Liberty Family Health Center.  These medical expenses shall be paid in a manner 
consistent with this decision. 
File No. 20700923.01 
Defendants shall authorize an evaluation and treatment of claimant’s right knee if 
requested. 
For both files 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s supplemental IME costs in the amount of 
three thousand one hundred sixty-two and 00/100 dollars ($3,162.00), set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 7. 

WENNING V. ERJ DINING d/b/a CHILI’S GRILL AND BAR 
Page 19 
Defendants shall pay costs in the amount of two thousand six hundred eighty-
nine and 15/100 dollars ($2,689.15). 
Signed and filed this _28th _ day of June, 2022. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Charles Cutler (via WCES) 
Gregory Taylor (via WCES) 
Timothy Wegman (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
