Case Number: 5068616
Case Title:  MEYER, LYNN V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Meyer Lynn-5068616d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LYNN MEYER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
           File No.  5068616 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     
 
 
  : 
 
    
vs. 
 
  : 
     ARBITRATION DECISION    
 
 
  :                  
 
         
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
    Head Note Nos.:   2907, 3202 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Lynn Meyer, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Trinity Health 
Corporation d/b/a MercyOne Dubuque Medical Center (hereinafter referred to as 
“MercyOne”) and asserted a separate claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
Claimant reached a settlement agreement with the employer prior to the scheduled 
hearing in this case and an agreement for settlement has been filed with this agency.  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has approved the agreement for 
settlement between claimant and the employer.  Administrative notice of that agreement 
for settlement is taken. 
The case against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa came before the undersigned 
for an arbitration hearing on December 2, 2020.  Due to the ongoing pandemic in the 
state of Iowa and pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, this case was tried using the CourtCall videoconference platform. 
The parties filed a hearing report before the scheduled hearing.  On the hearing 
reports, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, Employer’s Exhibit B1, and Second Injury Fund Exhibits AA through II.   
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  The Second Injury Fund called Courtney 
Veach, the employee health coordinator at MercyOne, to testify.  No other witnesses 
                                                 
1 Although the employer was not present or participating in the hearing, the Second Injury Fund 
requested that the employer’s Exhibit B be received into evidence. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jun-24  09:27:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
testified at the hearing.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
December 2, 2020 hearing.   
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on January 
25, 2021.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
STATEMENT OF THE ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether Ms. Meyer sustained a prior qualifying loss to the right leg in 
1995 for purposes of the Second Injury Fund claim. 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent functional loss, if any, as a result of 
the alleged 1995 right leg injury. 
3. 
Whether claimant sustained a compensable and qualifying loss to the 
bilateral upper extremities as a result of a work injury on December 13, 
2017. 
4. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent functional loss, if any, as a result of 
the alleged December 13, 2017 work injury. 
5. 
The extent of industrial disability, if any, sustained as a result of the first 
and second qualifying injuries. 
6. 
The extent of the credit to which the Second Injury Fund of Iowa is entitled 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.64. 
7. 
Whether costs should be assessed against the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa and, if so, in what amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Lynn Meyer was 65 years of age at the time of the arbitration hearing.  She is 
married and resides in Asbury, Iowa.  She worked as a registered nurse from 1975 
through the date of her retirement in May 2019.  Her nursing license has since lapsed.  
(Claimant’s testimony) 
Ms. Meyer alleges she sustained a work injury on December 13, 2017.  
Specifically, she asserts that she sustained bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome as a result 
of her cumulative work activities.  Ms. Meyer required bilateral carpal tunnel surgery for 
these injuries.  She resolved the December 13, 2017 injury claim with the employer.  

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has approved an agreement for 
settlement between claimant and the employer. 
In addition, Ms. Meyer alleges a claim for benefits against the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa.  In the hearing report, Ms. Meyer alleges an initial qualifying injury to the 
right knee or leg in 1995.  The sole claim before the undersigned at this time is Ms. 
Meyer’s claim for Second Injury Fund benefits. 
During her nursing career, Ms. Meyer worked as an operating room nurse.  Her 
position required her to perform physical manual labor, such as positioning patients that 
were under anesthesia.  She testified that both of her knees and her hands started 
hurting in the 1990s as a result of this physical work.  She described pain while walking 
as a result of her knees in this time frame.  (Claimant’s testimony) 
In October 1995, Ms. Meyer sought evaluation of her right knee by an 
orthopaedic surgeon, Scott P. Schemmel, M.D.  Dr. Schemmel initially diagnosed her 
with a probable right knee medial meniscal tear and a proximal tibial bone lesion in the 
left knee.  (Joint Exhibit 6, pages 32-33)  Dr. Schemmel ordered an MRI of the right 
knee.  The MRI did not reveal the suspected tear of the medial meniscus in Ms. Meyer’s 
right knee.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 35)  However, Dr. Schemmel did note the right knee MRI 
demonstrated some “degenerative changes in the posterior horn of the medial 
meniscus.”  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 33) 
Ms. Meyer testified that she was told she had arthritis in her knees in the 1995 
time frame.  However, an x-ray of the right knee taken on October 25, 1995 
demonstrated normal joint space.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 31)  Dr. Schemmel released claimant 
without ongoing medical care for the right knee. 
Ms. Meyer testified that she would often informally consult an orthopaedic 
surgeon, Judson Ott, M.D., with regard to her ongoing right knee symptoms.  She 
testified that Dr. Ott would perform a physical examination of the claimant’s knees in 
empty operating rooms while she was working at the hospital.  However, Ms. Meyer 
sought no further formal medical treatment for her right knee until 2010.  Apparently, 
nothing identified during Dr. Ott’s informal assessments or examinations warranted him 
to recommend more formalized evaluation, diagnostic testing, or intervention.  
(Claimant’s testimony) 
Dr. Ott formally examined Ms. Meyer in 2010.  At that time, he recommended x-
rays of her knees.  The January 5, 2010 x-rays demonstrated “[n]ormal joint space both 
knees” and concluded claimant had a “normal right knee.”  (Joint Ex. 6, pp. 37-38)  Dr. 
Ott re-evaluated Ms. Meyer in April 2010 noting that the January 2010 x-rays were 
“normal on the right side.”  Dr. Ott opined that claimant’s x-rays, examination and history 
“are most consistent with patellofemoral arthrosis, although relatively mild at this time.”  
(Joint Ex. 6, p. 41)  Dr. Ott recommended physical therapy to develop a home exercise 
program and a return evaluation in one year.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 41) 

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
Ms. Meyer testified that she has ongoing right knee symptoms.  She testified that 
she has difficulties with stairs, requiring the use of hand railings when she traverses 
stairs.  She testified that she has decreased motion in her right knee and that pain 
comes and goes primarily with activity in her right knee.  She testified that she does not 
feel the right knee is stable and explained that her knee symptoms would increase as 
she stood during work.  Ms. Meyer testified that she requires the use of Advil every 
night to permit her to sleep due to symptoms in both her hands and both her knees. 
Ms. Meyer also testified that she has difficulties working outside or walking on 
hills because of her knees.  She avoids bending, squatting, and testified she can no 
longer do Jazzercise because of her knees.  She described difficulties doing laundry 
because the laundry area in her house is in the basement and she struggles walking the 
stairs.  Ms. Meyer also testified that she is no longer able to ride a motorcycle because 
she cannot get on and off the motorcycle due to the symptoms in her knees. 
However, Ms. Meyer did not seek any additional treatment for her right knee 
between April 2010 and the alleged December 13, 2017 work injury.  Ms. Meyer 
conceded on cross-examination that no physician placed work restrictions on her as a 
result of her right knee condition prior to December 13, 2017.  She conceded that Dr. 
Ott did not prescribe the use of any medications or braces after his informal knee 
examinations.  Ms. Meyer also conceded that she continued to work full duty as an 
operating room nurse throughout this time period and until the December 13, 2017 work 
injury.  In fact, Ms. Meyer conceded that she did not have any permanent restrictions for 
her right knee even at the time of her retirement in May 2019. 
Subsequent to the work injury, Ms. Meyer sought evaluation for her left knee in 
July 2018.  (Joint Ex. 7)  In February 2019, claimant’s treating orthopaedic surgeon, 
Ryan P. Cloos, D.O., re-evaluated Ms. Meyer after arthroscopic surgery on her left knee 
and noted, “She is also having right knee pain now.”  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 47)  This record 
suggests that Ms. Meyer was not reporting or experiencing right knee pain prior to 
approximately February 2019.  Certainly, she had not sought any treatment for the right 
knee since 2010.  Ultimately, Ms. Meyer submitted to a total knee replacement on the 
left knee but did not have ongoing right knee treatment at the time of hearing.   
Claimant sought an independent medical evaluation, performed by Mark C. 
Taylor, M.D., on September 23, 2019.  Dr. Taylor evaluated Ms. Meyer’s right knee as 
part of that examination.  His diagnosis for the right knee was chronic knee arthralgia, 
noting that claimant had a previous diagnosis of patellofemoral arthrosis and 
osteoarthritis.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 10) 
Dr. Taylor was asked by claimant’s counsel to provide a permanent impairment 
for her right knee.  Dr. Taylor opined that there were two potential ways to offer 
permanent impairment for Ms. Meyer’s right knee using the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  He opined that Ms. Meyer sustained 
a two percent right lower extremity impairment as the result of patellofemoral-related 
pain.  Specifically, Dr. Taylor utilized Table 17-31 on page 544 of the AMA Guides, Fifth 

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
Edition.  He specifically referenced the footnote under Table 17-31 as the basis for his 
impairment rating of the right knee/leg.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 12) 
In the alternative, Dr. Taylor opined that another option for rating impairment of 
the right knee would be based upon a diagnosis of osteoarthritis.  He opined that 
claimant had arthritis in the right knee that pre-dated the December 13, 2017 work 
injury, stating, “the OA of her knees was more than likely present before her work 
injury.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 12)  However, Dr. Taylor acknowledged, “Because x-rays 
were not obtained in the year or two prior to her work injury, I am unable to assign a 
specific impairment value as pertains to her OA of the knees . . . because exact 
measurements of the joint space (prior to her work injury) are not available.”  
(Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 12) 
Dr. Taylor’s opinion is accurate that x-rays were not taken of the right knee within 
the year or two prior to the work injury.  During that period of time, Ms. Meyer was not 
seeking any medical treatment for her right knee and continued working full duty as an 
operating room nurse.  The most recent x-ray of her right knee was in 2010 and, as 
noted above, demonstrated normal joint space.  Accordingly, I accept Dr. Taylor’s 
opinion and concession that it is not possible to offer an opinion or permanent 
impairment related to claimant’s right knee arthritis prior to the December 2017 work 
injury. 
The Second Injury Fund challenged Dr. Taylor’s permanent impairment rating of 
the right knee.  It requested that Joseph Chen, M.D., a physiatrist, perform a medical 
record review and comment upon Dr. Taylor’s assignment of permanent impairment of 
the right knee.  Dr. Chen noted that claimant sought treatment for her right knee in 1995 
and again in 2010.  He opined that claimant’s clinical findings in 2010 were “consistent 
with mild patellofemoral arthrosis.”  However, he noted that claimant’s symptoms did not 
appear to limit her ability to function in her work or recreational activities in 2010.  He 
opined that the findings and symptoms identified in 2010 “would not lead to any 
objective impairment.”2  (Second Injury Fund Ex. GG, p. 29) 
Perhaps most directly to the dispute in this case, Dr. Chen reviewed the 
permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. Taylor and questioned the validity of that 
impairment rating under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  Specifically, Dr. Chen opined: 
Dr. Taylor also stated in his report that “she did not sustain direct trauma 
to the knee” yet assigned a rating according to the footnote under Table 
17-31[,] page 544 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, 5th Edition. 
                                                 
2 It is acknowledged that Dr. Chen refers to the left knee when corresponding medical records 
suggest treatment and findings were related to the right knee.  It is found that these references by Dr. 
Chen are typographical errors and likely caused by a typographical error in the question posed by Second 
Injury Fund counsel to Dr. Chen.  I do not find these typographical errors to be significant enough to 
disregard Dr. Chen’s opinions in their entirety, but they are considered when assessing credibility. 

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
. . .  
I am unable to follow the rationale that Dr. Taylor used to assign Ms. 
Meyer a 2% impairment of the knee due to her patellofemoral knee 
arthritis as she specifically denied any direct trauma to the knee. 
Therefore, it is my medical opinion that Ms. Lynn Meyer did not have a 
ratable permanent impairment for her [right] knee pain before her 
December 2017 work injury. 
(Second Injury Fund Ex. GG, p. 30) 
The footnote that Dr. Taylor relies upon to award a two percent permanent 
impairment provides, “In an individual with a history of direct trauma, a complaint of 
patellofemoral pain, and crepitation on physical examination, but without joint space 
narrowing on x-rays, a 2% whole person or 5% lower extremity impairment is given.”  
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Table 17-31, page 544 (footnote). 
During his September 23, 2019 examination, Dr. Taylor identified crepitation in 
Ms. Meyer’s right knee.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 10)  However, review of Dr. Schemmel’s 
October 25, 1995 evaluation demonstrates he performed a thorough evaluation of the 
right knee.  His note does not document any crepitation in the right knee.  (Joint Ex. 6, 
p. 32)  Similarly, review of Dr. Ott’s April 6, 2010 examination documents no evidence of 
crepitation in claimant’s right knee.   
In his report, Dr. Taylor acknowledges that Ms. Meyer “did not sustain direct 
trauma to the [right] knee.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 12)  Accordingly, using the footnote to 
Table 17-31, claimant had neither crepitation in the right knee prior to the December 
2017 work injury, nor direct trauma, as required to assign permanent impairment of the 
right lower extremity.  Dr. Taylor appears to recognize and acknowledge these 
shortcomings in his examination and the history and opines, “I do not recommend the 
full 5% that can be assigned, but rather I would recommend 2% right lower extremity 
impairment related to the patellofemoral-related pain.”  (Claimants’ Ex. 2, p. 12)  Yet, 
nothing in Table 17-31 or its footnote permits a physician to award something other than 
5% of the lower extremity or to award impairment if the criteria of the Table or the 
footnote are not met.  I find that Dr. Taylor was reading something into the AMA Guides 
that does not exist within the Guides. 
Ultimately, I accept the critique offered by Dr. Chen as most accurate and 
consistent with the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  I find the impairment rating offered by Dr. 
Taylor for claimant’s right knee is not supported by the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  
Therefore, I find the opinion of Dr. Chen most convincing on the issue of the right knee.   
I specifically find that Ms. Meyer did not prove she had a ratable permanent 
impairment of the right knee or leg prior to the December 13, 2017 work injury.  Ms. 
Meyer required no ongoing medical treatment for the right knee from April 2010 through 
the date of the work injury in December 2017.  I further find that she was working full 

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
duty without medical restrictions for her right knee at the time of her December 13, 2017 
work injury.  I further specifically find that Ms. Meyer failed to prove she had permanent 
loss, permanent loss of use, or permanent disability as a result of her right knee 
condition prior to December 13, 2017. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Ms. Meyer seeks an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
Iowa Code section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the 
Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost 
or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a 
loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  
Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.  
Iowa Code section 85.64. 
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
The Second Injury Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after 
the second injury that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  
Section 85.64; Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); 
Second Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. 
Mich. Coal Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1979). 
In this case, Ms. Meyer alleges she sustained a prior qualifying injury to the right 
leg in 1995.  Ms. Meyer relied upon the medical opinion of Dr. Taylor to support her 
contentions and to establish permanent functional impairment of the right leg prior to 
December 13, 2017.  Based upon Dr. Taylor’s opinion that Ms. Meyer sustained a two 
percent permanent functional impairment of the right leg prior to the December 13, 2017 
work injury, as well as her own testimony about ongoing symptoms in the right knee 
prior to her work injury, Ms. Meyer asserts she has proven a qualifying first injury to the 
right leg. 
The Second Injury Fund denies that claimant has proven she sustained 
permanent functional loss of the right leg prior to the December 13, 2017 work injury.  
Instead, the Second Injury Fund noted claimant had no permanent restrictions and no 
ongoing medical care for the right leg prior to December 13, 2017.  The Second Injury 
Fund also produced the opinion of Dr. Chen questioning the methodology for Dr. 
Taylor’s permanent impairment rating.  Specifically, Dr. Chen noted that Dr. Taylor 
should only assign permanent impairment for the right knee using the footnote of Table 
17-31 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
when there has been a direct trauma to the leg.   

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
Claimant does not assert a direct trauma to her right leg caused her permanent 
impairment.  Dr. Taylor does not identify any direct trauma to the right leg and, in fact, 
noted the opposite.  Dr. Taylor did not provide any explanation why he varied from the 
direct language and requirements of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, when rendering his 
permanent impairment rating for the right leg.  His impairment rating does not appear to 
conform to the requirements of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. 
A statutory change made to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) in 2017 demonstrated 
the Iowa legislature’s preference and policy choice to utilize the AMA Guides as the 
governing standard for determining permanent functional impairment of a scheduled 
member injury such as a leg.  While Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) is not directly 
applicable to a first qualifying injury in a Second Injury Fund claim, it does demonstrate 
the legislature’s preference for the use of the AMA Guides to determine permanent 
functional disability. 
Moreover, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has adopted the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, as the governing standard “for determining the extent of loss 
or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.”  876 IAC 2.4.  Once 
again, this administrative rule does not directly refer to the Iowa Second Injury 
Compensation Act, Iowa Code section 85.64.  However, it is apparent that the 
preference for determining permanent impairment, or permanent disability, for 
scheduled member injuries requires the use of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. 
Having weighed the competing medical expert’s opinions, I found the critique 
offered by Dr. Chen to be well founded within the specific language of the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition.  Accordingly, I found that Dr. Taylor’s permanent impairment rating for the 
right leg was not in conformity or supported by the specific language of the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition.  Claimant offered no other convincing evidence that proved by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she had a permanent disability, permanent loss, or 
permanent loss of use of the right leg before the December 13, 2017 work injury.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof to establish a 
qualifying first injury or a viable claim for Second Injury Fund benefits.  I conclude that 
claimant’s claim against the Second Injury Fund should be dismissed without an award 
of benefits.  All other disputed issues are rendered moot as a result of this conclusion. 
Finally, claimant requests that her costs be taxed against defendant.  Costs are 
taxed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  However, costs 
statutes are construed strictly.  Coker v. Abell-Howe Co., 491 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 
1992).  In this instance, I conclude that claimant failed to establish a compensable 
Second Injury claim.  Therefore, I similarly conclude that no costs should be assessed 
against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 

MEYER V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
All parties shall bear their own costs. 
Signed and filed this ____24th ___ day of June, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
Amanda Rae Rutherford (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
