Case Number: 23700224.01
Case Title:  RYAN, SHEILA RAE V. ZOETIS INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ryan Sheila-23700224.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SHEILA RAE RYAN, 
  : 
 
 
  :        
File No.  23700224.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     
 
 
  : 
 
    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
    
 
 
  :                 
ZOETIS, INC., 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AIU INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:   1402.30, 1402.40, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
        1701, 1802, 1803, 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
  
 
        2501, 2803, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Sheila Ryan, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Zoetis, Inc., as the 
employer, and AIU Insurance Company, as the insurance carrier.  This case came 
before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on May 3, 2024.  Pursuant to an order 
from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case was heard via a Zoom 
videoconference.   
Prior to the date of trial, claimant filed a motion for sanctions against defendants 
for violation of a discovery order in this case.  A prehearing conference was conducted 
by the undersigned with counsel of record, and the scope of the discovery sanction 
request was narrowed.  Claimant conceded at the prehearing conference that the only 
prejudicial evidence to be presented at hearing would be an IME report procured by 
defendants.   
In a ruling filed April 25, 2024, the undersigned found that claimant identified 
prejudice via the late introduction of the defense independent medical evaluation.  
Claimant asserted that she expended additional funds to prosecute her claim in 
response to the late disclosure by defendants.  Specifically, claimant urged that she 
obtained a functional capacity evaluation in response to the defendants’ medical report.  
Claimant further contends that she had to expend additional funds to have the treating 
physician review the late report from defendants’ expert. 
The undersigned concluded in the April 25, 2024 ruling that sanctions in some 
amount should be ordered.  The undersigned ordered that claimant “introduce a 
separate exhibit at the time of hearing outlining any claims for monetary sanctions 
pertaining to her reaction to the late production of Dr. Gorsche’s opinion.”  The 
undersigned reserved the determination of any monetary sanction until the time of trial 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Oct-23  15:33:11     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
noting that the specific amount of sanctions to be awarded would be made “after 
consideration of the reasonableness and necessity of the claimed expenses.” 
As will be discussed below, I find the functional capacity evaluation procured by 
claimant in response to Dr. Gorsche’s opinions to be unnecessary and not relevant to 
any disputed facts of this case.  Claimant pursues a scheduled member injury and 
nothing in the functional capacity evaluation affects the outcome of the award of 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Claimant identified nothing in the functional 
capacity evaluation that renders the opinions of Dr. Gorsche unreasonable, 
inappropriate, or not credible. 
Similarly, claimant urged she needed a rebuttal report from the treating physician 
to review the functional capacity evaluation to respond to the report from Dr. Gorsche.  
However, the rebuttal report obtained from the treating physician did not even comment 
on the functional capacity evaluation and certainly did nothing to use the functional 
capacity evaluation to challenge the opinions of Dr. Gorsche. 
I conclude that claimant’s efforts to obtain a functional capacity evaluation and a 
rebuttal report from the treating physician were not reasonable or effective in this case.  
While this does not excuse defendants’ failure to comply with orders of this agency, the 
expenses incurred were not necessarily reasonable or directed at actual rebuttal of the 
defendants’ late-served report.  Ultimately, I conclude that a monetary sanction in the 
amount of $500.00 is appropriate and sufficient to serve as punishment and deterrent of 
similar conduct in the future for defendants’ failure to comply with this agency’s 
discovery order. 
Less than 48 hours prior to trial, claimant filed a motion to amend her petition to 
add a penalty benefit claim. Defendants resisted the motion to amend.  Claimant noted 
an agreement that bifurcation of the penalty benefit issue was reasonable and 
appropriate.  Defendants conceded that bifurcation would be a reasonable means to 
deal with the proposed amendment.  Accordingly, the undersigned granted the motion 
to amend, permitting claimant to preserve and pursue a penalty benefit claim in a 
separate contested case proceeding.  The penalty benefit issue is bifurcated and can 
only be pursued if a separate petition for review-reopening is filed by claimant.  The 
penalty benefit claim will not be further discussed or considered in this proceeding. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record in this case is convoluted and difficult to review.  The 
parties filed joint exhibits, which were accepted and admitted into the evidentiary record 
without objection.  Claimant filed Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 10 prior to the 
commencement of hearing.  Claimant filed documents labeled as Claimant’s Exhibits 11 
through 16 after the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
At the commencement of hearing, defendants asserted objections to various of 
claimant’s exhibits.  Claimant’s Exhibit 1 was excluded as a duplicative exhibit.  
Claimant’s Exhibit 2 was admitted into the evidentiary record, but a ruling was entered 
that any records after July 29, 2023 were not considered because those records were 
not timely served on defendants.  In her post-hearing brief, claimant revisits this issue 
and categorizes the undersigned’s ruling excluding evidence not timely exchanged as 
draconian.  However, claimant was under specific obligation under 876 IAC 4.17 and 
4.18 to turn over medical evidence received.  Claimant’s failure to disclose information 
in her possession was prejudicial to defendants’ ability to investigate and defend these 
claims.  Therefore, the ruling will not be revisited or changed.  Claimant’s Exhibit 2 is 
admitted but any records after July 29, 2023 are not considered and will not be 
awarded. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 3 was admitted.  Claimant’s Exhibits 4 and 5 were excluded.  
Claimant withdrew Claimant’s Exhibit 6.  Claimant’s Exhibit 7 was admitted, but a similar 
ruling was entered precluding any claims after July 29, 2023.  Claimant’s Exhibit 8 was 
admitted as a rebuttal document to a late served report by defendants from Dr. 
Gorsche.  Claimant’s Exhibit 9 was a rebuttal report from Dr. Lyons and was admitted 
as rebuttal to a later report produced by defendants.  Claimant’s Exhibit 10 was 
admitted.  Therefore, at the commencement of hearing, Claimant’s Exhibits 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 
and 10 were admitted into the evidentiary record. 
Claimant subpoenaed a witness to testify at the hearing.  That witness did not 
appear for hearing.  Claimant requested that the evidentiary record be left open to 
obtain the deposition of that witness, Natasha Stewart.  Claimant obtained that 
deposition on May 14, 2024 and submitted that document to the agency.  Claimant’s 
filing identifies the filing as a “Notice of Deposition” on May 22, 2024.  However, the 
attachment to that “Notice of Deposition” is a copy of the transcript of the deposition of 
Natasha Stewart.   That deposition transcript was later re-filed at the undersigned’s 
direction and is now contained in the agency docket as Claimant’s Exhibit 16. 
Claimant also filed Claimant’s Exhibits 11 through 15 after the evidentiary 
hearing.  Claimant’s Exhibits 11-15 are actually deposition exhibits that pertain to the 
deposition of Ms. Stewart filed as Claimant’s Exhibit 16.  Claimant’s Exhibit 11 is a 
subpoena and directions for service to the Floyd County Sheriff.  This document was 
irrelevant to any disputed issues and unnecessary since the witness appeared and gave 
the deposition.  Claimant’s Exhibit 11 has no pertinent information to sway any disputed 
issue in this case.  Nevertheless, Claimant’s Exhibit 11 is received into the evidentiary 
record for whatever value it may have. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 12 is a Notice of Deposition for Ms. Stewart’s deposition.  
Again, this exhibit is irrelevant to any disputed issues, unnecessary as an exhibit, and 
should not have been filed.  However, it is received for whatever value it may have.  
Claimant’s Exhibits 13 through 15 are substantive exhibits, though minimal foundational 
testimony was offered for the exhibits.  Nevertheless, Claimant’s Exhibits 13 through 15 
are received into the evidentiary record for whatever weight they may possess.  
Therefore, the record includes Claimant’s Exhibits 2, 3, and 7 through 16. 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Defendants offered Exhibits A through D.  Defendants’ Exhibits A through C were 
admitted into the evidentiary record without objection.  Claimant objected to Defendants’ 
Exhibit D.  Ruling on that objection was reserved until entry of this decision, but the 
parties were permitted to discuss the issue of short-term disability benefits during the 
hearing.   
Having now considered Defendants’ Exhibit D, as well as the pending objection, I 
find that claimant was aware of the receipt of any short-term disability benefits.  I find no 
prejudice to claimant in the admission of Defendants’ Exhibit D.  Therefore, I overrule 
claimant’s objection to Defendants’ Exhibit D and receive all of defendants’ offered 
Exhibits A through D into the evidentiary record. 
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Claimant also called Val Lyons, M.D., 
Cassandra Rule, Stacie Henderson, and Aayla Moaring as witnesses.  Defendants 
called Patrick Neuzil to testify.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
deposition of Natasha Stewart and formal filing of her deposition transcript and 
deposition exhibits.   
The parties requested the opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  The parties 
agreed and the undersigned ordered that post-hearing briefs be filed on June 17, 2024.  
Defendants complied with the order and filed their post-hearing brief on June 17, 2024.   
Claimant failed to file a post-hearing brief on or before June 17, 2024.  Instead, 
on June 18, 2024, claimant filed a request to establish deadlines to file a post-hearing 
brief.  The undersigned granted claimant additional time to file a brief and defendants an 
opportunity to file a rebuttal brief.  Claimant filed her post-hearing brief on June 27, 2024 
and defendants filed their reply brief on July 16, 2024.  This case was considered fully 
submitted to the undersigned upon the filing of defendants’ reply brief. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
her employment on October 27, 2022. 
2. 
Whether defendants had actual knowledge of the alleged injury or 
claimant gave timely notice of the alleged October 27, 2022 work injury. 
3. 
Whether the alleged October 27, 2022 injury caused temporary disability 
and, if so, claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability or healing period 
benefits from October 28, 2022 through April 11, 2023. 
4. 
Whether the October 27, 2022 injury caused permanent disability. 
5. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability 
benefits, if any. 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
6. 
The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
7. 
Whether claimant is entitled to an award of past medical expenses, 
including a medical mileage reimbursement claim. 
8. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation expense. 
9. 
Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for payment of short-term 
disability benefits to claimant in the amount of $17,888.36. 
10. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
11. 
The amount of sanctions that should be awarded against defendants for 
their violation of this agency’s discovery order. 
The parties’ hearing report identified a dispute about claimant’s entitlement to 
exemptions and the applicable weekly worker’s compensation rate.  However, at the 
commencement of hearing, claimant stipulated that she was only entitled to two 
exemptions.  The parties ultimately stipulated that the applicable weekly workers’ 
compensation rate is $517.80.  That stipulation was accepted, and no findings or 
conclusions will be entered relative to the stipulated weekly rate.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Sheila Ryan, claimant, was an employee of Zoetis, Inc. on October 27, 2022.  On 
that date, she was performing her job duties as an Aseptic Tech 1.  In that position, she 
filled roller bottles and performed other physical tasks.  While transferring bottles onto a 
cart, Ms. Ryan turned to her right.  When she turned, she experienced a pop in her left 
knee. 
Ms. Ryan immediately said, “Ouch,” which was heard by a co-worker, Cassandra 
Rule.  Claimant told Ms. Rule that her knee had popped and finished her immediate 
task.  However, Ms. Rule testified claimant could barely walk and that she had to help 
claimant get to the control room and that she ultimately wheeled claimant in a chair to 
the women’s locker room. 
Ms. Rule testified that the plant nurse was called and that members of the 
medical emergency response team for the employer were called and responded after 
claimant’s injury.  Ms. Rule also testified that safety personnel for the plant were present 
and aware of claimant’s situation.  Finally, Ms. Rule testified that Terri Wagner was a 
boss and was present in the women’s locker room after claimant’s injury occurred.  Ms. 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Rule testified that claimant could walk circles around others prior to the injury and 
walked fine before the October 27, 2022 injury occurred.   
Claimant also called Stacie Henderson to testify at hearing.  Ms. Henderson 
testified that she is part of the medical emergency response team and responded after 
claimant’s reported injury.  Ms. Henderson testified that a team lead for the company 
was present in the women’s locker room when claimant was in the locker room after the 
alleged injury.  Ms. Henderson also testified that she interviewed claimant, offered an 
ambulance to transport her to the hospital.  Claimant refused an ambulance and agreed 
to self-transport herself to the hospital.   
Ms. Henderson testified that the plant nurse was notified of the injury and that 
she called safety personnel for the company and that two safety personnel arrived on 
scene to speak with claimant before she left the plant.  Finally, Ms. Henderson testified 
she assisted claimant to her car to leave the plant. 
Claimant called Aayla Moaring to testify live as well.  Ms. Moaring is claimant’s 
daughter.  She testified that she saw claimant approximately three times per week prior 
to the alleged injury date.  She denied noticing any problems with claimant’s ability to 
get around prior to the injury date.  She testified claimant was always on the “go,” that 
she was unable to keep up with her mother prior to this injury, and that claimant was 
able to do whatever she needed to do prior to this work injury. 
Via deposition, claimant called Natasha Stewart to testify.  Ms. Stewart is also a 
member of the medical emergency response team for the employer.  She recalls the 
events of October 27, 2022 and testified that she was called to assist in the executive 
office area (where claimant was moved after the women’s locker room).  She testified 
that two of the employer’s safety personnel, including Patrick Neuzil, were present in the 
executive offices with claimant when she arrived.  Ms. Stewart testified that on the date 
of injury claimant reported her knee had been swelling and that the event or occurrence 
of October 27, 2022 was not work-related. 
Claimant’s daughter, Aayla Moaring, testified that she saw claimant the day 
before this work injury.  The day before this injury claimant did not demonstrate any 
knee problems, was able to watch and care for her granddaughter, and was able to 
keep up with daily activities such as going to the store, going for walks, and was a fast 
walker prior to this injury. 
Ms. Ryan testified on her own behalf.  Claimant confirmed that she was able to 
power walk prior to the date of injury and that she did not have any significant knee 
problems prior to October 27, 2022.  Ms. Ryan testified that Pat from the plant’s safety 
personnel appeared on scene and told the medical emergency response team that 
claimant’s injury is a work comp incident. 
Patrick Neuzil, the employer’s Senior Manager for Environmental Health and 
Safety, testified at defendants’ request.  Mr. Neuzil testified that he asked claimant what 
happened and whether this injury was work related.  Mr. Neuzil testified that claimant 
indicated that this injury was not work related and that it is something she deals with.  

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
Mr. Neuzil testified that he asked claimant twice whether this was a work-related injury, 
and she denied it both times.  He further testified that he backs away from investigation 
or handling of injury issues if they are not work related.  Therefore, he testified that there 
was no documentation prepared relative to this injury.   
Ultimately, I find that claimant reported to work on October 27, 2022 capable of 
walking, bending, and working.  During her shift on October 27, 2022, Ms. Ryan 
suffered a left knee injury. and she reported the pain in her left knee to the employer’s 
personnel.  The medical emergency response team, as well as safety personnel for the 
employer, were deployed to assist claimant.  During those conversations, I find that 
claimant relayed what transpired during her work shift, but also that she stated she did 
not think this was a work-related injury.  Nevertheless, I find that the employer had 
sufficient actual knowledge of the events surrounding claimant’s left knee injury to alert 
it to the potential that claimant sustained a work-related left leg injury on October 27, 
2022.  As a reasonably conscientious employer, Zoetis’ supervisory and medical 
personnel had sufficient knowledge and information on the date of injury to alert them to 
the fact that claimant potentially sustained a left leg injury and that it may be work 
related. 
Claimant sought medical care after the work incident.  Interestingly, claimant 
adamantly reported at the emergency room on November 3, 2022 that she did not feel 
this was a work-related injury but that it just happened at work.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 3)  
Claimant also reported to her personal physician that she experienced intermittent 
discomfort in the left knee prior to October 27, 2022 and that she was not claiming a 
work-related injury, though she did specifically report that she experienced a loud pop in 
the knee when twisting at work.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 7)  Claimant was taken off work as of 
November 3, 2022 and was not medically released to return to work prior to achieving 
maximum medical improvement. 
Claimant was referred to an orthopaedic surgeon, Val Lyons, M.D.  Dr. Lyons 
ultimately diagnosed claimant with a torn medial meniscus in the left knee.  (Joint Ex. 2, 
p. 8)  Dr. Lyons took claimant to surgery and performed a left knee arthroscopy and 
specifically a partial medial meniscectomy and microfracture of the patella on December 
8, 2022.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 10) 
Ultimately, the causation issue was addressed by claimant’s treating orthopaedic 
surgeon.  Dr. Lyons opined, “On 10/27/22 she sustained an acute injury to the left knee 
which resulted in tear of the medial meniscus and osteochondral patella fracture.  This 
aggravated her pre-existing osteoarthritis.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 9, p. 1)  Dr. Lyons opined 
that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on March 21, 20231 and further 
opined that she sustained 5 percent permanent functional impairment of the left leg 
pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Sixth Edition.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 9) 
                                                 
1 Dr. Lyons’ report listed the date as March 21, 2022, which is obviously a typographical error 
since the injury occurred on October 27, 2022. 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
Defendants countered with an independent medical evaluation performed by 
Thomas Gorsche, M.D., on November 8, 2023.  Dr. Gorsche ultimately concurred on 
causation of claimant’s left knee injury.  Dr. Gorsche noted, “Claimant … developed 
sudden onset of left knee pain with a twisting injury rotating to the right and injuring her 
left knee.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 7)  Dr. Gorsche opined, “The mechanism of injury that 
the Claimant describes is consistent with causing a medial meniscal tear.”  (Defendants’ 
Ex. B, p. 8)  He indicated he could not comment on whether claimant’s underlying 
osteoarthritis of the left knee progressed as a result of the work injury on October 27, 
2022.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 8) 
Ultimately, the medical experts concur on the causation issue at least with 
respect to the medial meniscus tear in claimant’s left knee.  I accept those causation 
opinions and find that claimant proved she sustained a left knee injury, specifically a 
partial medial meniscus tear, which arose out of and in the course of her employment at 
Zoetis, Inc., on October 27, 2022. 
Dr. Gorsche also concurred with Dr. Lyons regarding maximum medical 
improvement (MMI).  Dr. Gorsche specifically concurred MMI occurred on March 21, 
2023.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 9)  I perceive no contrary opinions in this respect.  
Therefore, I find claimant achieved MMI on March 21, 2023. 
Dr. Gorsche did not comment on Dr. Lyons’ permanent impairment rating 
specifically.  Instead, Dr. Gorsche utilized the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, and rendered a two percent permanent functional 
impairment rating for claimant’s left leg.  Ultimately, I am directed by Iowa Code and 
applicable agency administrative rule to utilize the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides to 
determine permanent disability.  Therefore, I accept Dr. Gorsche’s opinion and find that 
claimant proved a two percent permanent functional impairment of the left leg as a 
result of the October 27, 2022 work injury. 
With respect to claimant’s claim for past medical expenses, the parties stipulate 
that the medical care provided was reasonable and necessary.  The parties stipulate 
that the medical expenses were also reasonable.  The sole factual question for 
determination is whether the past medical expenses are causally related to the October 
27, 2022 work injury.  I find that the medical expenses presented by claimant (at least 
those produced prior to July 29, 2023) are causally related to the October 27, 2022 work 
injury.  Similarly, claimant’s medical mileage to obtain that treatment is related to the 
October 27, 2022 work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
 The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
 A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
 A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
 While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
In this case, claimant’s treating surgeon, Dr. Lyons, concluded and opined that 
Ms. Ryan sustained an acute injury to the left knee resulting in a medial meniscus tear.  
Dr. Lyons also opined that claimant’s injury caused an aggravation of her pre-existing 
left knee osteoarthritis.  Defendants’ medical expert, Dr. Gorsche, concurred that the 
events of October 27, 2022 caused the left knee meniscus tear and opined that he was 
unable to comment on whether the traumatic injury on October 27, 2022 caused 
progression of claimant’s pre-existing and underlying left knee arthritis.  Ultimately, I 
accepted the opinions of Dr. Lyons and Dr. Gorsche and found that claimant proved a 
traumatic injury to the left knee on October 27, 2022 and specifically a partial medial 
meniscus tear.  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved she sustained a left leg injury that 
arose out of and in the course of her employment on October 27, 2022. 
Defendants raise a notice defense pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.23.  The 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act imposes time limits on injured employees both as to 
when they must notify their employers of injuries and as to when injury claims must be 
filed. 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176, 180 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809, 811 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 229 
Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91, 92 (1940). 
Having found that the employer had actual knowledge of the events of October 
27, 2022 and having found that the employer, as a reasonably conscientious manager, 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
should have been alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim involving 
an injury that may be work related, I conclude that the employer failed to prove its 
affirmative notice defense.  Indeed, I ultimately conclude that the employer had timely 
notice, on the date of the injury, that claimant sustained an injury at work during the 
course of her employment duties and as a result of her work duties.  As such, I 
conclude the notice defense fails, and I must consider claimant’s claims for further 
benefits. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to 
an injured employee who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the employee 
has returned to work; (2) it is medically indicated that significant improvement from the 
injury is not anticipated; or (3) the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.  The healing period can be 
considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of improvement of 
the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60, 65 
(Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  Teel v. 
McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405, 406 (Iowa 1986). 
In this instance, I found that claimant was first medically taken off work on 
November 3, 2022.  Ms. Ryan remained off work as she received treatment, including 
surgical intervention.  Ms. Ryan asserts a claim for healing period benefits through April 
11, 2023.  However, I found that Ms. Ryan achieved maximum medical improvement on 
March 21, 2023.  In fact, both Dr. Lyons and Dr. Gorsche concurred that claimant 
achieved MMI on March 21, 2023.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(1), healing 
period benefits terminate at the earliest of three conditions.  In this instance, the first 
circumstance that would qualify for termination of healing period benefits is achieving 
MMI on March 21, 2023.  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved entitlement to healing 
period benefits from November 3, 2022 through March 21, 2023.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(1). 
The next issue to consider is the claim for permanent partial disability.  Under the 
Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is compensated either for 
a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or 
for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v).  The extent of scheduled member 
disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is determined by using the 
functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to the loss of the physiological 
capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 
(Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
The parties stipulated that claimant’s injury is limited to a left leg scheduled 
member injury.  (Hearing Report; Transcript)  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p) provides 
that an injury to the leg should be compensated on a scheduled member basis using a 
220-week schedule.   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) provides: 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u,” or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u,” or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
This agency complied with the requirement in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) by 
enacting agency rule 876 IAC 2.4.  Rule 2.4 adopts the fifth edition of the AMA Guides 
for purposes of determining permanent functional disability of scheduled member 
injuries. 
In this case, two physicians addressed the issue of claimant’s permanent 
functional impairment resulting from her work injury.  Dr. Lyons opined that claimant 
sustained a five percent permanent impairment of the left leg using the Sixth Edition of 
the AMA Guides.  Dr. Gorsche opined that claimant sustained a two percent permanent 
functional impairment of the left leg utilizing the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides.  As 
noted above, the agency’s duly enacted administrative rule 876 IAC 2.4 formally adopts 
the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides for purposes of determining permanent functional 
disability of scheduled member injuries. 
Claimant offers no challenge to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) or the agency’s 
duly enacted administrative rule adopting the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides.  The 
undersigned has no authority to ignore the duly enacted statutory provision or 
administrative rule adopting the Fifth Edition.  Therefore, only one physician has offered 
a permanent impairment rating that complies with the statute and administrative rule.  
For that reason, I accepted the opinion of Dr. Gorsche and found that claimant proved a 
two percent permanent functional impairment of the left leg as a result of her October 
27, 2022 work injury. 
As noted above, a leg injury is compensated using a 220-week schedule.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(p).  When a scheduled member injury is less than total disability 
of the scheduled member, permanent disability benefits are paid on a proportional basis 
based on the percentage of functional impairment related to the scheduled benefits 
legislatively allotted to a specific scheduled injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  Two 
percent of 220 weeks totals 4.4 weeks.  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved 
entitlement to 4.4 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(p), (w). 
Permanent partial disability benefits “begin when it is medically indicated that 
maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and that the extent of 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by use of the guides to 
the evaluation of permanent impairment.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  In this case, I 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
concluded claimant achieved MMI on March 21, 2023.  Accordingly, I conclude that 
permanent partial disability benefits commence in this case on March 22, 2023.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2). 
The parties submitted a dispute about claimant’s entitlement to a credit for short-
term disability benefits paid to claimant.  Defendants contend they are entitled to a 
credit against any award of weekly benefits in this case for short-term disability benefits 
paid to claimant. 
  The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e).  
Therefore, defendants bear the burden to establish entitlement to a credit for short-term 
disability benefits in this case.  Defendants offered Defendants’ Exhibit D in support of 
their claim for a credit.  Ultimately, I admitted Defendants’ Exhibit D over claimant’s 
objection. 
Defendants’ claim for a credit arises under Iowa Code section 85.38(2), which 
provides in pertinent part: 
In the event the employee with a disability shall receive any benefits … 
under any group plan covering nonoccupational disability contributed to 
wholly or partially by the employer, which benefits should not have been 
paid or payable if any rights of recovery existed under this chapter … then 
the amounts so paid to the employee from the group plan shall be credited 
to or against any compensation payments … made or to be made under 
this chapter.  The amounts so credited shall be deducted from the 
payments made under these chapters…. This section shall not apply to 
payments made under any group plan which would have been payable 
even though there was an injury under this chapter.   
Defendants introduced the amount of short-term benefits paid to claimant and 
elicited testimony at hearing that the employer paid a portion, or all, of the premiums for 
the short-term disability plan.  However, defendants did not introduce a copy of the 
short-term disability plan, any summary of its terms, or offer any testimony pertaining to 
whether the short-term disability benefits were payable in addition to any worker’s 
compensation benefits payable to claimant.  Pursuant to the plain language of Iowa 
Code section 85.38(2), a credit is only available against worker’s compensation benefits 
if the short-term disability benefits were not payable in addition to or regardless of 
whether workers’ compensation benefits were payable.  In other words, if the short-term 
disability benefits were payable even if workers’ compensation benefits are owed, then 
defendants are not entitled to a credit. 
As the party that possesses this information in the form of plan documents, and 
that presumably has the contractual arrangements with administrators of the short-term 
disability plan, defendants had access to establish this essential term of Iowa Code 
section 85.38(2).  Defendants’ failure to produce any evidence to establish that the 
short-term disability benefits were not payable if workers’ compensation benefits are 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
payable results in a failure to establish entitlement to a credit pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.38(2).  I conclude that defendants failed to prove entitlement to a credit 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.38(2). 
Ms. Ryan also submitted a claim for past medical expenses.  The employer shall 
furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies for all 
conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The employer shall also 
allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for those services.  
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the employer 
has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Defendants stipulated that the medical treatment was reasonable and necessary 
and that the medical expenses related to that treatment were also reasonable and 
related to the disputed medical condition for which this claim is asserted.  The only 
dispute noted in the hearing report and at hearing is whether the medical treatment is 
causally related to the alleged work injury.  Having found that the medical treatment 
asserted (at least prior to July 29, 2023) is causally related to the work injury, I conclude 
claimant proved entitlement to the disputed medical expenses through July 29, 2023.  
Claimant also seeks medical mileage totaling $22.38.  The medical mileage is for 
awarded medical treatment.  Therefore, claimant should be reimbursed $22.38 in 
medical mileage.  Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Pursuant to a discovery ruling in this case, the issue of discovery sanctions 
remains to be decided.  Claimant seeks award of the cost of her impairment rating 
report from Dr. Lyons as well as the cost of a functional capacity evaluation.  Claimant 
urged the need for those responsive documents after a late disclosure of defendants’ 
report from Dr. Gorsche.  Ultimately, in my ruling, I concluded that an award of 
sanctions in some amount is justified for defendants’ violation of discovery orders.  
However, I reserved the ruling on the amount of sanctions until this decision. 
After contemplating the responsive documents produced by claimant, I find that 
they were neither convincing nor necessary.  Dr. Lyons ultimately referenced the Sixth 
Edition of the AMA Guides.  His opinion was not in compliance with Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(x) and 876 IAC 2.4, and his permanent impairment rating was rejected.  The 
functional capacity evaluation claimant urged was necessary to respond to Dr. 
Gorsche’s opinion ultimately was not referenced by Dr. Lyons in his rebuttal report and 
provides no relevant information for any of the disputed issues in this case.  
Accordingly, I conclude neither the rebuttal report nor the FCE obtained by claimant 
were credible or necessary.  I decline to assess the full cost of either, or both, of those.  
Ultimately, I conclude assessment of $500.00 in sanctions is sufficient to punish 
defendants for their violation of my discovery order and discourage similar conduct in 
the future.  876 IAC 4.36.  However, additional assessment is not necessary, or 
appropriate, under the facts of this case. 

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  
I concluded that claimant proved the October 27, 2022 left knee injury caused both 
temporary and permanent disability.  Therefore, it is appropriate to assess claimant’s 
costs in some amount. 
Ms. Ryan seeks assessment of her filing fee ($103.00) as a cost.  I conclude it is 
reasonable and permissible to assess the filing fee as a cost in this case.  876 IAC 
4.33(7).   
Claimant also asserts the expense of having Dr. Lyons testify live at the time of 
hearing (asserted to be $2,000.00) should be assessed as a cost.  I decline to assess 
any portion of Dr. Lyons’ trial testimony as a cost.  Dr. Lyons’ opinions, as expressed at 
the time of trial, were unnecessary to prevail in this case.  While I accepted Dr. Lyons’ 
causation opinion, it was not seriously challenged in defendants’ medical expert report 
nor significantly modified at the time of trial.  Dr. Lyons’ live testimony was not 
necessary, did not increase any award of benefits, and none of that expense is a 
reasonable cost to be assessed in this situation. 
Claimant seeks assessment of the cost of service of two subpoenas in this case.  
She does not introduce those expenses or demonstrate they were paid.  I decline to 
assess those expenses, as the testimony of Ms. Stewart did not prove to be vital or 
modify any award in this case.  If anything, Ms. Stewart’s testimony confirmed the 
testimony of defendants’ witness and tended to potentially lend credence to the 
asserted notice defense. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Any claim for penalty benefits is bifurcated and must be raised by the filing of a 
separate petition for review-reopening, if deemed appropriate and desirable. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay claimant healing period benefits 
from November 3, 2022 through March 21, 2023. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay claimant four point four (4.4) weeks 
of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on March 22, 2023. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred seventeen 
and 80/100 dollars ($517.80) per week. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump 
sum together with interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent.  

RYAN V. ZOETIS, INC. 
Page 16 
 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay any outstanding medical expenses, 
reimburse claimant for any out-of-pocket expenses, and reimburse any third-party payor 
for medical expenses summarized and contained in the medical expense summary 
attached to the hearing report that occurred prior to July 29, 2023. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s medical mileage 
expenses totaling twenty-two and 38/100 dollars ($22.38). 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay claimant five hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($500.00) as a discovery sanction for violation of the undersigned’s discovery 
order. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall reimburse claimant’s costs totaling one 
hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
The employer and insurance carrier shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) 
as required by this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___23rd ___ day of October, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Judith O’Donohoe (via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
