Case Number: 21007892.01
Case Title:  ELLIS, LINDSEY V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ellis Lindsey-21007892.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LINDSEY ELLIS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
              File No. 21007892.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :              
LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :            
 
Employer, 
  :  
 
 
  :  
  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EVEREST PREMIER INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
         Head Note Nos:  1803; 2501 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Lindsey Ellis, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Land Mark Products, Inc. (Land Mark), employer, and 
Everest Premier Insurance Company, insurer, both as defendants.  This matter was 
heard on August 13, 2024, with a final submission date of September 24, 2024. 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 7, Defendants’ Exhibits A through M, and the testimony of claimant. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
1. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
2. The commencement date of permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
3. Whether there is a causal connection between the injury and the claimed 
medical expenses. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jan-22  16:03:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
In the hearing report, the parties indicated defendants’ credit was in dispute.  At 
hearing, the parties indicated defendants’ credit, as detailed in the hearing report, had 
been resolved and was no longer an issue.  (Hearing Transcript, pages 5-6) 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was 26 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant has a GED.  
Claimant has worked at a Casey’s.  She also worked at a gas station/restaurant.  (Tr., 
pp. 23-24)  
Claimant began at Land Mark in March of 2021.  Land Mark provides retailers 
with pizza and calzone products.  Claimant worked as a line leader at Land Mark.  
Claimant’s job included making frozen pizzas, putting frozen products in a box, and 
putting boxes in larger boxes to be put on a pallet.  (Tr., p. 25) 
Claimant’s prior medical history is relevant.  In 2015, claimant was evaluated by 
a medical care provider for depression.  Claimant requested at that time to be put back 
on medication for depression.  (Joint Exhibit 1, pages 1-3) 
In October of 2020, claimant was treated for anxiety and depression.  The 
records indicate claimant had a history of anxiety and depression.  Claimant was 
assessed as having a moderate episode of recurrent major depressive disorder and 
adjustment disorder.  (JE 2, pp. 4-8) 
Claimant testified that on May 25, 2021, she was on a machine that taped boxes 
when she cut her index and long fingers on her left hand.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A, B; Tr., 
pp. 26-29)  Claimant testified that the injury “severed” the index finger on her left hand.  
(Tr., p. 29)  Photos of the machine where claimant injured her fingers are shown at 
Exhibit D.  
On May 25, 2021, claimant was evaluated in the emergency room at Lakes 
Regional Healthcare.  Claimant’s second and third fingers were caught in a machine 
which lacerated the distal palmar aspects of the fingers.  Claimant’s fingers were 
bandaged, and claimant was given an antibiotic.  (JE 3, pp. 9-10)  X-rays showed no 
fractures and no dislocations.  (JE 3, p. 12)  Claimant was returned to work on June 2, 
2021, with no restrictions.  (JE 3, p. 13) 
On June 1, 2021, claimant was evaluated by Philip Deffer, M.D., for lacerations 
on the pads of the index and middle finger.  Claimant was assessed as having index 
and middle finger soft tissue injuries.  Claimant was treated with Band-Aids.  (JE 4, p. 
14) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Deffer on June 15, 2021.  Claimant’s wounds were well 
healed, but claimant was sensitive at the scars on the left index and middle finger.  
Claimant was given silicone pads for her fingers for work.  Claimant was returned to 
work with no restrictions.  (JE 4, p. 15) 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
In June of 2021, claimant quit her job at Land Mark.  (Tr., p. 43) 
On June 22, 2021, claimant was evaluated at the Sanford Clinic for skin lesions.  
Claimant also sought treatment for her depression and anxiety.  Claimant’s symptoms 
began many years ago and had worsened.  Claimant had a lot going on with an injury at 
work, a delay in moving, and health concerns with her son.  Claimant’s prescription of 
fluoxetine was increased.  (JE 5, pp. 21-30) 
On July 8, 2021, claimant was evaluated by Stacey Jumbeck, APRN-CNP, for 
depression starting after the birth of her daughter in 2014.  Symptoms had worsened 
with a gastric bypass in 2016.  Symptoms also worsened on May 25, 2021, following a 
work injury.  Claimant describes the injury as the bone in her finger being exposed with 
the injury requiring skin grafting.  Claimant had a fear of being hurt again.  (JE 6, p. 61)  
Claimant was prescribed desvenlafaxine and told to start therapy.  (JE 6, pp. 61-72) 
Beginning in August of 2021, claimant began working at Pride Group Home for 
patients with mental health issues.  Claimant worked as an aid.  Claimant’s job duties 
included cooking meals and assisting with care of clients.  Claimant worked with Pride 
Group until she was fired after having a “mental breakdown.”  (Ex. L, depo pp. 13-14; JE 
6, p. 73; Claimant’s Exhibit 3, p. 36)   
Claimant returned to Nurse Practitioner Jumbeck on August 19, 2021, in follow-
up.  Claimant had begun working at Pride Group Home.  Claimant’s symptoms had 
improved, but not resolved.  (JE 6, pp. 73-80) 
On September 19, 2022, claimant was evaluated for congestion.  Claimant also 
complained of worsening anxiety caused by being subpoenaed for a friend’s lawsuit.  
Claimant had a history of anxiety and depression but was not taking medication.  
Claimant’s mental health medications were refilled.  (JE 5, pp. 31-38) 
In a November 3, 2022 note, Dr. Deffer assessed claimant as having lacerations 
of her left index and middle finger for her May of 2021 work injury.  (JE 4, p. 18) 
On April 19, 2023, claimant was evaluated by Dr. Deffer.  Claimant was found to 
be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of June 15, 2021.  Dr. Deffer found that 
claimant had a 7 percent permanent impairment to the left hand, converting to a 4 
percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  (JE 4, pp. 19-20) 
On August 1, 2023, claimant was seen for a pre-employment physical for a job at 
the Civil Commitment Unit for Sexual Offenders in Cherokee, IA.  Claimant was found to 
not have any physical, medical or psychological conditions that would require special 
accommodations for the job.  (JE 5, pp. 39-45) 
In August of 2023, claimant began her job at the Civil Commitment Sexual 
Offenders Unit (CCUSO).  (Tr., pp. 19-20) 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
In a March 27, 2024 report, Robin Sassman, M.D., gave her opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an independent medical evaluation (IME).  Photos of 
claimant’s injured fingers, and the report, showed some scarring in the middle and index 
fingers.  (Ex. 1, p. 7)  Claimant indicated her fingers had pain in cold weather.  She 
indicated her fingers were always cold.  (Ex. 1, p. 5)  Dr. Sassman found claimant at 
MMI as of May 25, 2022.  She found that claimant had an 18 percent permanent 
impairment to the left hand.  (Ex. 1, p. 9)  She limited claimant from repetitively gripping 
or grasping with the left hand, using vibratory tools or working in cold environments.  
(Ex. 1, p. 9) 
In an April 8, 2024 report, Kunal Patra, M.D., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following an independent psychiatric exam.  Claimant indicated that she 
received skin grafting for her injury.  (Ex. 2, p. 17)  She said that following the injury, she 
had sensitivity to cold, loss of strength and range of motion in her left index and middle 
finger.  (Id.)  Claimant said that after her work injury, her depression worsened, and she 
noticed panic attacks.  (Id.)   
Dr. Patra assessed claimant as having chronic PTSD and a major depressive 
disorder that was caused or materially aggravated by her May 25, 2021, work injury.  
(Ex. 2, pp. 25, 30) 
Dr. Patra found that claimant had a 15 percent permanent impairment related to 
her PTSD and her major depressive disorder.  He recommended claimant not work 
around sharp machines.  (Ex. 2, pp. 31-32)  He recommended claimant seek mental 
health counseling.  (Ex. 2, pp. 31-32) 
In an April 29, 2024, report, Tom Audet, C.R.C., gave his opinions regarding 
claimant’s vocational opportunities.  He opined that claimant had loss of access to the 
labor market of 63-76 percent.  He also opined that claimant had a loss of earning 
capacity of 47-51 percent.  (Ex. 3, pp. 34-39)  
In a May 31, 2024, report, Ted Stricklett, M.S., gave his opinion of claimant’s 
vocational opportunities.  Based on restrictions given by Dr. Patra, Dr. Sassman, and 
claimant’s education and work history, he found that claimant had a loss of earning 
capacity of approximately 30-35 percent.  (Ex. J) 
In a July 22, 2024 report, Terrence Augspurger, M.D., Elizabeth Augspurger, 
Ph.D., and Amy Mooney, Ph.D., gave their opinions of claimant’s condition following an 
independent mental health exam.  They opined that claimant had a pre-existing major 
depressive disorder and that there was no evidence to support the belief that claimant’s 
disorder was made worse by her May of 2021 work injury.  (Ex. K. p. 42)   
Regarding claimant’s alleged PTSD, they opined that claimant’s overall mental 
condition was not interfering with her life to a significant degree and was manageable 
without professional treatment.  (Ex. K, p. 43)  They opined claimant had a 10 percent 
permanent impairment.  They related 5 percent of this impairment to claimant’s pre-
existing depression condition.  (Ex. K, p. 44)   

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
In the report, Dr. Augspurger indicated 
It should be noted that the work injury reported by Ms. Ellis was not of 
such a severity that it would usually cause PTSD symptom reaction, but in 
a previous IME report by Dr. Patra, it was correctly noted that her prior 
mental health problems with depression, anxiety and “neurotic personality” 
predisposed her to a higher state of reactivity to external traumatic 
influence which could then bring about her resulting mental health 
changes.   
However, her ability to resume work (75 hours a week for 6-1/2 months in 
2024 and went to a 40 hour work week June 1st, 2024) and function 
adequately in most respects despite stopping psychotherapy in 2021, and 
stopping psychotropic medication treatment in July 2022 suggest that 
overall mental health condition is not interfering with her life to any 
significant degree and is manageable without professional treatment.   
(Ex. K, p. 43) 
Based on Dr. Augspurger’s 5 percent whole person rating, defendants paid 
claimant 25 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  (Ex. G, p. 19) 
In a July 30, 2024 email, Mr. Stricklett indicated that he had reviewed the report 
from Drs. Augspurger, Augspurger and Mooney.  Based on Dr. Augspurger's findings, 
Mr. Stricklett found that claimant had no loss of earning capacity or industrial disability.  
(Ex. J, p. 27) 
In a supplemental report, Dr. Sassman noted that she had reviewed the reports 
from Dr. Patra and Dr. Augspurger.  She opined that claimant should be given a 14 
percent permanent impairment regarding her mental health injury.  She also indicated 
claimant had a 20 percent permanent impairment to the hand, converting to an 11 
percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  She opined that combining the 
14 percent permanent impairment for the mental health injury and the 11 percent 
impairment to the body as a whole for the digital injury, resulted in a 23 percent 
permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  (Ex. 7, pp. 59-60) 
In an August 21, 2024 letter in response to correspondence from defendants’ 
counsel on August 13, 2024, Dr. Augspurger reiterated that claimant’s mental health 
problems would result in a 5 percent permanent impairment rating under the Guides.  
Dr. Augspurger indicated that he consulted with Charles Mooney, M.D., regarding the 
combined impairment.  Based on Dr. Deffer’s 4 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole and the 5 percent impairment for the mental health problems, this 
resulted in claimant having a 9 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  
(Ex. M) 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Augspurger opined that since Dr. Sassman did not specialize in mental health 
issues, she overestimated claimant’s permanent impairment for her mental health 
condition using the Guides. (Ex. M) 
At the time of injury, claimant earned $16.50 an hour and worked an average 
between 29-40 hours per week.  (Ex. H, p. 20)  At the time of hearing, claimant testified 
she earned $21.50 per week at CCUSO and worked full time.  (Tr., pp. 19-20)  In 
responses to discovery, claimant indicated she actually earned $23.00 per hour and 
worked 40 hours per week.  (Ex. F, p. 17)  The record indicates that claimant was 
working 75 hours a week at CCUSO and reduced her hours to 40 hours per week 
beginning on July 1, 2024.  (Ex. K, p. 40) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides:   
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u” hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the 
same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee's functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee's 
earning capacity. (emphasis added)   
Claimant was 26 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant has a GED.  
Claimant has worked at Casey’s.  She also worked at a gas station/restaurant. 
On May 25, 2021, claimant injured her index and middle fingers at work.  
Claimant’s injury was initially assessed as a laceration of the index and middle fingers.  
Claimant had no fractures regarding this injury.  Claimant had no surgery regarding this 
injury.  Claimant’s injury was initially treated with Band-Aids.  (JE 3, pp. 9-13; JE 4, p. 
14) 
The record indicates claimant has a history of overstating the nature of her injury.  
At hearing, claimant testified her fingers were severed.  (Tr., p. 29)  There is no 
evidence in the record that claimant’s fingers were severed.  Claimant has told multiple 
providers that the bone in her fingers was exposed, and that the injury resulted in skin 
grafting.  (JE 6, p. 61; Ex. 2, p. 17)  There is no evidence in the record that the bones in 
claimant’s fingers were exposed after the injury.  There is no evidence in the record that 
claimant had skin grafting for this injury.   
Regarding her injury to her fingers, two experts have opined regarding claimant’s 
permanent impairment.  Dr. Deffer treated claimant for her injury on several occasions.  
He opined that claimant had a 7 percent permanent impairment to the hand, converting 
to a 4 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  (JE 4, pp. 19-20) 
Dr. Sassman evaluated claimant once for an IME.  She opined that claimant had 
a 20 percent permanent impairment to the hand, converting to an 11 percent permanent 
impairment to the body as a whole.  (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
As noted above, claimant has a tendency to overstate her injury.  The opinions of 
treating doctors are not to be given greater weight solely because they are treating 
physicians.  Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 404, 408 (Iowa 1994)  
However, i.e., as a factual matter, Dr. Deffer has a far greater familiarity with claimant’s 
medical history and presentation than does Dr. Sassman.  Based on the above-
described record, it is found that Dr. Deffer’s opinion regarding permanent impairment 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
for claimant’s injury is more convincing than that of Dr. Sassman.  It is found that 
claimant has a 7 percent permanent impairment to her hand, converting to a 4 percent 
permanent impairment to the body as a whole regarding the laceration to her fingers. 
Two experts have opined regarding the extent of claimant’s mental health 
condition.  Drs. Augspurger and Mooney evaluated claimant once for an independent 
psychological evaluation.  They opined that claimant had 10 percent permanent 
impairment to the body as a whole for her depression and PTSD.  The doctors also 
found that claimant had a 5 percent permanent impairment for a pre-existing major 
depressive disorder and that claimant actually had a 5 percent permanent impairment 
for her PTSD.  (Ex. K, pp. 44-46; Ex. M) 
Dr. Patra evaluated claimant once for an independent psychological exam.  He 
found that claimant had a 15 percent permanent impairment for her major depressive 
disorder and her PTSD.  (Ex. 2, pp. 31-32)  Dr. Patra’s opinions regarding permanent 
impairment are problematic for several reasons.  As noted above, the record indicates 
claimant has a history of overstating the nature of her injury.  For example, claimant told 
Dr. Patra that she required skin grafts for the cuts to her fingers.  (Ex. 2, p. 17)  The 
record indicates claimant’s injury was actually treated with Band-Aids.  Claimant did not 
have any skin grafts.  In arriving at his opinions of claimant’s mental condition, Dr. Patra 
relied on the exaggerated description of claimant’s injury from claimant. 
Second, as noted in Dr. Augspurger’s report, claimant stopped seeking 
counseling and stopped taking psychotropic medications by July of 2022.  After that 
time, she found a higher paying job.  Claimant initially worked at a job for 75 hours a 
week.  The record indicates that claimant’s mental health condition did not interfere with 
claimant’s life to any significant degree and that claimant continues to work and function 
without professional treatment.  (Ex. K, p. 43) 
Claimant has not had any counseling or psychotropic medications since July of 
2022.  She has been able to hold a job and earn more money from that job than she did 
at the time of injury.  Claimant was able to work at that job up to 75 hours a week.  Dr. 
Patra does not appear to take any of these facts into consideration in making his 
determination of claimant’s permanent impairment regarding her mental health injury. 
Given the above-described record, it is found that the opinions of Drs. 
Augspurger and Mooney are found more convincing than those of Dr. Patra regarding 
claimant’s mental health condition.  Claimant is found to have a 5 percent permanent 
impairment regarding her mental health injury. 
Claimant has a 4 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole 
regarding her lacerated finger injury.  She has a 5 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole regarding her mental health injury.  Based on the combined values 
chart of the Guides, claimant is found to have a 9 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole regarding her May 25, 2021 work injury. 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
At the time of the injury, claimant was earning $16.50 an hour.  Claimant worked 
between 29-40 hours a week.  At the time of hearing, claimant was earning $21.50 or 
$23.00 per hour and working 40 hours a week.  Prior to June of 2024, claimant had 
been working up to 75 hours a week.  Based on this record, claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits is based only on the functional impairment of the 
injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  Claimant has a 9 percent permanent impairment 
to the body as a whole.  Claimant is entitled to 45 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits (9 percent x 500 weeks). 
The next issue to be determined is the correct commencement date of benefits.  
Dr. Deffer found claimant had reached maximum medical improvement as of June 15, 
2021.  Drs. Augspurger and Mooney opined that claimant reached MMI for her mental 
health condition approximately in July of 2022, but did not provide a specific date.  (Ex. 
K, p. 43)  Because Dr. Deffer’s date of maximum medical improvement is more specific, 
it is found that claimant’s permanent partial disability benefits should commence as of 
June 15, 2021. 
The final issue to be determined is whether there is a causal connection between 
the injury and the claimed medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Defendants object to being required to pay the charges in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 
regarding Hy-Vee Pharmacy payments.  This is because documentation for the charges 
was untimely submitted.  (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 16; Tr., pp. 6-9) 
At hearing, defendants appeared to admit that there was no prejudice to 
defendants regarding the late submitted charges.  (Tr., p. 8)  Defendants admit in their 
post-hearing brief that the Hy-Vee charges indicated in Exhibit 5 are related to 
claimant’s physical and mental injuries.  (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 16)  As 
defendants admit the contested charges relate to claimant’s work injury, and defendants 
appear to admit that no prejudice resulted in the late disclosure of these charges, 
defendants are required to pay the Hy-Vee Pharmacy charges as found in Exhibit 5. 
 
 
 

ELLIS V. LAND MARK PRODUCTS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That defendants shall pay claimant 45 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on June 15, 2021, at the rate of four hundred eighteen and 54/100 
dollars ($418.54) per week.   
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
That defendants shall pay claimant’s medical expenses as listed in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 5. 
That defendants shall be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
That defendants shall pay costs. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
under Rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Signed and filed this ___22nd ___ day of January, 2025. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
David Scott (via WCES) 
 
Kaitlyn Coenen (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
       JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
