Case Number: 20003796.02
Case Title:  TUTTLE, MICHELLE V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      231941_Tuttle_v_Archers_Daniels_Mid_22F3CEBECD00C.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 23-1941 
Filed January 9, 2025 
 
 
MICHELLE TUTTLE, 
 
Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND CO., 
 
Respondent-Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Patrick D. Smith, 
Judge. 
 
 
A claimant appeals the dismissal of her judicial review action to overrule an 
order of the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner imposing a sanction for 
service of a subpoena.  AFFIRMED. 
 
 
William Dennis Currell of Currell Law Firm, Cedar Rapids, for appellant. 
 
Brandon W. Lobberecht and Peter J. Thill of Betty, Neuman & McMahon, 
P.L.C., Davenport, for appellee. 
 
 
Heard by Tabor, C.J., and Ahlers and Sandy, JJ. 
 

 
2 
TABOR, Chief Judge. 
 
A deputy workers’ compensation commissioner ordered claimant Michelle 
Tuttle to reimburse her employer, Archer Daniels Midland Company (ADM), $3900 
as a sanction for allegedly harassing conduct in the service of a subpoena on its 
expert Dr. Chad Abernathey.  Tuttle contends that the deputy’s order was a nullity 
because the agency lacked jurisdiction to “adjudicate subpoenas.”  Tuttle’s 
contention has faced procedural hurdles and continues to do so. 
 
This appeal is Tuttle’s second trip to our court.  The first time around, we 
reversed the district court’s dismissal of her challenge—holding that her petition 
for writ of certiorari could be considered a petition for judicial review.  Tuttle v. Iowa 
Workers’ Comp. Comm’r, No. 21-1246, 2023 WL 4105478, at *5 (Iowa Ct. App. 
Jan. 25, 2023).  We remanded and directed Tuttle to recast her petition, which she 
did.  We also advised the district court that since Tuttle was seeking judicial review 
of intermediate agency action, she had to make two showings under Iowa Code 
section 17A.19(1) (2020): (1) all adequate administrative remedies had been 
exhausted and (2) review of the final agency action would not provide an adequate 
remedy.  Id.  Only if both requirements were met could the court consider the merits 
of her claim. 
 
After reviewing those requirements, the district court ruled: “The 
administrative remedies available to Tuttle in this case are adequate, and she is 
required to exhaust such remedies before seeking review in this court.”  The court 
explained that if the deputy was wrong in imposing the sanction, the commissioner 
could correct that wrong on intra-agency review or the court could correct it on 
judicial review from final agency action.  Unhappy with that decision, Tuttle again 

 
3 
appeals.  She argues not only that no remedy exists at the agency level, but that 
the judicial review decision violated her due process rights. 
 
Because Tuttle did not secure a decision from the commissioner on the 
deputy’s statutory authority to impose the sanction, there’s an adequate agency 
remedy that she has yet to exhaust.  And her constitutional claim is unpreserved.  
We thus affirm the district court’s decision. 
I. 
Facts and Prior Proceedings 
In the first appeal, we set out this factual background: 
 
Tuttle had multiple workers’ compensation claims arising from 
her employment with [ADM].  During discovery, Tuttle requested, 
“[c]omplete copies of all photographs, surveillance films and/or 
videotapes that Employer and insurance carrier have of [Tuttle], in or 
at the factory or adjacent parking lots.”  ADM’s response to this 
particular discovery request was “none.”  ADM did not update its 
discovery responses. 
 
ADM requested an independent medical examination (IME) 
with Dr. Chad Abernathey.  The materials ADM submitted to 
Dr. Abernathey included a statement from ADM’s counsel: “Visual 
images exist at ADM that display [Tuttle] walking as she arrives to 
work at the beginning of her shift, and leaves work at the end of her 
shift, on her last date worked, March 19, 2020, with no visual signs 
of injury or altered gait/limp.” 
 
After Dr. Abernathey issued a final IME report, Tuttle served 
Dr. Abernathey with a subpoena at his home, requesting documents 
supporting the report, including the visual images ADM offered to 
Dr. Abernathey.  Dr. Abernathey provided the information requested 
in the subpoena. 
 
Id. at *1. 
 
 
Tuttle’s method of serving the subpoena on its expert drew ADM’s ire when 
Dr. Abernathy withdrew from serving as its expert.  So it sought sanctions against 
Tuttle.  Tuttle resisted, arguing that the workers’ compensation commissioner did 
not have “jurisdiction” to impose sanctions.  Instead, Tuttle asserted, ADM needed 
to seek relief in district court.  Without holding a hearing, a deputy commissioner 

 
4 
sanctioned Tuttle for her counsel’s conduct in serving the subpoena.  The deputy 
wrote: 
 
In this case, counsel for the claimant purposefully served 
Dr. Abernathey, a well-known physician, with a subpoena at his 
home, after business hours.  As evidenced by his unannounced, 
uninvited visit to Dr. Abernathey’s office, claimant’s attorney clearly 
knew that Dr. Abernathey had a place of business.  A conscious 
choice was made that appears to have the intent to harass a 
defendant’s expert witness both at his business and also outside of 
business hours, at his home address.  Additionally, by serving a 
subpoena, rather than the appropriate discovery motion, the claimant 
appears to have caused an unnecessary delay or expense in this 
litigation.  Whether that was the intent of the claimant is irrelevant. 
 
The deputy determined that Tuttle should reimburse ADM for Dr. Abernathey’s 
fees, which were $3900.  The deputy then denied Tuttle’s motion to reconsider. 
 
As her next step, Tuttle applied for interlocutory appeal to the workers’ 
compensation commissioner.  The commissioner denied that request.  Tuttle then 
petitioned for writ of certiorari in district court, claiming the deputy lacked 
jurisdiction to issue the sanction.  The commissioner moved to dismiss on the 
grounds that (1) judicial review under Iowa Code chapter 17A was the exclusive 
means to challenge the agency decision and (2) Tuttle was required to exhaust 
administrative remedies.  Tuttle resisted the motion to dismiss.  The court granted 
the commissioner’s motion to dismiss the petition because Tuttle sought the wrong 
form of relief.  Our court found that even though Tuttle used the wrong vehicle—
certiorari—the court could treat the case as a “proper chapter 17A appeal if the 
situation merits.”  Id. at *4 (citation omitted). 
 
Finding that Tuttle’s filing could be treated as a petition for judicial review, 
we reversed and remanded.  We instructed Tuttle to file a “recast petition for 
judicial review” that named the employer, ADM, as the respondent rather than the 

 
5 
commissioner.  Id. at *5.  In her amended petition, Tuttle asserted that the agency 
“lacked jurisdiction regarding the ability to adjudicate contests to its subpoenas,” 
“lacked legal authority to enter adjudications arising out of contests to its 
subpoenas,” and “denied [Tuttle’s] constitutional right to Procedural Due Process.” 
 
The district court held a hearing on the new petition in August 2023.1  After 
discussing Tuttle’s sanction challenge and the remand order in depth with counsel, 
the district court dismissed the petition for judicial review.  The court clarified that 
it was only addressing the exhaustion questions set out in our earlier decision.  See 
id.2  The district court found, “There is no doubt Tuttle has available to her 
administrative remedies, which, if exhausted, would permit the same questions 
presented in her [amended petition for judicial review] to be presented to the court 
at a later time, once there is a final agency adjudication of her workers’ 
compensation claim.”  So, following our instructions, the district court declined to 
consider the merits of Tuttle’s claim that the agency lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction or authority to adjudicate subpoenas. 
 
1 Two months earlier, the deputy held a hearing on Tuttle’s underlying workers’ 
compensation claims.  As part of that agency hearing, Tuttle urged the sanction 
claim.  While assessing this appeal for mootness, we confirmed that the deputy 
did not rule on the sanction claim because it was still pending in the district court.  
See Tuttle v. Archer Daniels Midland, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n Nos. 
21011951.02, 20003796.03, 22700262.01, 2023 WL 7476353 (Nov. 6, 2023). 
2 At oral argument, Tuttle highlighted ADM’s agreement at the remand hearing that 
she had exhausted her administrative remedies.  True, when the court asked if 
“the adequate administrative remedies have been exhausted,” ADM’s counsel 
said: “That is correct.”  But later, ADM’s counsel noted that final agency action 
“hadn’t been rendered yet” and a question remained what the court could do upon 
final agency action: “Will that not provide an adequate remedy?”  And in its 
appellee’s brief, ADM defended the district court’s ruling that Tuttle failed to 
exhaust administrative remedies. 

 
6 
 
Addressing Tuttle’s argument that the administrative remedies were not 
adequate because the deputy lacked “subject matter jurisdiction” to “adjudicate 
contested subpoenas,” the court sought to clarify the terminology: “this case does 
not present a question of subject matter jurisdiction,” but one of statutory authority.  
The court then reasoned that even if Tuttle is correct about the lack of authority, 
that doesn’t mean there is no adequate agency remedy—the commissioner could 
vacate the deputy’s order in a final agency action.  And because Tuttle alleged 
only monetary losses, that final agency action would provide an adequate remedy.  
The court concluded that Tuttle was required to exhaust administrative remedies 
before seeking judicial review.  Tuttle again appeals. 
II. 
Standards of Review 
 
“We review a district court’s dismissal of a petition for judicial review for 
correction of errors at law.”  Irland v. Iowa Bd. of Med., 939 N.W.2d 85, 89 
(Iowa 2020).  We likewise review the district court’s statutory interpretation for legal 
error.  Bank of the W. v. Kline, 782 N.W.2d 453, 457 (Iowa 2010).  And we review 
constitutional claims de novo.  Gluba v. State Objection Panel, 11 N.W.3d 459, 
464 (Iowa 2024). 
III. 
Discussion 
 
Tuttle raises two issues.  First, she reprises her contention that the agency 
lacks “subject matter jurisdiction” to “adjudicate subpoenas.”  Second, she 
contends the deputy’s decision violated her due process rights.  We will consider 
each issue in turn.   

 
7 
 
A.  Does the commissioner lack authority to adjudicate subpoenas? 
 
Iowa Code section 17A.13(1) governs discovery for agencies. 
 
Agencies have all subpoena powers conferred upon them by 
their enabling acts or other statutes.  In addition, prior to the 
commencement of a contested case by the notice referred to in 
section 17A.12, subsection 1, an agency having power to decide 
contested cases may subpoena books, papers, records, and any 
other real evidence necessary for the agency to determine whether 
it should institute a contested case proceeding.  After the 
commencement of a contested case, each agency having power to 
decide contested cases may administer oaths and issue subpoenas 
in those cases.  Discovery procedures applicable to civil actions are 
available to all parties in contested cases before an agency.  
Evidence obtained in discovery may be used in the hearing before 
the agency if that evidence would otherwise be admissible in the 
agency hearing.  Agency subpoenas shall be issued to a party on 
request. 
 
The second part of this subsection is at issue.  It provides: 
On contest, the court shall sustain the subpoena or similar process 
or demand to the extent that it is found to be in accordance with the 
law applicable to the issuance of subpoenas or discovery in civil 
actions.  In proceedings for enforcement, the court shall issue an 
order requiring the appearance of the witness or the production of 
the evidence or data within a reasonable time under penalty of 
punishment for contempt in cases of willful failure to comply. 
 
Iowa Code § 17A.13(1) (emphasis added).  Tuttle’s position is that the statute 
gives the ability to entertain “contest[s]” and “proceedings for enforcement” to the 
court, thus depriving the agency of that power.  Tuttle describes that power as 
“subject matter jurisdiction.”  “Subject matter jurisdiction is the power of a court to 
hear and determine cases of the general class to which the proceedings in 
question belong, not merely the particular case then occupying the court’s 
attention.”  De Stefano v. Apts. Downtown, Inc., 879 N.W.2d 155, 164 (Iowa 2016) 
(cleaned up).  And although many appellate cases use jurisdiction informally to 
describe agency powers, it is different from the subject matter jurisdiction of courts.  

 
8 
We agree with the district court that what is in dispute is the agency’s statutory 
authority.3  
 
Thus, the question Tuttle pursues is whether the deputy commissioner had 
the statutory authority to “adjudicate subpoenas,” a term Tuttle uses as shorthand 
for issuing orders involving the subpoenas such as protective orders and 
sanctions.4  Tuttle cites Dunlap v. Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 558–59 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2012), where we found the “express grant of powers to the workers’ 
compensation commissioner” did not include “the power to deem a party in 
contempt for failure to comply with a subpoena.”5 
 
The commissioner declined interlocutory review of Tuttle’s question.  So 
Tuttle leapfrogged the commissioner, asked the district court, and now asks us to 
address it.  In doing so, she expects us to ignore the purpose of our remand—to 
determine whether her claim was “immediately reviewable.”  Our prior panel 
charged the district court with deciding whether Tuttle satisfied the two 
requirements under section 17A.19(1) for intermediate agency action.6  Tuttle, 
2023 WL 4105478, at *5. 
 
3 Asserting a lack of subject matter jurisdiction is key to Tuttle’s argument that our 
court can address her sanction claim directly without remand because defects in 
subject matter jurisdiction can be raised at any time.  Roland v. Annett Holdings, 
Inc., 940 N.W.2d 752, 757 (Iowa 2020). 
4 Although the deputy also issued a protective order as part of his decision on 
ADM’s motion to quash, at oral argument, Tuttle’s counsel agreed that the subject 
of this appeal is the sanction only. 
5 This is not a contempt action but arose from ADM’s motion to quash and for 
sanctions.  ADM does not address Dunlap in its brief. 
6 See Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Iowa C.R. Comm’n, No. 15-1697, 2016 
WL 7403726, at *1 (Iowa Ct. App. Dec. 21, 2016) (“A party seeking judicial review 
of non-final agency action, as here, must show that (1) adequate administrative 
remedies have been exhausted and (2) review of the final agency action would not 
provide an adequate remedy.  Because ‘both requirements must be satisfied 

 
9 
 
In doing so, we relied on Christensen v. Iowa Civil Rights Commission, 292 
N.W.2d 429, 431 (Iowa 1980), and Cheng v. Stanley, No. 08-0737, 2009 
WL 3337636, at *1 (Iowa Ct. App. Oct. 7, 2009).  In Christensen, the supreme court 
found that section 17A.13 does not “give nonagency parties a right of immediate 
recourse to the court” to settle discovery disputes.  292 N.W.2d at 431.  The court 
recognized the profound “disrupt[ion]” and “difficult additional burden” it would 
cause both agencies and courts “[i]f parties were able to interrupt agency 
proceedings by bringing original district court actions . . . [for] every discovery 
problem which conceivably might arise.”  Id.  In Cheng, the petitioner, Cheng, 
sought to enforce a subpoena duces tecum in a matter pending before the 
department of human services and alleged noncompliance.  2009 WL 3337636, 
at *1.  When Cheng filed a rule to show cause, the district court found that she 
failed to exhaust her administrative remedies.  Id.  Our court agreed, reasoning 
Cheng did not obtain a “final agency decision,” and “should have sought 
enforcement through the” agency before filing for judicial review.  Id. at *2. 
 
Returning to that rationale here, we reiterate that there is no final agency 
decision on the statutory authority to sanction Tuttle.  The deputy believed it was 
within his authority, but the commissioner refused to take up the matter before 
Tuttle’s underlying workers’ compensation claims were decided.  Rather than wait, 
Tuttle sought court review.  Although there was a circuitous route to the judicial 
review decision, the district court’s November 2023 ruling found that immediate 
 
before intermediate judicial review is permitted, the failure to meet one requirement 
disposes of the issue.’” (quoting Richards v. Iowa State Com. Comm’n, 270 
N.W.2d 616, 620 (Iowa 1978))).   

 
10
review of the intermediate agency action was not proper under section 17A.19(1).  
We find no error in the district court’s ruling. 
 
Tuttle’s appellate briefing focuses on the merits of her claim.  She contends 
the agency lacked statutory authority under section 17A.13(1) to issue the 
sanction.  And that the deputy’s ruling violated her right to due process.  Tuttle 
maintains that the district court has jurisdiction to decide subpoena contests in the 
first instance, and that we can decide that the deputy exceeded his statutory 
authority when he ordered the sanction.  But Christensen and Cheng caution 
against that piecemeal approach. 
 
The proper route is the one identified on judicial review.  As the district court 
correctly ruled, Tuttle has an adequate remedy that she has not exhausted.  She 
can ask the commissioner whether the deputy erred in imposing the sanction.  If 
the commissioner agrees with Tuttle and finds that the deputy lacked authority to 
impose a sanction or violated Tuttle’s due process rights in doing so, or that the 
sanction was unwarranted under the circumstances, then Tuttle receives an 
adequate remedy.  If the commissioner agrees with the deputy, Tuttle has a final 
agency decision she can challenge on judicial review under section 17A.19.  In 
sum, we agree with the district court’s dismissal of the petition. 
 
B.  Did the agency deny Tuttle’s right to due process? 
 
Tuttle next contends the deputy’s imposition of the sanctions violated her 
due process rights under article I, section 9 of the Iowa Constitution.  Tuttle asserts 
she preserved error by raising this constitutional claim in several petitions and 
briefs and at the district court hearing.  ADM argues error is not preserved because 
Tuttle did not obtain a ruling. 

 
11
 
It is fundamental to our review that an issue be both raised and decided 
before we rule on it.  Meier v. Senecaut, 641 N.W.2d 532, 537 (Iowa 2002).  Tuttle 
did not secure a ruling from either the agency or the district court on whether the 
deputy’s decision violated her due process rights, so she has relinquished that 
ground for appellate review. 
 
AFFIRMED. 
