Case Number: 19006100.02
Case Title:  REISTROFFER, RODNEY G V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Reistroffer Rodney-19006100.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RODNEY REISTROFFER, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
   File No. 19006100.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :         
QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND INSURANCE CO. 
  : 
OF AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes:  1108.50, 1402.40, 1803,                       
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
                      2501, 2907, 4000.2 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Rodney Reistroffer, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Quality Concrete Company, employer, and Accident Fund 
Insurance Company of America, insurance carrier, as defendants.  Hearing was held via 
Zoom videoconference on April 25, 2024.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Rodney Reistroffer, Beverly Reistroffer, and Dawn Holesinger were the only 
witnesses to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-7, 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, and Defendants’ Exhibits A-I.  Defendants objected to 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pages 76-79, a report from Dr. David Segal, because it was not 
produced to defendants until March 29, 2024, after the 30-day deadline.  Defendants 
failed to demonstrate that receipt of the evidence would be unfairly prejudicial as 
required by 876 IAC 4.19(3)(e).  Therefore, defendants’ objection was overruled and 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pages 76-79, was admitted.  All other exhibits were received 
without objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration 
hearing.       
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-30  13:24:24     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 2 
 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on May 24, 2024, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained any permanent partial disability as the result of 
the stipulated August 27, 2019 work injury.  If so, the nature and extent of 
permanency he sustained.   
 
2. The appropriate commencement date for any permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
 
3. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses. 
 
4. Whether penalty benefits are appropriate. 
 
5. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 Claimant, Rodney Reistroffer (“Reistroffer”), sustained a work-related injury on 
August 27, 2019, while working for Quality Concrete Company (“Quality”).  Quality 
makes concrete deliveries to residential, commercial jobs, and government jobs.  
(Hearing Transcript, page 14)  Reistroffer has been employed there for approximately 
nine years.  His entire work history was with Quality.  Prior to working at Quality, 
Reistroffer had enlisted in the Marines where he was assigned to artillery.  (Tr. pp. 12-
14)  While he was in the Marines he did have a surgery on his right shoulder.  (Tr. pp. 
12-13)   
At the time of the hearing Reistroffer was still employed with Quality.  He worked 
as a full-time driver which is the same job he was performing prior to his injury.  His 
duties included loading trucks, delivering concrete, and performing shop work.  (Tr. p. 
14)  Once he arrived at a job site, his duties were to operate the truck, putting the chute 
on, and spinning the drum.  (Tr. p. 15)  The job sites were typically within approximately 
one hour from Clinton and in Iowa.  (Tr. p. 15)  When he worked in the shop, he 
performed basic truck maintenance such as oil changes or brake work.  (Tr. p. 15)  At 
the time of the hearing he was paid $26.00 per hour.  (Tr. p. 16)  At the time of the 
injury, he was paid $21.00 per hour.  (Id. at p. 42) 
 
On the date of the injury, Reistroffer was in the drum of his cement truck cleaning 
concrete when a chunk of concrete fell and hit him on the top left side of his head. This 
caused him to hit the other side of his head on the steel fin of the truck.  He estimates 
that the chunk of concrete weighed a couple hundred pounds.  Reistroffer does not 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 3 
 
remember the event.  He was told that he got out of the truck and ran to the shop.  He 
was bleeding on both sides of his head.  He remembers having his head under the sink 
and blood was everywhere.  His boss, Dawn Holesinger, drove him to the emergency 
room.  (Tr. pp. 16-18)     
 
Reistroffer was taken to the emergency room at Mercy Medical Center in Clinton.  
(Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-8)  He had a head laceration on his skin above his right ear.  
There was no loss of consciousness.  A head CT was performed, which showed no 
acute intracranial abnormality.  The impression was scalp laceration, head contusion, 
and face laceration.  The bilateral scalp lacerations were repaired in the emergency 
department using staples.  He was instructed to return for staple removal in 10-14 days.  
(Id.) 
On September 10, 2019, Reistroffer returned to the emergency room.  He 
reported persistent headache, dizziness, and was unable to focus.  He felt lightheaded 
at work.  He denied vomiting and reported his headaches come and go.  He had no 
other focal neurological symptoms.  Exacerbating factors included light and noise.  The 
diagnosis was post-concussion syndrome.  He was instructed to follow up with his 
primary care physician as needed.  (JE1, pp. 9-11) 
Reistroffer went to MercyOne Urgent Care on September 23, 2019.  He reported 
continued headache and dizziness status post head injury on August 27.  For the first 
couple of weeks after the work injury he felt good, then for the next 2 weeks he felt 
worse.  He felt foggy, lightheaded and “I feel like I drink a 12 pack.”  (JE2, p. 15)  He 
reported episodic headaches with nausea.  He had difficulty sleeping and decreased 
focus.  He had been taking ibuprofen 2-3 times per day for headache.  He felt off 
balance.  He denied vision change.  When he squatted down his dizziness and head 
pressure worsened.  He could not watch TV or play games on his cell phone.  He wore 
sunglasses daily.  The assessment was traumatic injury of head, sequela, vertigo, other 
complicated headache syndrome, and nausea.  A brain MRI was recommended.  He 
was provided vertigo care instructions and told to return in 2 weeks.  (JE2, pp. 15-16) 
An MRI of Reistroffer’s brain was performed on October 1, 2019.  The impression 
was no acute intracranial abnormality.  (JE1, pp. 12-13) 
Reistroffer returned to MercyOne on October 3, 2019.  The brain MRI was 
negative for acute findings.  He reported that his dizziness had improved and 
headaches were now weekly or every other week.  He had significant dizziness with full 
extension of his neck.  He was not sleeping well.  He denied worsening headache, 
shortness of breath, chest pain, abdominal pain, or issues with bowel or bladder.  He 
took ibuprofen as needed for headache.  Osteopathic manipulative treatment was 
performed on 5 body regions.  Epley maneuvers were performed for 3 rounds with 
complete resolution of dizziness.  He was to return in 1 to 2 weeks for re-evaluation of 
symptoms.  The plan was to return to work after the next visit if he continued to improve; 
patient agreed with the plan.  (JE2, pp. 19-20) 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 4 
 
On November 19, 2019, Reistroffer returned to MercyOne.  (JE2, pp. 17-18)  He 
still had difficulty with focusing and recurrent headache.  He was taking cyclobenzaprine 
5 mg 2-3 times per day to prevent headache.  He was also taking meloxicam 15 mg 
daily.  He was easily fatigued and had difficulty staying awake.  He did drive to work, but 
no longer drove at work.  He worked in the shop loading trucks.  He was currently on 
restrictions at work and not allowed to operate heavy equipment.  The assessment 
included: traumatic injury of head, sequela; concussion without loss of consciousness, 
sequela; nonintractable episodic headache, unspecified headache type; chronic fatigue; 
and daytime somnolence.  A neurology evaluation was recommended.  He was to 
follow-up after the evaluation.  (JE2, pp. 17-18) 
On March 12, 2020, Reistroffer saw Michael Jacoby, M.D. at MercyOne 
Neurology Care for a work injury.  (JE4, pp. 26-27)  He was hit on the side of head by a 
piece of concrete and then the other side of his head hit a metal object.  He had no loss 
of consciousness, but next recall was washing his head in a sink.  He continued to have 
dizziness, daily migraines, and neck pain.  His tinnitus from his military service 
intensified with his headaches.  He did not notice neck pain until approximately one 
month after the accident.  His head symptoms were noticed immediately.  He reported 
that the first week after the event he felt fine but then everything spiraled out of control.  
No nausea, but he did not like bright lights.  He felt off balance pretty much since the 
start.  Headaches were more intense initially, but now more frequent.  He had not 
worked for a couple of months due to a “slow lay off.”  (JE4, p. 26)  He used ibuprofen 
three times per day for headaches, five days per week.  His MRI from October 2019 
was normal.  Imbalance sensation worsened with motion such as driving.  Neck pain 
experienced along the side of his spine.  No radiation into his arms.  The assessment 
was headache, dizziness, and neck pain, likely early posttraumatic headaches, but now 
concern for medication overuse headaches.  Dr. Jacoby recommended treating his 
headaches with 7 days of prednisone and starting amitriptyline for headache and neck 
pain.  He also instructed Reistroffer to stop cyclobenzaprine, ibuprofen, and avoid over-
the-counter medications.  He recommended physical therapy for the neck and vestibular 
exercises.  He was to return in 2 months.  (JE4, pp. 26-27)   
On March 19, 2020, Reistroffer started physical therapy at Rock Valley Physical 
Therapy.  The therapist noted the problems he was being seen for were neck pain, 
decreased range of motion of the cervical spine, and palpable muscle spasms.  He 
presented with signs and symptoms consistent with cervical whiplash.  The treatment 
plan was for 2 visits per week for 4 weeks.  (JE7, pp. 73-75) 
Reistroffer returned to Dr. Jacoby on August 27, 2020, for follow up of headache, 
dizziness, and neck pain due to a work-related accident about one year ago.  (JE4, pp. 
28-30)  He reported that his headaches were worse.  He returned to work in May and 
since had noticed more problems.  Neck was also an issue.  He blamed the driving of 
his work as problematic.  Physical therapy helped a lot but not long enough.  Ubrelvy 
was effective in lessening pain but not resolving it.  Reistroffer believed his headaches 
emanated from his neck.  He had dizziness with bad migraines.  The assessment was 
headache and neck pain, suspect worsening symptoms from increased activity.  Dr. 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 5 
 
Jacoby renewed Ubrelvy and cyclobenzaprine.  Trigger point injection (TPI) was done 
on that date.  The note indicated Botox if the TPI was not effective.  Reistroffer was to 
return to physical therapy.  He was to return to the clinic as needed.  (JE4, pp. 28-30) 
Reistroffer saw Dr. Jacoby again on October 12, 2020, for follow-up of headache, 
dizziness, and neck pain due to a work accident.  He returned to receive Botox because 
the TPI was not effective.  He reported 20 migraine/headache days per month.  Dr. 
Jacoby noted good attention span and good concentration.  The assessment was 
chronic migraine without aura and neck pain.  He was given a Botox injection.  He was 
to return to physical therapy and return to the clinic in 3 months.  (JE4, pp. 31-33) 
Reistroffer underwent additional physical therapy at Rock Valley Physical 
Therapy in October 2020.  During the visits the therapist noted pain and stiffness in the 
neck and headache.  On one occasion Reistroffer reported he was very dizzy while 
driving to work that morning.  (JE7)     
On January 13, 2021, Reistroffer returned to Dr. Jacoby.  He reported 20 
migraine/headache days per month.  Active problems were listed as chronic migraine 
without aura, dizziness, headache, and neck pain.  He found the Botox effective with no 
injection side effects.  He wished to proceed with Botox again.  Reistroffer was given 
another injection.  He was to follow up in 3 months.  (JE4, pp. 34-36) 
Dr. Jacoby provided another Botox injection on April 20, 2021.  Reistroffer 
reported 3-4 migraine days per month.  (JE4, pp. 37-38) 
On July 1, 2021, Dr. Jacoby saw Reistroffer.  Consent was obtained for Zoom.  
He noted patient was last there in April for Botox.  Headaches were controlled until late 
into the injection cycle.  Ubrelvy was effective and used closer to next injection.  The 
assessment was chronic migraine without aura which was controlled with Botox and 
Ubrelvy.  The next appointment was moved to the end of July, rather than the start of 
August.  (JE4, pp. 39-40)       
On July 6, 2021, Dr. Jacoby answered a series of questions posed to him by the 
defendants.  He diagnosed Reistroffer with chronic migraine.  When asked if he felt the 
current complaints were related to the August 27, 2019 work injury, Dr. Jacoby wrote, 
“Don’t know.”  (JE4, p. 41)  Although Dr. Jacoby was asked to explain his reasoning, he 
did not.  He placed Reistroffer at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of June 1, 
2021.  Dr. Jacoby felt that the injury did not lead to the permanent loss of an injured 
body part.  He did not anticipate the need for any additional treatment for the injury.  
(JE4, p. 41)  
Based on the opinion of Dr. Jacoby, on July 9, 2021 defendants notified claimant 
that they would not be responsible for any future medical treatment.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 
5, page 113)  
At the request of his attorney, Reistroffer saw David Segal, M.D., a board-
certified neurosurgeon, for an independent medical examination (IME) on September 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 6 
 
23, 2021.  As the result of the examination of Reistroffer and review of records provided 
to him, Dr. Segal issued a letter and an addendum consisting of 43 pages to claimant’s 
counsel dated November 12, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 3-47)  Dr. Segal opined that the work 
injury caused permanent brain injury and injury to Reistroffer’s cervical spine.  He noted 
that Reistroffer had a double impact to his brain, first when the concrete hit his head and 
second when the other side of his head struck the inside of the truck drum.  (Id. at p. 13) 
He felt that Reistroffer’s symptoms had not improved and that his symptoms were 
permanent.  (Id. at 14)  Dr. Segal opined that the following diagnoses were causally 
related to the August 27, 2019 work injury:  
Traumatic Brain Injury and Post-Concussive Syndrome: 
1. Closed head injury with traumatic brain injury and concussion. 
2. Post-concussion syndrome with cognitive deficits, memory deficits, 
visual deficits, vestibular dysfunction, tinnitus with decreased 
hearing, sleeping disturbance, post traumatic headache, nausea, 
as well as psychiatric sequelae of brain injury with emotional 
lability. 
3. Post traumatic migraine.  
4. Post concussive vestibular dysfunction. 
5. Post traumatic sleep disorder. 
Cervical Diagnoses: 
1. Traumatic cervical facet arthropathy. 
2. Occipital neuralgia.    
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
 
In his report Dr. Segal set forth his explanations of the mechanism of injury for 
Reistroffer’s injuries.  He also set forth the symptoms Reistroffer experienced in relation 
to the diagnoses.  Dr. Segal opined that Reistroffer’s work activities were a material 
factor in causing his current impairments.  (Id. at p. 30) 
 
Dr. Segal disagreed with Dr. Jacoby’s July 2, 2021 opinions.  At that time, Dr. 
Jacoby stated he did not know if the current complaints were related to the work injury.  
Dr. Jacoby also opined that the work injury did not lead to a permanent loss of the 
injured body part and he did not anticipate the need for any additional treatment for the 
work injury.  (Id. at p. 30)  Dr. Segal stated,  
[a]ll the symptoms for which he [Dr. Jacoby] was treating Mr. Reistroffer 
started with the August 27, 2019, work injury and are consistent with that 
mechanism of injury.  It would not be reasonable to opine that post 
concussive migraines that were clearly caused by that work injury became 
non-work-related because they continued for two years.  Mr. Reistroffer’s 
symptoms caused by the work injury are permanent and also are work 
related.  There is no expiration date for work relatedness.  To say that 
there is “not permanent loss of the injured body part” for Mr. Reistroffer is 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 7 
 
to ignore the history, records, principles of the AMA Guides (especially 
Chapter 13), and Iowa workers’ compensation law. 
(Id. at 30) 
 
Dr. Segal noted that Dr. Jacoby’s July 2, 2021, opinions interrupted Reistroffer’s 
treatment and since that time Reistroffer’s condition had been worse.  Dr. Segal placed 
him at MMI as of July 2, 2021, for post concussive symptoms and November 27, 2020, 
for his cervical spine.  (Id. at p. 31)   
 
Dr. Segal assigned permanent impairment under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, 
which he believed Reistroffer sustained as the result of the work injury.  For post-
concussive syndrome, he cited Chapter 13, page 320, Table 13-5, Clinical Dementia 
Rating (CDR), and Table 13-6, Criteria for Rating Impairment Related to Mental Status.  
He placed Reistroffer in the higher range of Class 1 and assigned 12 percent 
impairment of the whole person.  (Id. at p. 32)  He assigned impairment for emotional 
and behavioral impairment due to the brain injury.  He cited Table 13-8, page 325, and 
stated Reistroffer would conservatively be rated in the lower part of Class 1 and 
assigned 4 percent impairment of the whole person.  (Id. at pp. 32-33)  Dr. Segal also 
addressed impairment related to post-concussive migrainous and trigeminal 
dysfunction.  He cited Table 13-11, page 331, and assigned 7 percent impairment whole 
person.  He assigned impairment for vestibular dysfunction with many near falls and 
one fall in the shower.  He cited Table 13-13 and assigned 9 percent whole person 
impairment.  Dr. Segal did not assign any impairment for visual impairment.  Due to 
sleep disturbance, he cited Table 13-4 and assigned 5 percent whole person 
impairment.  For Reistroffer’s injuries to his cervical spine, Dr. Segal assigned 7 percent 
whole person impairment.  He cited Table 15-5, page 392, of the Guides.  Thus, Dr. 
Segal assigned a total combined impairment amounting to 38 percent of the whole 
person.  (Id. at p. 35) 
 
On November 8, 2021, Reistroffer saw Kristie Rice-Melvin, ARNP, at MercyOne 
to establish care.  (JE3, pp. 21-25)  He reported migraines that began when concrete hit 
his head at work.  He had been seeing Dr. Jacoby for Botox injections until July 2021.  
He was also using Ubrelvy for his migraines but he had been out of this medication and 
slowly needed to establish primary care.  He reported bilateral neck pain since the work 
injury, stabbing pain in the center of his neck that radiated to the bilateral upper 
extremities.  Turning his head quickly caused dizziness.  At night he had difficulty with 
unsteady gait/balance.  He drove a ready mix truck which exacerbated his neck pain 
and migraines. The assessment included migraine without aura, traumatic injury of the 
head, concussion without loss of consciousness, and mixed hyperlipidemia.  Treatment 
included Naproxen, stopping ibuprofen, and Ubrelvy was renewed.  An MRI of the 
cervical spine was ordered, a referral to neurology was made, specifically for Botox 
injections, and he was to return in four weeks.  (JE3, pp. 21-25) 
On December 7, 2021, Reistroffer underwent a cervical spine CT which revealed 
no significant canal or foraminal stenosis and no fracture, dislocation, or malalignment.  

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 8 
 
The soft tissues were unremarkable.  There was minimal degenerative facet disease.  
(JE1, p. 14) 
Dr. Jacoby responded to a series of questions posed to him from claimant’s 
counsel on December 10, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 96)  Dr. Jacoby agreed to the following 
statements: 
During our discussion, you stated that, to a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty, assuming Rodney did not have a history of headaches prior to 
his closed head injury on August 27, 2019, and that he [sic] no period of 
recovery since the injury, then it is reasonable to conclude, despite your 
expectations that these headaches would resolve that the current chronic 
migraines are caused by his closed head injury of August 27, 2019. 
You also agreed that ongoing treatment using Botox injections is 
reasonable to treat these chronic headaches resulting from the August 27, 
2019 closed head injury, especially since Rodney has seen significant 
relief with the Botox.  You are unable to state how long he will require 
these injections.   
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 96) 
Defendants authorized Reistroffer to resume treatment with Dr. Jacoby.  (Cl. Ex. 
5, p. 116)  Reistroffer returned to Dr. Jacoby on December 28, 2021.  He reported 20 
migraine days a month prior to starting Botox, but with treatment he reported 3-4 
migraine days per month.  (JE4, pp. 42-44)  Due to insurance issues, Botox was 
interrupted resulting in worsening of headaches and dizziness.  Headaches had 
returned to daily.  He wished to resume Botox.  Ubrelvy also provided good abortive 
effect and he wished to continue.  His active problems were listed as chronic migraine 
without aura, dizziness, headache, neck pain.  Botox was administered, and Ubrelvy 
was renewed.  He was to follow-up in 3 months.  (JE4, pp. 42-44)  
On March 22, 2022, Reistroffer returned to Dr. Jacoby.  He reported that the 
Botox 3 months prior was effective, but he was sore for a couple of weeks after the 
injection.  He wanted another injection on that date.  Botox was administered and he 
was instructed to return in 3 months.  (JE4, pp. 45-47) 
Reistroffer saw Dr. Jacoby on July 20, 2022.  He reported that the Botox 
continued to provide benefit and he wanted another injection.  Dr. Jacoby provided 
another injection.  He was to continue his medication and return in 3 months.  (JE4, pp. 
48-50)   
Dr. Jacoby last saw Reistroffer in October 2022.  (Defendants’ Exhibit I, page 2) 
Reistroffer requested that his care be transferred closer to his home.  (Tr. pp. 26-27) 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 9 
 
Reistroffer’s care was transferred to Timothy J. Miller, M.D. on February 2, 20231.  
(JE5, pp. 51-53)  The doctor noted he could not find clear evidence of a concussion.  
Reistroffer reported neck pain which started occipitally and then came up over his head.  
Dr. Miller felt the distribution was not classic occipital nerve.  He noted there could be 
some minor superficial nerve damage.  The patient was mildly tender with palpation 
along the incision or wound site. Dr. Miller thought it was perhaps hypersensitivity 
migraine headaches and getting Botox with a migraine pattern, but Dr. Miller felt he 
would not develop migraines from this type of injury.  He believed the Botox was 
perhaps desensitizing the nerve.  He suggested the addition of pregabalin at a very low 
dose.  Cervical range of motion was excellent.  The patient did not have any neurologic 
symptoms.  A CT of his neck was clean.  Dr. Miller diagnosed cervico-occipital 
neuralgia.  For treatment he added Lyrica two times per day.  (JE5, pp. 51-53) 
Reistroffer returned to Dr. Miller on February 22, 2023, with a chief complaint of 
neck pain and headache.  He noted that Reistroffer was previously treated in Des 
Moines with Ubrelvy and Botox injections and now wished to have that done locally.  Dr. 
Miller wanted the notes from prior treatment for exact dosing.  (JE5, pp. 55-57) 
There is a hand-written note dated February 23, 2023. which appears to be 
signed by Dr. Miller.  This note is also difficult to decipher.  The note appears to be in 
response to a letter to Dr. Miller from the defendants dated February 15, 2023, wherein 
Dr. Miller is asked 5 questions.  Dr. Miller diagnosed Reistroffer with chronic migraine 
established by neurologist and nerve injury to branch of occipital nerve in trauma.  
When asked about medical treatment, Dr. Miller scrawled maintenance of current plan 
for migraine established by neurologist, Ubrelvy and Botox and use of pregabalin for 
nerve injury.  He placed Reistroffer at MMI as of February 22, 2023.  Dr. Miller 
recommended maintaining the established treatment by the prior neurologist for his 
migraines.  Dr. Miller stated, “I do question how diagnosis of migraine was established 
from trauma, but that is what record shows.”  (JE5, p. 58)     
On March 16, 2023, Dr. Miller provided Botox into a total of 20 injection sites, 
using 5 units of Botox at each site.  (JE5, p. 59) 
Dr. Miller provided Botox again to Reistroffer on June 26, 2023.  He noted Botox 
for migraine with slightly atypical pattern, total of 25 injection sites.  (JE5, p. 60) 
On July 5, 2023, there is a note of a telephone encounter with Dr. Miller’s office.  
Jennifer Driscoll, ARNP, of Dr. Miller’s office was taking over the care because she 
manages migraine medications and provides Botox.  The nurse case manager 
approved the treatment.  (JE5, pp. 61-62)   
    On September 19, 2023, Reistroffer saw ARNP Driscoll.  (JE6, pp. 63-66)  She 
noted he had a work injury a few years ago which resulted in chronic migraines with 
occasional dizziness and myofascial pain in his neck and shoulders.  Botox treatments 
                                                 
1 Dr. Miller’s notes are difficult to discern; it appears there may have been issues with the Dragon 
voice recognition system. 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 10 
 
helped manage his migraine symptoms.  He also took Ubrelvy as needed.  This 
provided relief but was low dose, requiring additional doses and he did not receive 
enough tablets per month.  He was interested in a higher dose.  ARNP Driscoll provided 
him with Botox injections.  She recommended Botox every 12 weeks for treatment of 
chronic migraines and increased pregabalin to 75 mg 3 times a day.  (JE6, pp. 63-66).  
She changed Ubrelvy dosing to 100 mg by mouth as needed for migraines with a 
maximum dose of 200 mg every 24 hours.  She also recommended considering TPI for 
myofascial pain.  Follow-up was to be in 3 months.  (JE6, pp. 63-66) 
On December 26, 2023, Reistroffer returned to ARNP Driscoll for Botox 
injections.  The patient reported that Botox helped to reduce his headache days from 
nearly daily to 10 to 15 per month.  His headaches were not as severe and did not last 
as long.  Reistroffer reported he started massage therapy to help with myofascial pain in 
his neck and he thought that helped.  He believed the higher dosage of Ubrelvy also 
helped his migraines.  He was also taking a higher dose of pregabalin.  He had chronic 
dizziness after being hit in the head.  His dizziness came and went but he thought it had 
to do with his vision.  ARNP Driscoll recommended Botox every 12 weeks for migraines, 
continuing pregabalin, continuing Ubrelvy and follow up in 3 months.  ARNP Driscoll 
opined that Reistroffer would benefit from massage therapy 1-2 times per month for 
ongoing myofascial pain.  (JE6, pp. 67-79)  The massage therapy was approved.  (JE6, 
p. 72) 
On January 17, 2024, at the request of his attorney, Reistroffer saw Dr. Segal for 
a follow-up evaluation. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 48-75)  In addition to examining Reistroffer, Dr. 
Segal reviewed additional medical records that were provided to him.  As the result of 
that evaluation, he issued a supplemental report on February 13, 2024.  Reistroffer 
reported that in general he was about the same as he was when he saw Dr. Segal in 
September 2021, even with treatment.  (Id. at p. 54)  Dr. Segal modified his opinion with 
regard to MMI dates to December 26, 2023, for the head and cervical injuries.  This was 
the date Reistroffer saw Neurology and it appeared that he had a stable long-term 
treatment plan.  (Id. at p. 63)  Dr. Segal noted there was an error in his November 12, 
2021, impairment rating calculations.  He combined the behavioral disorder and sleep 
disorder with cognitive impairment when the instructions say to use the highest value of 
the three.  The corrected total impairment was 34 percent of the whole person.  (Id. at 
pp. 63-68)  
Stanley J. Mathew, M.D. authored a responsive letter to claimant’s counsel on 
March 13, 2024.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  Dr. Mathew noted that Reistroffer was a patient under his 
practice’s care since September 19, 2023.  Dr. Mathew is a colleague of Jennifer 
Driscoll, ARNP.  Dr. Mathew reviewed Reistroffer’s medical records including the 
reports from Dr. Jacoby and Dr. Segal.  Dr. Mathew’s diagnosis of Reistroffer included 
chronic disabling pain, chronic headaches, neck and posterior shoulder pain.  He stated 
that Reistroffer had sustained permanent impairment from the work injury.  He opined 
that Reistroffer’s current complaints and symptoms were credible, consistent with and 
attributable to his work injury.  Dr. Mathew felt the work accident was a substantial 
contributing factor in bringing about the need for treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 91-92)      

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 11 
 
On March 25, 2024, Dr. Jacoby authored a responsive missive to defendants. 
(Def. Ex. I)  Defendants requested Dr. Jacoby review a report done by Dr. Segal whose 
opinions appeared contrary to Dr. Jacoby’s assessment.  Dr. Jacoby noted Reistroffer 
presented to him on March 12, 2020, after a work injury.  He noted that for the first week 
after the work accident Reistroffer felt fine, but then things spiraled out of control.  He 
experienced headaches and light sensitivity.  One month after the accident Reistroffer 
experienced neck pain.  He also had a feeling of being off balance which started with 
the accident.  Reistroffer had tinnitus from prior military exposure, but it worsened.  Dr. 
Jacoby assessed Reistroffer with headache, dizziness, and neck pain.  Dr. Jacoby 
stated that on May 12, 2020, Reistroffer returned to his clinic and felt much improved, 
particularly after participating in physical therapy.  He denied dizziness or pain.  His pain 
score was 0.  (Def. Ex. I, p. 1)  Dr. Jacoby reviewed Dr. Segal’s January 17, 2024 
evaluation.  Dr. Jacoby reviewed the impairment ratings assigned by Dr. Segal and the 
symptoms Dr. Segal based those ratings on.  Dr. Jacoby stated,  
[t]hese features Dr. Segal contends that Mr. Reistroffer experiences in 
2024 is [sic] beyond reasonable or as expressed during the visits to my 
clinic from March 2020 through October 2022.  In May 2020 Mr. 
Reistroffer was feeling fine, without any complaints.  Traumatic brain injury 
and cervical myofascial problems should be at their greatest intensity 
around the time of the event.  Indeed, he experienced some headache 
and other symptoms possibly as a result, but these essentially resolved.  
The re-emergence at a later point contends to some other process that 
would not be related to “concussion” or “post-concussion syndrome.”  The 
natural tendency for concussed patients is improvement and resolution 
within a few months.  Continued symptoms of the degree Dr. Segal 
reports 4-1/2 years later is highly unusual and unlikely.  These features, if 
claimed by Mr. Reistroffer as reported by Dr. Segal, represent subsequent 
worsening after improvement, are contrary to a diagnoses of 
concussion/post-concussion syndrome.  People do not worsen.  People 
improve.  Once improvement is obtained, worsening does not occur.  
Additionally, Dr. Segal’s interpretation of findings and methodologies for 
calculating impairment ratings are in error. 
I do not find that his evaluation or thoughts are either reasonable or have 
any impact on my previously stated position.   
(Def. Ex. I, pp. 2-3) 
On March 28, 2024, Dr. Segal authored a letter in response to Dr. Jacoby’s 
March 25, 2024 letter.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 76-79)  Dr. Segal disagreed with Dr. Jacoby’s 
opinions and affirmed his own prior opinions.  Dr. Segal noted that Dr. Jacoby had not 
seen Reistroffer since December 28, 2022.  In reviewing Dr. Jacoby’s notes, Dr. Segal 
did not see any detailed evaluation or questions regarding Reistroffer’s other post-
concussive symptoms.  Dr. Segal believed it was not appropriate for Dr. Jacoby to state 
years after an evaluation that symptoms were not present if the patient was not 
questioned about those symptoms.  Dr. Segal stated that neurotrauma was an integral 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 12 
 
part of neurosurgery and neurosurgeons are experts in the field of neurotrauma.  (Id. at 
pp. 76-77)  Dr. Segal opined that a brain injury is a complex and fluctuating injury that 
manifests differently at different times.  He stated symptoms can worsen over time and 
that delayed post-concussive symptoms are common.  (Id. at p. 78)  Dr. Segal stood by 
his functional impairment rating.  (Id. at p. 79) 
At the hearing, Reistroffer testified that prior to the August 27, 2019 work injury 
he did not experience headaches, dizziness, or light-headedness.  Since the injury he 
experiences stabbing pain, loss of balance, problems with focusing, headaches, and 
neck pain.  His vision problems are unpredictable.  (Tr. pp. 20-21, 30)  He has good 
days and bad days with his headaches.  The headaches are stabbing on each side of 
his head in the proximity of his scars.  (Id. at pp. 31-32)  He has stabbing pain and 
limited movement of his neck.  Looking at the television, phone screens, and reading 
bother him.  He has difficulty walking around his home in the dark because he has no 
sense of balance in the dark.  (Id. at pp. 31-34)  Reistroffer fatigues easier than he did 
prior to the injury.  Sometimes he is in bed at 4:30 in the afternoon due to his head and 
neck pain.  He tries not to use his migraine medication at night so he can save it for 
work.  He believes he is forgetful.  He feels stressed out due to pain which he thinks 
leads to irritability. (Id. at pp. 34-36)  He is less social now than at the time of the injury.  
(Id. at p. 37) 
Reistroffer testified that sometimes he has problems performing his job if he is in 
a lot of pain.  There are also times when his vision is blurry.  If he is having a rougher 
day, he tries not to venture too far away because his truck is very bouncy and bothers 
his neck and headaches.  A typical day for him involves arriving at work between 6:00 to 
7:00 AM and working until 3:00 to 4:00 PM.  When he gets home, he basically sits on 
the couch, or if it is a rough day, he goes to bed.  Reistroffer likes his job and does not 
plan to leave his job.  (Tr. pp. 38-40) 
Reistroffer testified that when he saw Dr. Jacoby it was essentially for Botox and 
prescription refills and there was basically no discussion.  According to Reistroffer, Dr. 
Jacoby knew about his dizziness because he had to have the lights turned off because 
he felt like the floor was moving.  (Tr. pp. 46, 50)  
Beverly Reistroffer also testified at the hearing.  She is Reistroffer’s ex-wife, but 
since the time of the injury they have reunited.  At the time of the hearing, she was living 
with Reistroffer.  (Id. at pp. 35-36, 51-52)  She described the difference between 
Reistroffer before and after the injury as a major difference.  If he is not at work, he is 
mostly in bed or literally in the dark. (Id. at pp. 52-53)  She has to go to their kids’ 
activities and social events alone because often time Reistroffer simply cannot attend 
due to headaches and pain.  (Id. at pp. 53-54)  Prior to the injury, he was very easy-
going, but since the injury he has had anxiety about going places or having to take the 
kids to school.  (Id. at p. 55)  She has observed him have issues with dizziness.  She 
gave an example of Reistroffer walking and smacking into a doorway; he cannot walk in 
a straight line.  He has also fallen in the shower.  (Id. at pp. 57-58)  He gets migraines 
after being at places with fluorescent lights.  She attended numerous doctor 
appointments with Reistroffer.  He drove himself to Des Moines one time, but it took him 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 13 
 
six hours to get home because he could not drive.  She described Dr. Jacoby as a fast-
paced doctor who basically provided Botox shots and left.  She felt he did not have any 
interest in getting to the bottom of what was causing Reistroffer’s pain; rather, he just 
wanted to put a Band-Aid on it.  (Id. at 58-60)  She attended the appointments with Dr. 
Segal.  She described Dr. Segal as very thorough and he ran a battery of tests.  (Id. at 
pp. 59-60)  Beverly feels that ARNP Driscoll is wonderful.  She gave Reistroffer the full 
amount of medication and increased his migraine pills.  She also injected the Botox in 
different areas than Dr. Jacoby.  She has noticed an improvement in Reistroffer’s 
conditions since he has treated with ARNP Driscoll.  (Id. at pp. 61-62)       
Dawn Holesinger, the manager/owner of Quality, also testified at the hearing.  
Her testimony of Reistroffer’s job duties and pay was consistent with his testimony.  He 
does work mandatory overtime.  She considers Reistroffer to be a good employee.  (Id. 
at pp. 63-70)  
I find the testimony of all three witnesses, Reistroffer, Beverly and Dawn, to be 
credible. 
The central dispute in this case is whether Reistroffer sustained permanent 
disability as the result of the stipulated work injury.  Reistroffer relies on the opinions of 
Dr. Mathew and Dr. Segal and contends that he is entitled to 34 percent whole person 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Defendants rely on the opinions of Dr. Jacoby and 
contend that Reistroffer did not sustain any permanent partial disability as the result of 
the injury. 
As set forth above, Dr. Jacoby’s opinions have not been entirely consistent.  Dr. 
Jacoby provided treatment to Reistroffer from March 12, 2020 through October 2022.  
(JE4; Def. Ex. I, p. 2)  Early in July 2021, Dr. Jacoby stated that he did not know if 
Reistroffer’s current complaints were related to the work injury.  He placed Reistroffer at 
MMI and opined that he did not anticipate any additional treatment for the injury.  He did 
not provide any rationale to explain his positions.  (JE4, p. 41)  Approximately six 
months later, Dr. Jacoby requested authorization from workers’ compensation for 
additional Ubrelvy and Botox treatment.  (JE4, p. 42)  Reistroffer resumed treatment 
with Dr. Jacoby.  (JE4, pp. 43-50)  In December 2021, Dr. Jacoby opined that 
Reistroffer’s current chronic migraines were caused by the work injury and the ongoing 
treatment was reasonable.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 96)  In March 2024, Dr. Jacoby issued a letter 
which disagreed with Dr. Segal’s opinions.  Dr. Jacoby had not seen Reistroffer since 
October 2022.  He noted that Reistroffer’s headaches had essentially resolved in May 
2020, and a re-emergence at a later point contends to some other process that would 
not be related.  (Def. Ex. I)   
I do not find Dr. Jacoby’s opinion to carry much weight.  First, the record is void 
of any evidence that Reistroffer’s headaches essentially resolved in May 2020.  But 
even if they had resolved, Dr. Jacoby’s opinion that a re-emergence would point to 
some other process is not consistent with him seeking approval from workers’ 
compensation for additional treatment in December 2021, when six months earlier he 
stated no additional treatment was anticipated.  Additionally, it appears Dr. Jacoby’s 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 14 
 
opinions were based on an incomplete history.  As noted above, Reistroffer’s care was 
transferred from Dr. Jacoby in October 2022.  In Dr. Jacoby’s 2024 letter, there is no 
indication that he was provided the treatment records after October 2022.  (Def. Ex. I)  
For these reasons, I do not find Dr. Jacoby’s opinions to be persuasive.       
Claimant relies on the opinions of Dr. Segal who was provided the treatment 
records in this case.  I find that generally the symptoms and conditions described in Dr. 
Segal’s reports are consistent with the testimony of Reistroffer and Beverly.  I find Dr. 
Segal’s opinions to be consistent with the record as a whole, including the opinion of Dr. 
Mathew.  I find the opinions of Dr. Segal and Dr. Mathew carry greater weight than 
those of Dr. Jacoby.  Thus, I find claimant has demonstrated that he has sustained 
permanent disability as the result of his work injury.  Based on the opinion of Dr. Segal, I 
further find claimant reached maximum medical improvement for his work injury on July 
2, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 31)     
In July 2021, Dr. Jacoby was asked if the work injury led to a permanent loss of 
the injured body part.  Dr. Jacoby provided a cursory reply of “no.”  He did not provide 
any rationale for his opinion.  Additionally, there is no mention of the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition.  (JE4, p. 41)  Dr. Segal is the only physician to assign an impairment rating 
pursuant to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  Dr. Jacoby states, “Dr. Segal’s 
interpretation of findings and methodologies for calculating impairment ratings are in 
error.”  (Def. Ex. I, p. 3)  Because Dr. Jacoby reviewed Dr. Segal’s impairment rating 
which discusses and cites to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, an argument could be 
made that it is implicit that Dr. Jacoby also reviewed the Guides.  However, Dr. Jacoby 
fails to reference the AMA Guides and does not provide any specifics with his blanket 
allegation of error.  I find that Dr. Segal is the only medical expert in this case to render 
an opinion of permanent impairment that cites to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  Based 
on the opinions of Dr. Segal, I find Reistroffer sustained 34 percent permanent 
functional impairment of the whole person as the result of the work injury. 
Claimant seeks payment of past medical expenses as set forth in his exhibit 7.  
In his post-hearing brief claimant advises that defendants have recently reimbursed him 
for the expenses in claimant’s exhibit 7, pages 128-133, so those expenses are no 
longer an issue.  After Dr. Jacoby’s July 6, 2021 letter, defendants denied additional 
medical care for Reistroffer.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 113)  At that point, Reistroffer sought 
treatment on his own.  I find a review of the medical bills submitted in claimant’s exhibit 
7, pages 125-127, demonstrates that these expenses were incurred due to the work 
injury and during the period of defendants’ denial of medical treatment.  I find 
defendants are responsible for those expenses.   
Claimant contends penalty benefits are appropriate for defendants’ failure to 
accept and pay any permanency benefits without probable cause or excuse.  In July 
2021, Dr. Jacoby stated that the work injury did not lead to a permanent loss of the 
injured body part.  (JE4, p. 41)  Defendants relied on this opinion to deny payment of 
permanent disability benefits to Reistroffer. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 113)  Claimant essentially 
submits that Dr. Segal’s November 2021 opinion and subsequent opinions from Dr. 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 15 
 
Segal and Dr. Mathew were sufficient to trigger a duty on the defendants to conduct an 
investigation into permanent impairment.   
I do not find claimant’s argument to be persuasive.  Defendants denied payment 
of permanent disability benefits based on Dr. Jacoby’s July 2021 and his March 2024 
opinion.  I find that defendants’ denial of payment of permanency benefits was 
reasonable in light of the opinions of Dr. Jacoby in July 2021 and March 2024.  
Ultimately the undersigned found Dr. Segal and Dr. Mathew’s opinions were more 
persuasive than the opinion of Dr. Jacoby.  However, it was reasonable for the 
defendants to rely on Dr. Jacoby’s opinions.   I find defendants set forth the basis for 
their denial in their correspondence to Reistroffer on July 9, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 113)  I 
find Reistroffer’s claim for permanency benefits was fairly debatable based on a good 
faith dispute over his factual or legal entitlement to benefits 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing 
the case.  I find that claimant was generally successful in his claim and exercise my 
discretion and find that an assessment of costs is appropriate. 
Specifically claimant is seeking the filing fee and service fees in the amount of 
$144.95.  I find that these are appropriate under 876 IAC 4.33(3 and 7).   
Next, claimant is also seeking the costs of two reports from Dr. Segal; the 
February 13, 2024 report in the amount of $1,275.00 and the March 28, 2024 report in 
the amount of $566.67.  Defendants contend that the reports from Dr. Segal should not 
be reimbursed as a cost because they are IMEs.  Defendants note they reimbursed the 
claimant for the November 12, 2021 Dr. Segal IME, and claimant is not entitled to any 
additional IMEs.      
Iowa Code section 85.39 is the sole method for reimbursement of an exam by a 
physician of the employee’s choice.  If an injured worker seeks reimbursement for an 
IME, the provisions established by the legislature, under Iowa Code section 85.39, must 
be followed.  Only the costs associated with preparation of the written report of a 
claimant’s IME can be reimbursed as a cost at hearing under rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Des 
Moines Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846-847 (Iowa 2015).  
Here, claimant is not seeking reimbursement for the exam.  Claimant is seeking 
reimbursement for the costs associated with preparation of the written report.  
Therefore, I find these costs are appropriate under 876 IAC 4.33(6).   
Therefore, defendants are assessed costs totaling $1,986.62.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 16 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When an expert's opinion is based upon an incomplete history, it is not 
necessarily binding on the commissioner or the court. It is then to be weighed, together 
with other facts and circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder of 
fact. Musselman v. Central Telephone Company, 154 N.W.2d 128, 133 (Iowa 
1967); Bodish v. Fischer, Inc., 257 Iowa 521, 522, 133 N.W.2d 867 (1965). 
The commissioner as the trier of fact has the duty to determine the credibility of 
the witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and 
circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion.  Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and 
Casualty Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I concluded that the opinions of Dr. Segal 
and Dr. Mathew carried greater weight than that of Dr. Jacoby.  Thus, I conclude 
claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained permanent 
impairment as the result of the work injury. 
We now turn to the amount of permanent partial disability benefits claimant is 
entitled to receive.  Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v) states: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee's functional impairment 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 17 
 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee's earning 
capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v)(2019). 
In this case, the parties agree that claimant has returned to work with the same 
employer and is receiving earnings that are the same or greater than at the time of the 
injury, and compensation should be based on claimant's permanent impairment 
resulting from his injury.  As such, I conclude that claimant’s current recovery is limited 
to his permanent functional impairment rating resulting from the injury. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through ““u”, or paragraph “v” when 
determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x)(2019).   
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant sustained 
permanent functional impairment as set forth by Dr. Segal.  Having adopted the 
impairment rating assigned by Dr. Segal, I found claimant proved a functional loss of 34 
percent to the body as a whole.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 68)  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v), claimant is entitled to a proportional award equivalent to 34 percent of 500 
weeks. Therefore, I conclude that claimant is entitled to an award of 170 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits, commencing on July 2, 2021.  
Claimant seeks payment of past medical expenses as set forth in his exhibit 7.  
Under Iowa law, the employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' 
compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 
injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 18 
 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner, 78 
(Review-Reopening 1975).  An employer has no right to control the medical care when 
compensability is contested.  See Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010).  Therefore, defendants are precluded from asserting an 
authorization defense as to any future treatment during their period of denial.  Brewer-
Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 2018). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that the expenses incurred by the 
claimant for his treatment of the work injury were incurred during a period when 
defendants contested compensability.  The records demonstrate that the treatment was 
connected to the work injury.  I conclude defendants are responsible for medical 
expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 7, pages 125-127. 
Claimant contends penalty benefits are appropriate for defendants’ failure to 
accept and pay benefits for claimant’s permanent physical impairment without probable 
cause or excuse.   
 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
a. 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation 
commissioner shall award benefits in addition to those benefits 
payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty 
percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, delayed, or 
terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
 
b. 
The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, 
or termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 19 
 
Based on the plain language of section [10A.315(4)]2, we hold an 
employee is entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in 
payment unless the employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A 
reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary 
for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a 
reasonable basis to contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A 
“reasonable basis” for denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly 
debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section [10A.315(4)].  In that case, we 
will defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s 
finding of legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); 
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section [10A.315(4)].  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 
(Iowa 1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section [10A.315], the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
                                                 
2 Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) was previously codified as Iowa Code section 86.13(4).  No 
substantive changes were made to the statute when transferred from section 86.13 to section 10A.315.  
References to the current location of this statute are substituted to avoid confusion. 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 20 
 
   If we were to construe [section 10A.315] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 
[10A.315] is applicable when payment of compensation is 
not timely . . . or when the full amount of compensation is not 
paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant’s claim for 
permanency benefits was fairly debatable based on a good faith dispute over the 
claimant’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits.  Therefore, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude an assessment of costs against 
defendants in the amount of $1,986.62 is appropriate.   
 

REISTROFFER V. QUALITY CONCRETE COMPANY 
Page 21 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of six hundred ninety-two 
and 67/100 dollars ($692.67).   
Defendants shall pay 170 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on July 2, 2021. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.    
Defendants shall pay these medical providers, reimburse claimant, reimburse all 
third-party payers, or otherwise satisfy and hold claimant harmless for medical 
expenses as set forth in claimant’s exhibit 7, pages 125-127. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __30th _ day of July, 2024. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas Wertz (via WCES) 
Laura Ostrander (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
