Case Number: 21010430.01
Case Title:  PERRY, LASHAUN V. TYSON FOODS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Perry Lashaun-21010430.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LASHAUN PERRY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 21010430.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION 
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
Head Notes: 1100, 1108, 1402.30, 2209 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, LaShaun Perry, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Tyson Foods, self-insured employer, as defendant, as a 
result of an alleged injury sustained on July 13, 2021.  This matter came on for hearing 
before Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch, on January 24, 
2024, via videoconference, using Zoom.  The record in this case consists of joint 
exhibits 1 through 6, claimant’s exhibits 1 through 10, defendant’s exhibits A through H, 
and the testimony of the claimant. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs; the matter 
being fully submitted on March 8, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his 
employment on July 13, 2021; 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability and if so, 
whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from July 14, 2021 
through September 6, 2023; 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability; 
4. Nature and extent of permanent disability, including: whether the disability is a 
scheduled member disability to the bilateral upper extremities and any extent 
thereof; whether the disability is an industrial disability and any extent thereof; 
or whether claimant is permanently and totally disabled under IC section 
85.34(2)(t); 
5. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits, if awarded; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-24  12:20:48     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate care under section 85.27;  
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination under section 85.39; and  
8. Specific taxation of costs, as found in Claimant’s Exhibit 8. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony at the time of hearing was not entirely consistent with his 
testimony at deposition. There are also discrepancies between claimant’s testimony and 
his reports of injury to medical providers. At hearing, claimant became defensive and 
raised his voice upon certain questioning by defense counsel. While some 
inconsistency is to be expected, I find too many inconsistencies were noted within the 
evidentiary record. When coupled with claimant’s altered demeanor during cross-
examination, I find claimant is not a credible witness. 
Claimant was 47 years of age at the time of hearing. He is right hand dominant. 
(Claimant’s testimony) Claimant attended formal schooling through the 8th grade; he 
subsequently earned his GED. Claimant also possesses a welding certification. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 8; Defendant’s Exhibit A, p. 3) Claimant’s work history includes 
experience as a press machine operator, automotive technician, pallet repairer and 
rebuilder, glass machine operator, and his work for defendant. (Claimant’s testimony; 
CE2, pp. 9-10; DEA, pp. 4, 12) Claimant’s work history in the years preceding the 
alleged work injury is limited and sporadic, due to incarceration. Claimant was 
incarcerated during periods from 2012 to 2017, 2018 to 2019, and due to a probation 
violation, from 2019 to May 2021. (DEA, pp. 4-5, 11-12) Claimant was released into a 
halfway house in May 2021. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant began work at defendant on June 7, 2021. Prior to commencing work, 
claimant underwent a preemployment physical. At that time, claimant denied any health 
conditions or issues. (CE5, pp. 15-16) A physical assessment found claimant’s wrists, 
hands, thumbs, and fingers to be within normal limits. (CE5, pp. 17-18) Claimant was 
assigned to the position of ham skinner. (DEA, p. 5) As a ham skinner, claimant was 
tasked with reaching into a container with both hands, pulling the piece of meat from the 
container, and moving the boned ham over the skinner machine. Claimant testified the 
meat weighed an estimated 20 to 25 pounds and he performed these same tasks 
repeatedly throughout his 8-hour shift. Claimant described the work as repetitive and 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
forceful, being required to “jam” his hands into and “yank” them from the container. 
(Claimant’s testimony)  
On June 24, 2021, claimant presented to defendant’s onsite medical clinic. 
Claimant reported gradual development of pain in the right forearm and elbow while 
repetitively reaching into a hopper for product. Heat application and Aleve were 
provided. Claimant was directed to apply alternative ice and heat, as well as use a 
topical muscle rub, while at home. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) The following day, claimant 
returned to the onsite clinic and reported resolution of pain and a desire to close his 
case. (JE1, p. 1) 
On July 13, 2021, claimant returned to the onsite medical clinic and reported an 
acute incident of symptoms. Specifically, claimant indicated he felt sudden finger pain 
and his fingers “got bent backwards” while reaching into a hopper. Heat was applied 
and a topical muscle rub provided. (JE1, p. 2) 
On July 14, 2021, claimant presented to his primary care provider, Samantha 
Malley, ARNP, in follow up of personal medical conditions of sleep apnea and anxiety. 
During the appointment, claimant reported he had begun a new job, which he believed 
caused bilateral hand pain, numbness, and tingling. (JE2, p. 21) On examination, Nurse 
Malley noted diffuse swelling of the right hand, with positive Phalen’s and Tinel’s tests. 
On the left side, Nurse Malley noted mild hand swelling, with negative Phalen’s and 
Tinel’s tests. (JE2, p. 22) Nurse Malley assessed possible carpal tunnel syndrome and 
ordered EMG testing. (JE2, pp. 23, 25) 
Also on July 14, 2021, claimant returned to the onsite medical clinic with reports 
of worsening hand symptoms. Claimant was returned to work, alternating between 
performing duties and resting each 10 minutes. (JE1, p. 2) Claimant returned to the 
clinic later that date, upset he was not removed from his job. The nurse indicated she 
was unable to remove claimant from his job, but reduced his work rate to 5 minutes on, 
followed by 55 minutes off. (JE1, p. 3) 
On July 15, 2021, claimant completed a statement of injury/illness. At that time, 
he reported suffering an injury on July 13, 2021. Claimant indicated he believed his 
injury developed over time, but had also experienced an incident where his fingers bent 
backwards and he felt as if “something tore.” (CE6, p. 19; DEH, p. 59) 
On July 15, 2021, claimant returned to the onsite medical clinic. He reported 
worsened pain and swelling of his hands. The nurse indicated claimant raised his voice 
and became loud with staff. Union representatives were called, and claimant was 
released without intervention, on the same work rate schedule. Claimant returned to the 
clinic a few minutes later and apologized for exaggerating his pain symptoms, which he 
attributed to fear of a serious problem with his hands. He requested time off to allow the 
symptoms to abate; the nurse advised claimant to discuss time off with his supervisor. 
(JE1, p. 3) 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Claimant returned to the onsite clinic on July 19, 2021 and denied pain in his 
wrist and hands, with the exception of soreness in the little finger. No intervention was 
provided, and claimant remained on the 5 minutes on, 55 minutes off, work schedule. 
(JE1, p. 4) 
Defendant arranged for claimant to be evaluated at MOHA. (JE1, p. 4) 
On July 27, 2021, claimant was evaluated by MOHA physician, Robert Gordon, 
M.D. Claimant reported development of bilateral hand swelling and tingling on or about 
July 13, 2021. He reported tremendous improvement in symptoms after time off of work. 
Dr. Gordon noted no complaint of sensory issues of the bilateral hands, but some 
reported tightness of the left small digit at the PIP joint. (JE1, p. 11) Dr. Gordon 
examined claimant’s bilateral upper extremities. Bilaterally, Dr. Gordon found full range 
of motion and full strength at the elbow. Dr. Gordon noted negative Tinel’s test at the 
right cubital tunnel and no edema of the right forearm. He found full range of motion and 
full strength about the right wrist, with negative median nerve compression testing, 
negative Phalen’s test, no edema of the right hand, intact sensation, and 5/5 grip 
strength. On examination of the left hand, Dr. Gordon noted claimant complained of 
pain with flexion at the PIP joint of the left small digit, but full flexion of the digit. (JE1, p. 
12)   
Following examination, Dr. Gordon opined claimant did not tolerate the ham 
skinning job, due to claimant’s “anatomical/physiological construct” as it relates to the 
bilateral upper extremities. Dr. Gordon opined claimant was now doing well with his 
symptoms after not performing his duties for the last week. Dr. Gordon discharged 
claimant from care with respect to a work-related condition, without permanent 
restrictions or permanent impairment. (JE1, p. 12) However, Dr. Gordon opined: “Given 
his anatomical/physiological construct, the following personal permanent restrictions are 
appropriate: No grasping with the bilateral hands greater than 66% of a work period; no 
knife use greater than occasionally.” (JE1, p. 12) 
Following the appointment with Dr. Gordon, claimant returned to the onsite 
medical clinic. At that time, claimant denied wrist, hand, and finger pain. The nurse 
closed claimant’s case and referred claimant to human resources to commemorate Dr. 
Gordon’s permanent restrictions. (JE1, p. 4) Claimant was ultimately provided with a 
permanent physical restriction card and directed to carry the card on his person while 
working. (JE1, pp. 16-18; CE7, pp. 23-25) Claimant testified he was unable to perform 
the ham skinner job within these restrictions. (Claimant’s testimony) 
In response to inquiry from defendant, Dr. Gordon opined that the condition for 
which he treated claimant was not causally related to claimant’s employment. Dr. 
Gordon opined claimant demonstrated no objective findings on examination. He further 
opined claimant did not present with a pathological condition that required treatment 
secondary to his essential job duties and that claimant did not suffer with a pathological 
condition that was caused, aggravated, or accelerated by his essential job duties. Dr. 
Gordon specifically opined claimant had not suffered with either a temporary or 
permanent aggravation of the condition. (DEB, pp. 22-23) 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
After receipt of Dr. Gordon’s opinions, defendant denied compensability for 
claimant’s claim and declined to provide further care of claimant’s upper extremity 
complaints. (DEC, p. 24) 
Defendant attempted to locate a job position available to claimant within his 
permanent restrictions. Claimant testified he was placed in the operator loin stuffer 
position, which required him to lift heavier bundles of meat, and which required grasping 
more than 66 percent of his shift. Claimant testified he complained to his supervisor. 
(Claimant’s testimony) As part of the job placement analysis, defendant provided Dr. 
Gordon with the job analysis for the position of operator loin stuffer. (JE1, p. 19; See 
also CE4) Following review, Dr. Gordon opined claimant could not safely perform the 
job and he was unaware of any potential modifications which would allow claimant to 
perform the job within his grasping limitations. (JE1, p. 19) 
Claimant was then placed in the position of pick lean-ham trim, a light duty 
position, pending placement in a permanent job. (CE7, pp. 29, 31) Counsel for the 
parties engaged in correspondence regarding claimant’s work assignments, with 
claimant’s counsel indicating claimant reported being required to grasp 100 percent of 
his work shift and requested work within claimant’s restrictions. Defendant’s counsel 
indicated grasping was only required if an item needed to be removed. Claimant’s 
counsel also requested payment for temporary disability payments for those dates 
claimant was unable to work and referral to a specialist for further evaluation. (CE7, pp. 
20-21, 26-28, 32-33) At hearing, claimant testified he was unable to perform the lean 
pick job, as he believed it required grasping more than 66 percent of the time and 
performance of the duties caused hand pain. Claimant testified he informed defendant 
he was unable to perform these duties. (Claimant’s testimony) 
On August 16, 2021, claimant presented to his personal medical clinic and was 
seen by Deborah Ralston, M.D. Claimant reported bilateral hand pain and numbness 
which began approximately one month prior. Claimant did not believe himself capable of 
continuing working and requested an excuse from work pending specialist evaluation. 
(JE2, p. 27) Following examination, Dr. Ralston assessed bilateral hand pain, but 
questioned if the conditions were work-related or attributable to another etiology. She 
noted questions with respect to whether the condition represented carpal tunnel 
syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, and/or gout. As a result, Dr. Ralston ordered several 
laboratory studies and x-rays. (JE2, p. 29) X-rays of the left hand were negative. (JE2, 
p. 31) Laboratory studies yielded normal results. (JE2, p. 33) Dr. Ralston recommended 
claimant keep the currently scheduled EMG appointment. Dr. Ralston prescribed 
nighttime splints and imposed a work restriction to avoid repetitive bilateral hand and 
wrist motion until September 5, 2021. (JE2, pp. 29-30, 32) She ultimately recommended 
claimant continue to work with defendant to locate “the right job for [claimant].” (JE2, p. 
33) 
On August 31, 2021, claimant presented to an urgent care facility and was 
examined by Michael Knutsen, PA-C. Claimant reported bilateral hand pain, right 
greater than left, of a one-month duration. Claimant also endorsed numbness and 
tingling of the hands and fingers. He reported employment at defendant for 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
approximately 3 months, with slow worsening of symptoms, weakened grip, and slight 
swelling. (JE3, p. 34) On examination, PA Knutsen noted slight general swelling of the 
bilateral hands, positive Tinel’s test bilaterally, and slightly positive right-sided Phalen’s 
test for the third and fourth fingers. He explained that claimant may be beginning to 
develop mild carpal tunnel syndrome. PA Knutsen prescribed ibuprofen 800 milligrams 
and removed claimant from work for a couple days. He encouraged claimant to follow 
up with his personal care provider relative to additional time off from work, as well as 
possible referrals for care. (JE3, p. 35) 
Claimant testified he eventually ceased presenting to work at defendant. He did 
not believe defendant had a job available which met his restrictions. (Claimant’s 
testimony; DEA, p. 8) He was terminated on November 3, 2021 for job abandonment, 
after failing to present to work since October 11, 2021. (DEF, p. 41) 
On November 16, 2021, claimant presented to Malhar Gore, M.D. to establish a 
course of care for multiple conditions. (JE4, p. 36) Relevantly, Dr. Gore noted claimant 
had been diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome, but required “official tests” and 
needed a local provider. Accordingly, Dr. Gore issued a neurologist referral. (JE4, p. 38) 
Claimant underwent EMG studies of the upper extremities on December 6, 2021 
with Stanley Mathew, M.D. At that time, claimant reported numbness and tingling of the 
hands, as well as neck pain that occasionally radiated down the arms. Claimant 
reported he performed manual labor, entailing a lot of repetitive lifting, pushing, and 
pulling. On examination, Dr. Mathew noted positive Tinel’s and Phalen’s tests over the 
bilateral wrists. (JE4, p. 39) Electrodiagnostic findings were within normal limits, without 
electrical evidence of cervical radiculopathy or peripheral neuropathy. Dr. Mathew 
opined claimant did present with “some clinical evidence of a mild carpal tunnel 
syndrome.” He educated claimant on a home exercise program and indicated claimant 
might benefit from use of wrist splints. (JE4, p. 40) 
On January 27, 2022, claimant presented to his personal medical clinic and was 
examined by Brianne Benjamin, DNP, for complaints of chronic bilateral hand pain. 
Claimant also relayed numbness of the fingertips, pain shooting up the arm, and 
increased dropping of items. Nurse Benjamin noted claimant had been diagnosed with 
mild carpal tunnel syndrome per the recent EMG study.  (JE4, pp. 44, 46) Following 
examination, Nurse Benjamin referred claimant to occupational therapy. (JE4, p. 47) 
Claimant began a course of occupational therapy on March 29, 2022. The 
therapist described claimant’s symptoms as consistent with bilateral carpal tunnel 
syndrome. She also noted some symptoms suggestive of ulnar nerve compression. 
(JE5, p. 54) 
On March 30, 2022, claimant returned to his personal medical clinic and was 
seen by Kati Carpenter, DNP, in follow up of left pinky finger complaints and inability to 
bend the digit. (JE4, pp. 48, 50) Nurse Carpenter noted claimant sustained an injury to 
his hand in July and thereafter, the pinky was swollen for five months. She noted 
claimant had undergone an EMG which was negative for carpal tunnel syndrome. Nurse 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Carpenter opined claimant’s prior x-rays were normal and the EMG was negative. She 
recommended continued therapy and issued a referral to an orthopedic specialist. (JE4, 
pp. 50-52)   
On April 7, 2022, claimant presented to Clifford Novak, M.D. for evaluation of his 
left hand. Dr. Novak noted claimant had been injured in July 2021 in a work accident, 
which resulted in significant swelling and persistent pain. (JE6, p. 63) On examination of 
the left upper extremity, Dr. Novak noted intact sensation and 5/5 grip strength. He 
noted claimant was unable to flex at the DIP joint and had difficulty flexing at the PIP 
joint. Dr. Novak also noted contracture of the PIP joint of about 30 degrees. X-rays were 
ordered. Dr. Novak also ordered an MRI of the left small finger to evaluate a potential 
flexor tendon injury. (JE6, pp. 64-65) 
Claimant underwent left small finger MRI on April 29, 2022. (JE6, pp. 66-67) 
Thereafter, claimant failed to attend a follow-up appointment with Dr. Novak. Due to 
claimant’s failure to appear, Dr. Novak indicated he would not see claimant in the future. 
(JE6, p. 68) 
On January 9, 2023, claimant presented to Peter Pardubsky, M.D., a practice 
partner of Dr. Novak. Dr. Pardubsky noted he was evaluating claimant due to lack of 
motion complaints. However, Dr. Pardubsky noted the prior evaluation had been for left 
small finger complaints, while claimant presented to him with right hand complaints. Dr. 
Pardubsky reviewed Dr. Novak’s records and the left finger MRI. On history of the right-
sided complaints, claimant reported he suffered an injury to his finger during an incident 
in an August 2021 work injury. Claimant reported improvement in left-sided symptoms, 
but concern regarding right-sided limitations. (JE6, p. 69) 
Dr. Pardubsky ordered right small finger x-rays, which he read as revealing old 
deformity consistent with a metacarpal neck fracture and mild PIP joint space 
narrowing. Dr. Pardubsky also reviewed claimant’s left-sided x-rays and MRI, which he 
opined revealed an intact flexor tendon. Following examination and radiographic review, 
Dr. Pardubsky assessed flexor tendinitis of the hand and right finger pain. He did not 
recommend further imaging, as claimant’s tendon appeared intact. He declined to 
recommend surgery given overall improvement in left-sided complaints. Dr. Pardubsky 
opined claimant could use his right hand as tolerated and follow up as needed. (JE6, p. 
70)  
In early 2023, claimant testified he attempted to work at Popeyes, a fast-food 
restaurant. At his deposition, claimant testified he performed kitchen work, such as 
handling and cooking chicken, and he attempted the work for approximately two weeks. 
At that time, claimant ceased working due to hand symptoms. (DEA, pp. 8-9) At 
evidentiary hearing, claimant testified he submitted an application and was hired by 
Popeyes. However, claimant testified he presented to the restaurant and realized he 
was unable to perform the tasks required of him; he denied working there for any period 
of time. (Claimant’s testimony)  

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
At the referral of claimant’s counsel, on September 7, 2023, claimant presented 
to Farid Manshadi, M.D., for an independent medical examination. As elements of his 
evaluation, Dr. Manshadi interviewed claimant, completed a records review, and 
performed an examination. Dr. Manshadi issued a report containing his findings and 
opinions, dated September 28, 2023. Dr. Manshadi noted claimant began work at 
defendant in June 2021 in the position of ham skinner, which claimant relayed required 
him to use both hands to lift meat and roll it over a skinner. Claimant reported the meat 
weighed between 15 and 20 pounds and he performed the tasks repetitively. Claimant 
indicated he ceased working at defendant in October 2021. (CE1, pp. 1-2) On physical 
examination, Dr. Manshadi’s findings included: bilateral abductor pollicis brevis testing 
at 4/5 bilaterally; reduced sensation of the right-sided 2nd through 4th digits; positive 
Tinel’s test of the bilateral wrists; and impacted hand grip. (CE1, pp. 2-3) 
Dr. Manshadi opined claimant presented with clinical evidence of bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome, with weakness of the bilateral abductor pollicis brevis muscles and 
reduced sensation along the median digits. Dr. Manshadi opined claimant’s cumulative 
work duties leading up to July 13, 2021, were a substantial aggravating factor in 
claimant’s development of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. He explained claimant’s job 
was “fairly repetitious,” requiring use of the bilateral hands to skin the product and to lift 
meat from containers, “all in a very repetitious manner throughout the day.” (CE1, p. 3) 
Dr. Manshadi opined claimant had achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) as 
of the date of his evaluation, September 7, 2023. Nevertheless, he recommended 
further EMG studies and opined bracing and injections may be beneficial in treatment of 
claimant’s symptoms. With respect to permanent impairment, Dr. Manshadi opined 
claimant had sustained bilateral impairments due to sensory and motor deficits. 
Specifically, he opined an  impairment of 13 percent right upper extremity and 19 
percent left upper extremity. (CE1, p. 3) Dr. Manshadi recommended permanent work 
restrictions of: avoidance of any activity which requires sustained gripping activities with 
either hand; avoidance of power tool use with either hand; and avoidance of any activity 
requiring repetitious pushing or pulling with either wrist. (CE1, p. 4)  
Defendant retained Charles Mooney, M.D., to evaluate claimant. Claimant was 
scheduled for an independent medical examination on December 14, 2023; however, 
he did not appear due to miscommunication between claimant and his counsel. As a 
result, Dr. Mooney’s evaluation was converted to a records review. (DED, p. 25) Dr. 
Mooney authored a report containing his findings and opinions, dated January 3, 2024.  
Dr. Mooney reviewed and summarized claimant’s medical records. (DED, pp. 25-30) Of 
note, in his history, Dr. Mooney incorrectly identified claimant as a 55-year-old male; 
claimant was 47 years of age on the subsequent hearing date. (See Claimant’s 
testimony; DED, p. 28)   
Following his records review, Dr. Mooney assessed medical record evidence of 
onset of bilateral hand pain, with intermittent tingling and potentially mild swelling. Dr. 
Mooney noted these symptoms had a rapid onset, after brief exposure to less than 30 
days of work in the ham skinner position. Dr. Mooney opined the records revealed no 
objective evidence of any specific injury related to the alleged date of July 13, 2021. Dr. 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Mooney opined Dr. Gordon performed an appropriate examination and found no 
evidence of anatomic, physiologic, or neurologically based diagnosis to an underlying 
condition in either upper extremity. Dr. Mooney opined claimant’s symptom onset was 
most consistent with a lack of physical conditioning to the ham skinner position. (DED, 
p. 30) He further opined claimant’s EMG studies were essentially negative, with very 
borderline findings consistent with carpal tunnel. He opined claimant did not present 
with evidence of specific carpal tunnel syndrome based on EMG findings and physical 
examination. (DED, pp. 30-31)  
Dr. Mooney detailed potential occupations and personal risk factors in 
development of carpal tunnel. (DED, pp. 31-32) He opined claimant presented with 
personal risk factors, including age greater than 50 years old1 and obesity with a BMI 
over 35. (DED, pp. 30, 32) Dr. Mooney opined claimant’s “very brief exposure” to use of 
his bilateral hands in the ham skinner position would not be of sufficient duration or 
intensity to have been either directly causal to or significantly aggravate underlying 
carpal tunnel syndrome. He opined that the carpal tunnel condition had not been 
medically diagnosed by any objective measure, including physical findings, with the 
exception of Dr. Manshadi’s findings. He therefore opined the diagnosis of carpal tunnel 
syndrome was not supported by electrical diagnostic findings and as such, had not been 
objectively confirmed. (DED, p. 32) 
Dr. Mooney opined the record lacked evidence supporting a finding of permanent 
impairment. As claimant did not appear for Dr. Mooney’s evaluation, Dr. Mooney 
indicated he was unable to corroborate any of Dr. Manshadi’s clinical findings of 
neurologic deficits used in computing permanent impairment. Dr. Mooney opined he 
found it inappropriate to rate permanent impairment when no objective diagnostic test 
had confirmed the findings, particularly in a case lacking agreement among examiners. 
As no diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome had been established, Dr. Mooney opined 
permanent restrictions were unwarranted. (DED, p. 32) 
The evidentiary record contains conflicting information regarding whether and to 
what extent claimant has engaged in a search for meaningful employment. As of the 
date of his deposition on May 18, 2023, claimant testified he had not applied for work 
outside of Popeyes, as he found it difficult to find a job that met his restrictions. (DEA, 
pp. 9, 10) At the time of hearing on January 24, 2024, claimant entered into evidence a 
listing of emails obtained by searching “Indeed,” the job service provider, in claimant’s 
personal account as evidence of his job search. (CE10) The face value of this exhibit is 
negligible, as it does not demonstrate an actual work search was performed or whether 
applications were submitted in response to these messages. Rather, the listing appears 
to be comprised of automated emails from Indeed that were sent when a job posting 
matched claimant’s resume. The listing also appears to include multiple postings for the 
same and/or similar positions with the same employers and automated follow-up emails 
regarding potential job matches. The emails listed date from October 26, 2021 through 
approximately May 17, 2023. (CE10, pp. 50-88) Claimant testified the jobs listed were 
ones he applied for, reviewed the job description, or contacted the potential employer, 
                                                 
1 Again, Dr. Mooney incorrectly believed claimant was 55 years of age. 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
but learned they did not meet the restrictions imposed by Dr. Gordon. When cross-
examined regarding whether these emails reflected search alerts or applications, 
claimant became confrontational with defense counsel and did not provide clear 
responses to questions. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant applied for Social Security disability benefits. An initial application was 
denied on July 26, 2022. (DEG, pp. 50-53) Claimant filed a timely appeal. (DEG, p. 54) 
A notice of reconsideration again denied claimant’s claim on September 28, 2022. 
(DEG, pp. 55-57) Claimant appealed this denial on October 13, 2022. (DEG, p. 58) 
Following a hearing, on January 8, 2024, the SSA entered a fully favorable decision in 
claimant’s claim for supplemental security income. (CE9, p. 41) The decision found 
claimant demonstrated severe impairment of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, anxiety, 
obesity, asthma, sleep disorder, and PTSD. (CE9, p. 44) It was found that claimant’s 
physical impairments limited him to performance of work at the light exertional level, 
with manipulative limitations. (CE9, p. 47) It was also determined that claimant was 
unable to perform any past relevant work, and given claimant’s age, education, work 
experience, and functional capacity, there were no jobs that exist in significant numbers 
in the national economy that claimant could perform. Accordingly, claimant was found to 
have been under a disability dating to the alleged onset date of March 14, 2022. (CE9, 
p. 48) As of the date of evidentiary hearing in this matter, claimant had not yet begun to 
receive monetary benefits. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Claimant alleges he suffered a cumulative injury to his bilateral upper extremities. 
He testified he continues to experience symptoms of his hands and arms on a daily 
basis. Symptoms include numbness, tingling, and pain, at an average level of 7 on a 10-
point scale. He testified symptoms worsen with prolonged activity, resulting in a 
shooting pain and pulling sensation of the hands and arms. He reports these symptoms 
interfere with his ability to perform daily activities, particularly the pace at which he is 
able to perform tasks. Claimant self-treats with over-the-counter medication. He denied 
notable relief with treatment provided by medical providers, but indicated he would be 
willing to try additional treatment recommendations, if made. He has no upcoming 
medical appointments scheduled for his bilateral upper extremities. (Claimant’s 
testimony) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of his employment on July 13, 2021. 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant seeks a determination that he sustained a cumulative injury arising out 
of and in the course of his employment with defendant on July 13, 2021. Claimant 
began work with defendant on or about June 7, 2021. The record shows that claimant 
first began experiencing symptoms on or about June 24, 2021, when he presented to 
the onsite medical clinic. While symptoms initially resolved, claimant again sought care 
on July 13, 2021 after an acute event causing his fingers to bend backwards. 
Thereafter, claimant completed an injury report and reported both a gradual and acute 
onset of symptoms. Claimant received medical evaluation and treatment from a number 
of providers over the following 1 1/2 years, although he did not have prolonged care 
with any single provider such as would place that provider in a superior position to 
evaluate the causation of claimant’s complaints.  
Defendant relies upon the opinions of Drs. Gordon and Mooney as support for its 
denial of claimant’s claim. Dr. Gordon examined claimant as part of a treatment plan. 
While he opined claimant required permanent restrictions, he did not find claimant’s 
treatment causally related to his work activities at defendant. Dr. Gordon opined 
claimant lacked objective findings on examination and did not present with a 
pathological condition that required treatment secondary to his essential job duties. 
Further, Dr. Gordon opined claimant did not suffer with a pathological condition that was 
caused, aggravated, or accelerated by his essential job duties. Finally, he opined that 
claimant did not sustain either a temporary or permanent aggravation of any condition 
which was attributable to his work activities. Dr. Gordon ultimately opined claimant did 
not tolerate the ham skinning job, due to claimant’s “anatomical/physiological construct.” 
Dr. Mooney expressed agreement with Dr. Gordon’s opinions. As claimant did 
not appear for examination, Dr. Mooney based his opinions upon a medical records 
review. Thereupon, Dr. Mooney assessed evidence of onset of bilateral hand pain, with 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
intermittent tingling and potentially mild swelling. He opined the records revealed no 
objective evidence of any specific injury related to the alleged July 13, 2021 injury date. 
He opined Dr. Gordon performed an appropriate examination and found no evidence of 
anatomic, physiologic, or neurologically based diagnosis to an underlying condition in 
either upper extremity. Dr. Mooney opined claimant’s EMG was essentially negative, 
with borderline findings consistent with carpal tunnel, and claimant lacked physical 
examination findings of carpal tunnel. Dr. Mooney reviewed the occupational and 
personal risk factors of carpal tunnel syndrome. He ultimately concluded that claimant’s 
“very brief” exposure to use of his bilateral hands in the ham skinner position would not 
be of sufficient duration or intensity to directly cause or significantly aggravate 
underlying carpal tunnel syndrome. Rather, Dr. Mooney found claimant’s symptom 
onset was more consistent with a lack of physical conditioning to the ham skinner job.  
In support of his claim, claimant urges reliance upon the opinions of his 
independent medical examination provider, Dr. Manshadi. Dr. Manshadi opined 
claimant presented with clinical evidence of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and that 
claimant’s cumulative work duties leading up to July 13, 2021, were a substantial 
aggravating factor in claimant’s development of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Dr. 
Manshadi described claimant’s job duties as “fairly repetitious,” requiring use of the 
bilateral hands to skin the product and to lift meat from containers, “all in a very 
repetitious manner throughout the day.”  
Following review of the entirety of the record, I find the opinions of Drs. Gordon 
and Mooney to be most persuasive. Dr. Gordon evaluated claimant contemporaneously 
with the onset of his symptoms and opined claimant’s condition was not attributable to 
his work duties, but rather to claimant’s anatomical construct. Dr. Mooney reviewed Dr. 
Gordon’s evaluation and found it was appropriate. Dr. Mooney is the only physician to 
specifically delineate the occupational and personal risk factors of carpal tunnel 
syndrome. While Dr. Mooney incorrectly considered claimant’s age to be over 50, 
representing a personal risk factor, I do not find this error warrants disregarding the 
entirety of Dr. Mooney’s opinions. Dr. Mooney believed claimant’s performance of the 
ham skinner job was of insufficient duration and intensity to cause or aggravate 
underlying carpal tunnel syndrome. He opined claimant’s symptoms were consistent 
with lack of conditioning of the ham skinner position. I find this opinion consistent with 
Dr. Gordon’s attribution of the symptoms to claimant’s own anatomical construct. I 
further find the conclusion logical on its face, as claimant’s employment at defendant in 
the ham skinner position represented nearly his first employment in almost a decade 
due to extended periods of incarceration. It is only logical that the transition into full-time 
employment would result in symptoms related to lack of conditioning in performance of 
those specific tasks. Experiencing symptoms as a result of lack of conditioning does not 
establish claimant sustained a work-related cumulative injury, particularly after only 
approximately 30 days of employment.  
I do not find Dr. Manshadi’s opinion convincing enough to displace the consistent 
and logical opinions of Drs. Gordon and Mooney. Dr. Manshadi’s opinion is based in 
large part upon claimant’s description of his job duties as repetitive and forceful. As 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
previously stated, I do not find claimant to be a credible witness, and this undermines 
the persuasiveness of Dr. Manshadi’s opinions. Dr. Manshadi’s report did not contain a 
detailed analysis of the potential causative factors of carpal tunnel syndrome, nor did he 
address the duration of claimant’s performance of such tasks and the potential of 
deconditioning.  
Ultimately, I award greatest weight to the consistent opinions of Drs. Gordon and 
Mooney. As a result, I find claimant has failed to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that he sustained a cumulative work injury on or about July 13, 2021. Having 
found claimant failed to prove he sustained a cumulative injury arising out of and in the 
course of his employment with defendant on July 13, 2021, claimant is not entitled to 
temporary or permanent disability benefits. Claimant is not entitled to an award of 
alternate medical care, nor is defendant responsible for unauthorized medical care. As 
claimant failed to prove a compensable work injury, he is not entitled to reimbursement 
of the independent medical examination of Dr. Manshadi under the plain language of 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2). Finally, claimant seeks a specific taxation of costs. As 
claimant was not successful in his claim, he is not entitled to an award of costs against 
defendant. Each party shall bear its own costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings.  
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Each party shall bear its own costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
Signed and filed this ___24th ____ day of July, 2024. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
James Neal (via WCES) 
 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 

PERRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
