Case Number: 5051580
Case Title:  BRANDT, TESSA V. CRST EXPEDITED INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Brandt Tessa-5051580D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TESSA BRANDT, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       File No. 5051580 
CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                       85.27  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE 
  : 
GROUP, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :           Head Note Nos.:  2501, 2505, 2602 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Tessa Brandt, claimant, filed a petition seeking workers’ compensation medical 
benefits from CRST, employer and Liberty Mutual Insurance Group, insurance carrier 
as defendants.  Hearing was held on May 11, 2020.  This case was scheduled to be an 
in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  However, due to the outbreak of a 
pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings 
to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via CourtCall with all parties, the undersigned, and the court reporter also 
appearing remotely.   
The undersigned heard the prior arbitration hearing in this matter on June 8, 
2017.  The case was fully submitted on June 29, 2017.  The arbitration decision was 
issued on November 21, 2017.  In the underlying arbitration decision, the undersigned 
concluded that claimant sustained permanent injury to her right eye and also the work 
injury resulted in post-traumatic headaches, dizziness, neck pain, shoulder pain, and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  The arbitration decision was not appealed.      
In the pending case, the parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of 
the arbitration hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various 
stipulations.  All of those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into 
this arbitration decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
will be raised or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their 
stipulations.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Sep-30  15:59:42     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
Tessa Brandt was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary record 
also includes Joint Exhibits JE1-JE17, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-22, and Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-H1.  All exhibits, other than Claimant’s Exhibit 22, were received without 
objection.  On May 6, 2020, defendants filed a motion to exclude the medical record of 
Dr. Verbruggen dated February 25, 2020, which is labeled as Claimant’s Exhibit 22.  
Defendants argued the exhibit should be excluded due to late disclosure.  The 
undersigned overruled the objection, but allowed defendants the opportunity to obtain 
rebuttal evidence after the hearing.  The evidentiary record remained open at the 
conclusion of the arbitration hearing to give defendants an opportunity to submit rebuttal 
evidence.  On July 8, 2020, defendants notified the undersigned that they would not be 
submitting any additional evidence.  Therefore, the evidentiary record is closed with no 
evidence submitted after the time of the hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on July 29, 2020, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Tessa Brandt, is currently living in Leiden, Netherlands.  Leiden is 
situated between Amsterdam and Rotterdam, approximately 10 minutes from each city.  
At the time of this hearing, she was working as a registered nurse at a hospital in 
Zoetermeer.  (Testimony)   
Ms. Brandt continues to experience symptoms which she believes are related to 
the June 7, 2013 work injury.  She testified that her loss of vision in her right eye has 
remained the same over the years.  Additionally, she has some cataract spots on her 
lens where the bungee cord struck her right eye.  These spots cause problems when 
light enters her eye.  She continues to have difficulty with perception of depth and her 
                                                 
1 It should be noted that Defendants’ Exhibit A is the transcript of claimant’s 
deposition.  There are handwritten notes on that transcript; these handwritten notes will 
not be considered by the undersigned.  In the future, the parties should not file exhibits 
that contain these handwritten notes.  If it is necessary to file exhibits with handwritten 
notes, then the offering party should bring that to the deputy’s attention either before or 
at the time the exhibits are offered. 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
right eye is also very dry.  Ms. Brandt also has headaches which have remained the 
same since the injury.  Additionally, she continues to have neck and shoulder pain and 
stress-related symptoms.  (Testimony) 
Prior to moving from the United States back to the Netherlands, Ms. Brandt saw 
Dr. Feldon, a neuro-ophthalmologist.  Dr. Feldon recommended a clinic to treat her 
headaches.  She received treatment at Strong Headache Clinic in Rochester, New 
York.  However, defendants have not offered her any headache treatment since that 
time.  (Testimony)   
Also prior to moving back to the Netherlands, Ms. Brandt was seen by Robert R. 
Demerath, Ph.D.  She was sent to Dr. Demerath by the defendants for an evaluation.  
He is the doctor who diagnosed her with PTSD.  Dr. Demerath recommended massage 
therapy for her headaches and neck and shoulder pain.  Ms. Brandt testified that 
defendants have not offered or provided any massage therapy.  Dr. Demerath also 
recommended audio textbooks for her schooling.  Additionally, he recommended 
psychological therapy for her PTSD.  Dr. Demerath also recommended a systematic 
trial of appropriate pain medications; this has never been offered by the defendants.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 3)    
Ms. Brandt testified that since she returned to the Netherlands, the defendants 
have not offered any treatment for her right eye, neck pain, or shoulder pain.  
Defendants did offer a psychologist from the United States for PTSD treatment.  
However, Ms. Brandt did not feel comfortable with online sessions for psychological 
treatment.  She requested to have an in-person session with a provider near her 
residence.  This request was denied by the defendants.  (Testimony) 
Since returning to the Netherlands, Ms. Brandt has had her eye checked at 
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC).  She has seen a specialist to check her eye 
and eye pressure.  The specialist prescribed Duratears.  (Testimony; Cl. Ex. 9, p. 48)  
Ms. Brandt has filled this prescription many times, but the defendants have never paid 
for the prescriptions and have not paid LUMC for the visits.  During cross-examination, 
Ms. Brandt admitted that she has not saved the receipts for these refills or the 
ibuprofen.  (Testimony) 
Dr. Feldon and the ophthalmologist in the Netherlands recommend that Ms. 
Brandt wear glasses over her contact to protect her left eye.  These would be clear 
lenses for protection.  Ms. Brandt testified about the importance of her protecting her 
one fully functioning eye.  They also recommended sunglasses for outside that have a 
special UV cover because, as the result of the work injury, her right pupil does not 
respond to light as well as her left eye does.  The defendants have not provided these 
glasses to her.  (Testimony)  
Dr. Feldon has told Ms. Brandt that glaucoma or pressure might be an issue for 
her right eye.  This is the reason they must monitor her right eye so closely.  He said 
she may also need surgery for her eye lenses.  Her eye turns slowly, especially when 
she is tired, almost like a lazy eye.  If this continues to get worse, they will need to drain 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
it.  Because Ms. Brandt’s right eye gets dry, Dr. Feldon recommends that she not wear 
her contact lenses while at home.  Instead, she should wear prescription glasses.  
(Testimony) 
Ms. Brandt also saw Michiel Eggen who she described as a physical therapist, 
and manual therapist.  Ms. Brandt described him as similar to a chiropractor, but not 
really the same.  He corrects her neck and shoulders and whole back area.  She found 
his treatment to be very helpful.  However, for financial reasons she did not continue the 
treatment.  He recommends massage therapy every six weeks, but this is not a service 
that he provides.  He also recommends an ergonomic desk chair.  (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 49) 
Dr. Kramer is Ms. Brandt’s primary care physician (PCP).  In the Netherlands the 
PCP has to write a referral to a specialist.  Dr. Kramer is also the one who prescribes 
Ms. Brandt eye drops, Duratears.  Defendants have not paid for any of this treatment or 
prescriptions.  (Testimony)    
Since returning to the Netherlands, Ms. Brandt has sought psychological 
treatment with Susan Moll in Rotterdam.  She received what was described as talk-type 
treatment.  She found this treatment to beneficial.  She would like to continue with this 
type of treatment, but would prefer to see someone who has an office in Leiden.  There 
are no clinical notes from these visits in evidence.  (Testimony)   
Claimant’s Exhibit 5, pages 22 through 33 is the declaration overview of Ms. 
Brandt’s health insurance.  This declaration includes all of her medical expenses that 
were submitted to her health insurance, this includes treatment for nonwork-related and 
work-related conditions.  To Ms. Brandt’s knowledge, the workers’ compensation carrier 
has not covered any of these expenses.  Unfortunately, there is no way for the 
undersigned to decipher what is or is not work related.  (Tr. p. 39) 
Ms. Brandt is seeking payment of past medical expenses which she claims are 
related to the June 7, 2013 work injury.  The total of the medical bills that claimant is 
seeking is set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 11.  The actual bills are contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 12-16; unfortunately, none of these exhibits are written in or translated to 
English.  Since returning to the Netherlands the defendants have not paid for any of her 
treatment and have not asked her to see any doctors or other healthcare providers in 
Europe.  Ms. Brandt admitted that she has not always kept her receipts or provided 
them to the defendants.  (Testimony) 
I find that financial responsibility for any bills incurred before the arbitration 
hearing should have been decided at the June 8, 2017 arbitration hearing.  The 
principle of res judicata prevents an award of those bills at this time.  Therefore, any 
bills for services incurred prior to June 8, 2017 cannot be recovered through this 
proceeding.   
Claimant’s Exhibit 12 seeks payment for medical bills from Timmers General 
Practice from June 3, 2015 and July 6, 2015.  I find that these expenses were incurred 
years before the 2017 arbitration hearing.  Additionally, because these bills are not in 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
English, it is unclear if these services were even incurred as the result of the work injury.  
However, even if they were incurred due to the work injury, res judicata applies.  I find 
that payment for these bills cannot be recovered via this proceeding.   
Claimant’s Exhibit 13 seeks payment for medical bills from Leiden University 
Medical Center dated February 12, 2016.  These expenses were incurred well before 
the 2017 arbitration hearing.  Frankly, because these bills are not in English, it is 
unclear if these services were even incurred as the result of the work injury.  However, 
even if they were incurred due to the work injury, res judicata applies.  I find that 
payment for these bills cannot be recovered via this proceeding. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 14 is a screenshot of medical bills paid from Dr. Marjorie Post-
Bergman.  The quality of the screenshot is poor, but it appears the bills are for services 
rendered in 2015.  Again, because these bills are not in English, it is unclear if these 
services were even incurred as the result of the work injury.  However, even if they were 
incurred due to the work injury, res judicata applies.  These expenses were incurred 
well before the 2017 arbitration hearing.  I find that payment for these bills cannot be 
recovered via this proceeding.  
Claimant’s Exhibit 15 contains medical bills from Merenwijk Gezondheidscentrum 
for dates from July 3, 2018 through November 30, 2018.  These bills were incurred after 
the 2017 arbitration hearing.  Unfortunately, these bills are not written in English so 
there is no way to ascertain whether these expenses are related to the work injury or 
not.  Because I literally cannot read these bills, I cannot find that claimant has carried 
her burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that these expenses 
were incurred as the result of the work injury.  (Testimony; JE2, p. 8)   
Claimant’s Exhibit 16 contains medical bills from Dr. Kramer for dates from 
November 15, 2018 through November 30, 2018.  These bills were incurred after the 
2017 arbitration hearing.  Ms. Brandt testified that she saw Dr. Kramer for both work-
related and nonwork-related conditions.  Unfortunately, these bills are not written in 
English, so there is no way to ascertain whether these expenses are related to the work 
injury.  Thus, I cannot find that claimant has carried her burden of proof to show by a 
preponderance of the evidence that these expenses were incurred as the result of the 
work injury.   
Payment cannot be authorized for unexplained charges that may or may not 
have been incurred as the result of the work injury.  Furthermore, Ms. Brandt’s claim to 
recover medical expenses incurred prior to June 7, 2018 is barred because those 
expenses could have been claimed at the time of the prior hearing.   
Ms. Brandt is also seeking alternate medical care as set forth in the January 8, 
2019, letter to the defendants.  The letter states in pertinent part,  
I have discussed with my client your letter to me dated 12/31/18, denying 
medical bills for my client’s neck/upper back treatment.  I will be 
discussing my client’s options with her, but I would like to make our 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
request for various medical treatment and medical products and services 
under [s]ection 85.27 so that we may address them all at one time.  Our 
first request is for treatment of my client’s neck and upper back, and we 
are specifically seeking treatment by M.H.J. Eggan [sic] at Merenwijk 
Gezondheidscentrum for this purpose.  We have provided documentation 
to you from this facility.  Second, we are seeking annual eye exams at 
Leids Universitair Medisch.  Third, we are seeking massage therapy for 
the neck and shoulder at Hollos Massagetherapie in Leiden.  Fourth, we 
are seeking psychological treatment for my client’s PTSD by Yvonne 
Ludwig in Leiden.  Fifth, we are seeking psychological treatment for my 
client’s general health condition at a facility in Leiden.  Sixth, we are 
seeking medication, including ibuprofen and Duratears.  Seventh, we are 
seeking a desk lamp, which my client needs because of her visual 
impairment.  Eighth, we are requesting an ergonomic chair because of my 
client’s ongoing neck and shoulder pain.  Ninth, we are requesting 
prescription glasses every other year.  Tenth, we are requesting 
prescription sunglasses every other year.  Eleventh, we are requesting 
that my client be provided with a parking sensor for her car, which she 
needs because of her lack of depth perception.  Please submit these 
requests to your client for consideration, and let me know your client’s 
position on these requests so that I may advise my client of her legal 
options for proceeding. 
(Cl. Ex. 7, p. 41; Testimony)  
First, Ms. Brandt is seeking treatment for her neck and upper back with M.H.J. 
Eggen at Merenwijk Gezondheidscentrum.  In the underlying arbitration decision, the 
undersigned concluded that the work injury resulted in neck pain and shoulder pain.  
Defendants are obligated to promptly provide reasonable and necessary medical 
services for the work injury.  I find that claimant is entitled to treatment for her neck and 
upper back.   
Second, Ms. Brandt is seeking annual eye exams at Leids Universitair Medisch.  
The underlying arbitration decision found that the work injury did cause injury to the right 
eye.  The records support that Ms. Brandt needs to have a checkup every two years, or 
sooner in case of increase in symptoms.  Additionally, Z.S. Gaurisanker, M.D. 
recommends Ms. Brandt also have her eye pressure measured by an optician.  Ms. 
Brandt testified that this is to be performed annually.  There is no evidence to conflict 
her testimony that her eye pressure should be measured annually.  (Cl. Ex. 22, pp. 69-
71; Testimony)  I find defendants are responsible for the expenses of a checkup every 
two years, or sooner in case of increase of symptoms.  Defendants are also responsible 
for the expenses of annual eye pressure measurements.   
Third, Ms. Brandt has requested massage therapy for her headaches, neck and 
shoulder pain at Hollos Massagetherapie in Leiden.  Robert R. Demerath, Ph.D. is a 
provider that defendants sent Ms. Brandt to prior to the underlying arbitration hearing.  
He recommended massage therapy for her headaches, neck, and shoulder pain.  

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
Despite the underlying arbitration decision which found Ms. Brandt’s headache, neck 
and shoulder pain were related to the work injury and despite defendants’ own doctor 
recommending massage treatment, defendants have failed to provide this treatment to 
Ms. Brandt.  I find defendants are responsible to provide the recommended massage 
therapy.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3; Testimony) 
Fourth, she is asking for psychological treatment for her PTSD with a provider in 
Leiden.  In the underlying arbitration decision the undersigned found that Ms. Brandt’s 
PTSD was due to the work injury.  Dr. Demerath recommended psychological therapy 
for the PTSD.  Defendants offered a virtual appointment for Ms. Brandt with a provider 
in the United States.  Ms. Brandt informed the defendants that she was not comfortable 
having psychological sessions virtually.  I find that the virtual sessions offered were not 
reasonable.  I find defendants are obligated to provide prompt and reasonable 
psychological treatment for PTSD.  (Testimony) 
Fifth, Ms. Brandt has requested a gym membership for her general health 
condition at a facility in Leiden.  M.H.J. Eggen, a physical and manual therapist, has 
recommended Ms. Brandt perform fitness exercise in a gym or sports center two times 
a week to strengthen her muscles.  He notes that she has tension in her neck and upper 
back muscles and also in her lower back.  He indicates that the lower back tension is 
most likely the result of the tension of her neck and shoulder muscles.  (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 
49)  I find defendants are obligated to provide the recommended treatment to help Ms. 
Brandt strengthen her muscles.  (Testimony)   
Sixth, Ms. Brandt is seeking medication including ibuprofen and Duratears.  Ms. 
Brandt testified that she has been advised to stop taking ibuprofen.  Therefore, I find 
defendants are not responsible for Ms. Brandt’s ibuprofen expenses.  As the result of 
the work injury, Ms. Brandt has problems with her right eye being dry.  Duratears, eye 
drops have been prescribed for her right eye.  I find defendants are responsible for 
these Duratears expenses.  (Testimony)     
Seventh, Ms. Brandt would like a desk lamp due to her visual impairment.  She 
testified that there was an ophthalmologist in the United States that recommended she 
get a good desk lamp.  However, there is no note of this recommendation in the record.  
Therefore, I find claimant has failed to show entitlement to a desk lamp at the 
defendants’ expense.  (Testimony)   
Eighth, she is seeking an ergonomic chair due to her ongoing neck and shoulder 
pain.  Ms. Brandt testified that Michiel Eggen recommended a good desk chair for better 
posture.  However, there is no note of this recommendation in the record.  Therefore, I 
find claimant has failed to show entitlement to a good desk chair at the defendants’ 
expense.  (Testimony)   
Ninth, Ms. Brandt has requested prescription glasses every other year.  Ms. 
Brandt testified that she wore prescription glasses prior to the work injury and that her 
prescription has not changed as the result of the work injury.  I find Ms. Brandt has 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
failed to demonstrate that she requires prescription eyeglasses as the result of the work 
injury.  (Testimony)   
Tenth, Ms. Brandt is requesting prescription sunglasses every other year.  Due to 
the damage that the work injury caused to the lens of her right eye, Ms. Brandt’s eye 
has difficulty adjusting to light.  Defendants provided Ms. Brandt with one pair of 
prescription sunglasses back in 2013 or 2014.  Over the past six to seven years that 
pair has been scratched and Ms. Brandt is having difficulty with one of the screws.  I 
find that the prescription sunglasses have become unusable.  Thus, pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27, I find defendants are responsible for providing Ms. Brandt with a 
new pair of prescription sunglasses.  (Testimony)   
Eleventh, Ms. Brandt was seeking a parking sensor for her car due to her lack of 
depth perception.  However, at the hearing she testified that this is no longer an issue 
for her because she has purchased a vehicle with a sensor.  Furthermore, there is a 
lack of evidence in the record that a parking sensor was prescribed for Ms. Brandt.  I 
find defendants are not responsible for a parking sensor.  (Testimony) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of 
Appellate Procedure 6.14(6)(e). 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury is 
a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is proximate if 
it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only cause.  A 
preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable rather 
than merely possible.  Iowa Code § 85.27; George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 
N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Ms. Brandt is seeking payment of past medical expenses which she contends 
are related to the June 7, 2013 work injury.  The total of the medical bills that claimant is 
seeking is set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 11.  The actual bills are contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 12-16.      
As previously noted, there was an arbitration hearing in this matter on June 8, 
2017.  Defendants contend that any bills incurred prior to that date cannot be awarded 
in this proceeding because those bills should have been claimed at the time of the prior 
hearing.  Defendants contend the bills that pre-date the arbitration hearing are barred by 
res judicata.  Claimant argues that she should be able to recover these expenses 
because she did not have all of her bills at the time of the prior arbitration hearing.  I do 
not find claimant’s argument to be persuasive.  
Res judicata is a term that includes claim preclusion and issue preclusion.  Iowa 
Coal Mining Co. v. Monroe County, 555 N.W.2d 418, 440-41 (Iowa 1996).  Res judicata 
prevents a party from relitigating a claim or issue that has already been determined by a 
final judgment.  See George v. D.W. Zinser Co., 762 N.W.2d 865, 868 (Iowa 2009).  
Res judicata aims to protect the finality of a court's judgment and to preserve scarce 
judicial resources by preventing the repetitive relitigation of claims that were, or should 
have been, decided at a prior trial.  Claim preclusion, which is the focal point of this 
decision, prevents piecemeal litigation by requiring a party to try an entire claim or 
defense in the case at trial.  To that end, claim preclusion applies not only to matters the 
earlier action actually determined but also to relevant matters that could have been 
determined had they been raised.  Penn v. Iowa State Board of Regents, 577 N.W.2d 
393, 398 (Iowa 1998).  See Christopher Williams v. Chunkee, Inc., File Number: 
5033820, 2020 WL 1183541, at *7 (Feb. 17, 2020).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that financial responsibility for 
any bills incurred before the arbitration hearing should have been decided at the June 8, 
2017 arbitration hearing.  The principle of res judicata prevents an award of those bills 
at this time.  Therefore, any bills for services incurred prior to June 8, 2017 cannot be 
recovered through this proceeding.   
Claimant’s Exhibit 12 seeks payment for medical bills from Timmers General 
Practice from June 3, 2015 and July 6, 2015.  Based on the above findings of fact, I 
conclude that payment for these bills cannot be recovered via this proceeding.   
Claimant’s Exhibit 13 seeks payment for medical bills from Leiden University 
Medical Center dated February 12, 2016.  These expenses were incurred well before 
the 2017 arbitration hearing.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that 
payment for these bills cannot be recovered via this proceeding. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 14 is a screenshot of medical bills paid from Dr. Marjorie Post-
Bergman.  The quality of the screenshot is poor, but it appears the bills are for services 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
rendered in 2015.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that payment for 
these bills cannot be recovered via this proceeding.  
Claimant’s Exhibit 15 contains medical bills from Merenwijk Gezondheidscentrum 
for dates from July 3, 2018 through November 30, 2018.  These bills were incurred after 
the 2017 arbitration hearing.  Unfortunately, these bills are not written in English so 
there is no way to ascertain whether these expenses are related to the work injury or 
not.  Based on the above findings of fact, I cannot conclude that claimant has carried 
her burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that these expenses 
were incurred as the result of the work injury.  (Testimony; JE2, p. 8)   
Claimant’s Exhibit 16 contains medical bills from Dr. Kramer for dates from 
November 15, 2018 through November 30, 2018.  These bills were incurred after the 
2017 arbitration hearing.  Ms. Brandt testified that she saw Dr. Kramer for both work-
related and nonwork-related conditions.  Based on the above findings of fact, I cannot 
conclude that claimant has carried her burden of proof to show by a preponderance of 
the evidence that these expenses were incurred as the result of the work injury.   
Payment cannot be authorized for unexplained charges that may or may not 
have been incurred as the result of the work injury.  Furthermore, Ms. Brandt’s claim to 
recover medical expenses incurred prior to June 7, 2018 is barred because those 
expenses could have been claimed at the time of the prior hearing.   
Through this proceeding claimant is also seeking alternate medical care.  Ms. 
Brandt filed a petition for alternate medical care on January 25, 2019.  She sought the 
specific treatment set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 7, p. 41, as set forth above.  On 
February 4, 2019, defendants filed an answer which denied liability for the conditions for 
which Ms. Brandt sought treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 3)  Due to the denial of liability, claimant’s 
petition for alternate medical care was dismissed by this agency on February 5, 2019.   
First, Ms. Brandt is seeking treatment for her neck and upper back.  Based on 
the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant is entitled to treatment for her neck 
and upper back.  Defendants are hereby ordered to provide an authorized medical 
provider for Ms. Brandt’s neck pain and shoulder pain.  Defendants have 21 days from 
the date of this decision to identify an authorized provider who is located near Ms. 
Brandt’s residence.  If defendants fail to identify such an authorized provider, then 
defendants have lost the right to direct claimant’s care for her neck and upper back and 
Ms. Brandt may seek treatment on her own at defendants’ expense. 
Second, Ms. Brandt is seeking annual eye exams at Leids Universitair Medisch.  
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude defendants are responsible for the 
expenses of a checkup every two years, or sooner in case of increase of symptoms.  
Defendants are also responsible for the expenses of annual eye pressure 
measurements.  
Third, Ms. Brandt has requested massage therapy for her headaches, neck and 
shoulder pain at Hollos Massagetherapie in Leiden.  Based on the above findings of 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
fact, I conclude defendants are hereby ordered to provide the recommended massage 
therapy.  Defendants have 21 days from the date of this decision to identify an 
authorized provider for massage therapy.  If defendants fail to identify such an 
authorized provider, then defendants have lost the right to direct claimant’s care for her 
headaches, neck and shoulder pain and Ms. Brandt may seek massage therapy 
treatment on her own at defendants’ expense. 
Fourth, she is asking for psychological treatment for her PTSD with a provider in 
Leiden.  In the underlying arbitration decision the undersigned found that Ms. Brandt’s 
PTSD was due to the work injury.  Dr. Demerath recommended psychological therapy 
for the PTSD.  Defendants offered a virtual appointment for Ms. Brandt with a provider 
in the United States.  Ms. Brandt informed the defendants that she was not comfortable 
having psychological sessions virtually.  I find that the virtual sessions offered were not 
reasonable.  Defendants have 21 days from the date of this decision to identify an 
authorized provider who is located near Ms. Brandt’s residence.  If defendants fail to 
identify such an authorized provider, then defendants have lost the right to direct 
claimant’s care for her PTSD and Ms. Brandt may seek treatment on her own at 
defendants’ expense.    
Fifth, Ms. Brandt has requested a gym membership for her general health 
condition at a facility in Leiden.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude 
defendants are obligated to provide Ms. Brandt with a membership so she may perform 
fitness exercise in a gym or sport center two time a week to strengthen her muscles.  
Defendants have 21 days from the date of this decision to identify an authorized facility 
located near Ms. Brandt’s residence.  If defendants fail to identify such an authorized 
provider, Ms. Brandt may seek such a membership at defendants’ expense.     
Sixth, Ms. Brandt is seeking medication including ibuprofen and Duratears.  
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude defendants are not responsible for Ms. 
Brandt’s ibuprofen expenses.  I further conclude defendants are responsible for the 
Duratears expenses. 
Seventh, Ms. Brandt would like a desk lamp due to her visual impairment.  Based 
on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant has failed to show entitlement to a 
desk lamp at the defendants’ expense.   
Eighth, Ms. Brandt is seeking an ergonomic chair due to her ongoing neck and 
shoulder pain.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant has failed to 
show entitlement to a good desk chair at the defendants’ expense.   
Ninth, Ms. Brandt has requested prescription glasses every other year.  Based 
on the above findings of fact, I conclude Ms. Brandt has failed to demonstrate that she 
requires prescription eyeglasses as the result of the work injury.   
Tenth, Ms. Brandt is requesting prescription sunglasses every other year.  Based 
on the above findings of fact, I conclude defendants are responsible for providing Ms. 
Brandt with a new pair of prescription sunglasses.  (Testimony) 

BRANDT V. CRST VAN EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
Eleventh, Ms. Brandt was seeking a parking sensor for her car due to her lack of 
depth perception.  However, at the hearing she testified that this is no longer an issue 
for her because she has purchased a vehicle with a sensor.  Furthermore, there is a 
lack of evidence in the record that a parking sensor was prescribed for Ms. Brandt.  I 
conclude defendants are not responsible for a parking sensor.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
As set forth above, defendants shall provide prompt and reasonable medical 
treatment related to the work injury. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this       30th      day of September, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas J. Currie (via WCES) 
Charles A. Blades (via WCES) 
Rachael Neff (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
