Case Number: 5061883
Case Title:  DENG, MARY V. FARMLAND FOODS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Deng Mary-5061883d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARY DENG, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5061883 
FARMLAND FOODS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :    
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY CORP., :    Head Note Nos.:  1803; 1803.1; 4000.2 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :   
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a petition in arbitration.  Claimant, Mary Deng, initiated this contested 
case proceeding when she filed her original notice and petition with the Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation.  The petition was filed on April 13, 2018.  Claimant alleged she 
sustained a work-related injury on August 19, 2017.  Claimant alleged the work injury 
affected her left shoulder, left arm, and neck.  (Original Notice and Petition) 
Farmland Foods, Inc. is the named employer.  Safety National Casualty 
Corporation is the named insurance carrier.  Defendants filed their answer on April 30, 
2018.  Defendants denied liability for the alleged injuries.   
The hearing administrator scheduled the case for hearing on February 26, 2019.  
The hearing took place at the Iowa Workforce Development offices in Sioux City, Iowa.  
The undersigned appointed Ms. Morgan Catania as the certified shorthand reporter.  
She is the official custodian of the records and notes.  The original transcript was filed 
on March 15, 2019. 
Claimant testified at hearing.  No other witnesses testified.  The parties offered 
Joint Exhibits 1 through 8.  Claimant offered Exhibits 1 through 4.  Defendants offered 
Exhibits A through C.  The exhibits were admitted as evidence in the case. 
The evidentiary record was suspended at the conclusion of the live hearing to 
permit claimant an opportunity to obtain a rebuttal report from Sunil Bansal, M.D.  The 
rebuttal report was timely filed thereafter by claimant and is admitted as Joint Exhibit 6, 
pages 87A-87B.  Upon receipt of Dr. Bansal’s rebuttal report, the evidentiary record 
closed. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-25  10:24:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
Post-hearing briefs were filed on March 29, 2019.  The case was deemed fully 
submitted on that date. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties completed the designated hearing report and filed it at the time of the 
arbitration hearing.  The parties’ various stipulations are: 
1. There was the existence of an employer-employee relationship at the time of 
the injury; 
2. Claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment on August 19, 2017; 
3. The parties agree the stipulated injuries resulted in both temporary and/or 
permanent disability; 
4. Temporary disability, or healing period, is no longer in dispute; 
5. Claimant’s gross average earnings on the date of injury, calculated pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.36, were $956.94 per week; 
6. Claimant’s actual average earnings prior to the injury were $1,088.05 per 
week. 
7. Claimant’s actual average earnings at the time of hearing were $1,204.74. 
8. If claimant’s injury is determined to be to the “whole body,” no industrial loss 
is assessed at this time due to Claimant’s increased earnings since the injury 
date. 
9. Claimant was married on the date of injury; 
10. Claimant was entitled to four exemptions on the date of injury; 
11. Medical benefits are no longer in dispute; 
12. Defendants consented at the commencement of hearing to pay claimant’s 
medical mileage ($171.20 for mileage to an FCE on March 7, 2018 and an 
MRI on November 15, 2017). 
13. Defendants will pay interest on any benefits awarded. 
14. Defendants waive any affirmative defenses. 
15. Defendants have paid ten weeks of compensation at the rate of $628.46 and 
are entitled to a credit for those payments. 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
16. Claimant has paid certain costs associated with this case, and defendants do 
not dispute those costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
The issues presented are: 
1. Whether claimant’s injury involves the left shoulder and should be 
compensated as a scheduled member injury or involves an unscheduled 
injury? 
2. If the injury is limited to the left shoulder, what is the applicable permanent 
impairment rating under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition? 
3. If the injury is limited to the left shoulder, should claimant be awarded 
permanent disability benefits above the permanent impairment rating due to 
permanent restrictions? 
4. If the injury is limited to the left shoulder, should the injury be compensated as 
a scheduled member to the arm or should the impairment rating be converted 
to the whole person before being awarded? 
5. If it is determined that the injury should be compensated as an unscheduled 
injury, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits for 
the functional impairment rating. 
6. What is the proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits? 
7. Whether defendants should be ordered to pay penalty benefits for allegedly 
late-paid and allegedly unreasonably delayed payment of permanent disability 
benefits. 
8. Whether claimant’s costs should be assessed against defendants and, if so, 
in what amount? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
This deputy, after listening to the testimony of claimant at hearing, after judging 
the credibility of the claimant, and after reading the evidence, the transcript, and the 
post-hearing briefs, makes the following findings of fact and conclusions of law: 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving the issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Mary Deng started working for Farmland Foods on March 29, 2016.   During her 
employment, Ms. Deng performed three different positions for Farmland Foods.  The 
initial position she performed was “cutting cheeks.”  The second position she performed 
was trimming fat in the belly and the third position was trimming the liver.  These 
positions required repetitive use of claimant’s upper extremities, including some work at 
approximately shoulder level. 
Before commencing her employment with Farmland Foods, Ms. Deng had no 
prior symptoms or treatment of her left shoulder or surrounding structures.  
Unfortunately, on August 19, 2017, Ms. Deng developed symptoms in her left shoulder 
area and went to the plant nurse.  The company ultimately referred Ms. Deng for 
medical evaluation by Todd A. Woollen, M.D. 
Dr. Woollen evaluated claimant on November 22, 2017.  He obtained an MRI of 
claimant’s left shoulder and referred claimant for orthopaedic evaluation performed by 
Douglas F. Bolda, M.D.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 4)  Dr. Bolda evaluated claimant on November 
28, 2017.  He indicated the left shoulder MRI suggested a potential SLAP tear but noted 
claimant was not an overhead throwing athlete and she did not have a history of trauma 
to the left shoulder.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 8) 
By January 9, 2018, Dr. Bolda indicated claimant’s left shoulder etiology is 
uncertain.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 11)  On February 27, 2018, Dr. Bolda noted comments from 
claimant’s physical therapist that claimant was unable to replicate home exercises and 
the therapist did not think claimant was performing those home exercises.  Dr. Bolda 
also noted the therapist’s report of poor effort by claimant, rather than true shoulder 
weakness.  In his February 27, 2018 office note, Dr. Bolda indicated he suspected 
malingering by claimant because she exhibited non-physiologic symptoms.  Dr. Bolda 
recommended a functional capacity evaluation (FCE).  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 13)  The FCE 
occurred on March 7, 2018.  (Joint Ex. 4) 
Claimant returned for further evaluation with Dr. Bolda on April 6, 2018.  Dr. 
Bolda noted claimant had submitted to a FCE, which was determined to be valid by the 
therapist.  The FCE recommended claimant lift and carry no more than 40 pounds on an 
occasional basis.  However, Dr. Bolda recommended slightly more conservative 
permanent restrictions.  Specifically, Dr. Bolda recommended claimant not lift more than 
30 pounds on an occasional basis.  He recommended claimant limit lifting overhead to 
20 pounds or less.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 18) 
Unfortunately, claimant’s left shoulder symptoms continued.  On June 16, 2018, 
Dr. Bolda recommended claimant be evaluated by an orthopaedic surgeon that 
specialized in treatment of the shoulder.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 22)  Defendants honored the 
referral and scheduled claimant to be evaluated by Timothy R. Vinyard, M.D.  (Joint Ex. 
5) 
 
 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Vinyard evaluated claimant on July 30, 2018.  He assessed claimant with 
neck pain and left arm pain.  Dr. Vinyard noted pain in the left trapezius.  Dr. Vinyard 
opined, “I do not believe that her pain is related to the shoulder, especially since 
cortisone injections to the shoulder in the past did not improve her pain.  I do not have 
any surgical intervention options offer her at this time.”  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 59)  Dr. Vinyard 
concurred with the restrictions recommended in the FCE.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 61) 
Ms. Deng returned to Dr. Bolda, who rendered a permanent impairment rating on 
February 23, 2019.  Dr. Bolda opined claimant had symmetric ranges of motions in her 
right and left shoulders.  Therefore, Dr. Bolda opined claimant did not qualify for a 
permanent impairment of the left shoulder.  However, Dr. Bolda did assign a two 
percent permanent impairment rating as a result of claimant’s ongoing pain.  (Joint 
Exhibit 1, pp. 32G-32H) 
Claimant obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by Sunil 
Bansal, M.D. on September 27, 2018.  Dr. Bansal opined claimant sustained a superior 
anterior to posterior labral tear (SLAP tear) in her left shoulder.  He also opined claimant 
had rotator cuff tendonitis.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 78)  He opined claimant achieved maximum 
medical improvement on August 4, 2018 and assigned an eight percent permanent 
impairment of the left upper extremity as a result of the work injury.  Dr. Bansal also 
recommended permanent work restrictions.  The restrictions included no lifting greater 
than 10 pounds occasionally with the left arm, no lifting more than 30 pounds with both 
arms, and no over the shoulder lifting with the left arm.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 80) 
Claimant’s counsel inquired and requested clarification from Dr. Bansal after 
issuance of his IME report.  On January 4, 2019, Dr. Bansal issued a supplemental 
report.  In the report, Dr. Bansal opined: 
Ms. Deng has two anatomically distinct shoulder area injuries.  One is to 
her labrum that is not located proximal to the glenohumeral joint space 
and the second is to her infraspinatus that is proximal to the glenohumeral 
joint space…. [t]he infraspinatus attaches to the scapula.  Moreover, this 
anatomical attachment at least partially explains the scapular area pain as 
noted by her treating physician, Dr. Boda [sic]. 
(Joint Ex. 6, p. 87) 
Defendants took the deposition of Ms. Deng’s treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. 
Bolda, on February 18, 2019.  Dr. Bolda provided further insight into the issue of the 
medical definition of the shoulder joint and the areas where claimant’s injuries were 
located.  Dr. Bolda testified, the classic definition of the shoulder involved the ball and 
socket joint, known as the glenohumeral joint.  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 26)  He conceded 
one could define the shoulder to include the muscles, tendons and ligaments 
surrounding the glenohumeral joint.  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 26) 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Dr. Bolda testified the clavicle is part of the shoulder, especially the distal end 
that meets the acromion.  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 28)  However, he also explained all of 
the rotator cuff muscles originate proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  He also explained 
the muscle belly of the infraspinatus, the affected area in claimant’s case, is proximal to 
the glenohumeral joint for the most part.   
Dr. Bolda conceded the tendons of the rotator cuff were distal to the 
glenohumeral joint, however.  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 27)  Dr. Bolda also testified the 
pain claimant describes in her trapezius is proximal to the glenohumeral joint line.  
(Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 55)  However, he also testified tendinitis (claimant’s diagnosis) is 
usually close to the insertion part of the tendon and distal to the glenohumeral joint.  
(Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 56) 
Claimant submitted a rebuttal report from Dr. Bansal dated March 1, 2019.  In the 
report, Dr. Bansal opines: 
   Interestingly, Dr. Bolda chooses to rate pain for the impairment rating.  
While I agree that Ms. Deng does have pain, in addition she has a 
functional loss of range of motion.  A point of discrepancy between Dr. 
Bolda’s shoulder ranges of motion compared to my measurements is that 
Dr. Bolda used passive range of motion measurements instead of active 
range of motion measurements as noted in his deposition.  Per Section 
16.4a of the AMA Guides of [sic] Evaluation for Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, ‘measurements of active motion take precedence’ (over 
passive). 
(Joint Ex. 6, p. 87B) 
In this case, the undersigned finds claimant experiences pain and symptoms due 
to injury to part of her anatomy that are proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  For 
instance, she sustained injury to the infraspinatus muscle belly and has residual 
symptoms in the trapezius, both of which are proximal to the glenohumeral joint 
according to Dr. Bansal and Dr. Bolda.  However, claimant sustained potential injury to 
the labrum located within the glenohumeral joint.  This deputy finds claimant also 
sustained injury proximal to that joint space. 
Turning to the extent of the injury, the undersigned finds the permanent 
impairment rating offered by Dr. Bansal to be most convincing and accurate.  Dr. Bolda 
is the treating surgeon.  He has excellent credentials and had numerous opportunities to 
evaluate claimant.  Often, this will make a treating surgeon’s opinions most convincing.   
However, in this case, Dr. Bolda utilized passive range of motion measurements 
to render his permanent impairment rating.  Dr. Bansal credibly and convincingly 
explained the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
require the use of active range of motion measurements to calculate permanent  
 
 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
impairment of the shoulder and surrounding structures.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 87B)  In this 
case, Dr. Bansal utilized active range of motion measurements and more accurately 
calculated the permanent impairment under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.   
Dr. Bansal opined claimant sustained an eight percent permanent impairment of 
the left upper extremity.  He converted the impairment rating and opined claimant 
sustained a five percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the 
work injury.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 79)  This deputy accepts Dr. Bansal’s impairment ratings 
and finds claimant proved she sustained a five percent permanent functional impairment 
of the whole person as a result of the August 19, 2017 work injury.  The undersigned 
further accepts Dr. Bansal’s opinion; claimant achieved maximum medical 
improvement.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 79)  However, this deputy notes Dr. Bansal indicated the 
last treatment with Dr. Bolda was August 4, 2018.  Instead, it appears Dr. Bolda issued 
permanent restrictions on September 4, 2018.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 25)  The undersigned 
finds claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on September 4, 2018 and her 
permanent impairment could be determined at that time. 
Ms. Deng also alleged a penalty benefit claim, asserting defendants 
unreasonably delayed or denied her weekly benefits.  Claimant contends permanent 
partial disability benefits were not issued by defendants after September 4, 2018.   
Claimant asked, through counsel, on September 17, 2018 why permanent partial 
disability benefits were not being paid by defendants.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 10)  After an 
exchange of communications between counsel, defendants agreed to advance ten 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, which they asserted was equivalent to 
two percent of the whole person.  However, defendants did not issue the permanent 
disability estimate payment until October 22, 2018.  This represents a delay in benefits.  
This deputy finds claimant has proven a delay or denial of weekly benefits after the 
September 3, 2018 maximum medical improvement date. 
It is noted there is a dispute about the proper date for maximum medical 
improvement.  Yet, by September 4, 2018, claimant had attended a FCE and the 
treating orthopaedic surgeon imposed permanent restrictions.  On September 19, 2018, 
defense counsel indicated a recommendation would be made for payment of permanent 
partial disability benefits.  Yet, no benefits were paid until over a month later.  
Defendants do not offer a reasonable excuse for the delay of more than a month of late 
benefits.   
Claimant also contends penalty benefits should be paid because she went and 
obtained an independent medical evaluation on November 12, 2018.  Dr. Bansal offered 
a permanent impairment that was ultimately accepted in this decision.  At the time Dr. 
Bansal’s impairment rating was issued, defendants had no competing impairment 
rating.  Therefore, claimant asserts there was not a reasonable basis for further delay or 
denial.  A penalty on a five percent whole person impairment rating should be awarded. 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
Defendants did obtain a permanent impairment rating from Dr. Bolda in February 
2019.  However, defendants offered no reasonable explanation for not obtaining a 
permanent impairment between September 2018 and February 2019.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND RATIONALE 
The first issue for determination is the matter of whether claimant’s injury is 
limited to the left shoulder and should be compensated as a scheduled member injury 
pursuant to Iowa Codes section 85.34(2)(n) (2017) or whether the injury extends into 
the body as a whole and should be compensated pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) (2017). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, there is no real dispute about whether the injury occurred.  Rather, 
the parties dispute whether the injury is limited to the left shoulder as a scheduled 
member injury or extends beyond the left shoulder into the body as a whole as an 
unscheduled injury.  Claimant contends her injury involves the left shoulder, which she 
asserts should be defined as the glenohumeral joint.  However, claimant also contends 
the injury extends proximal to the glenohumeral joint and, thus, includes an injury to 
unscheduled body parts.  Claimant contends the injury should be compensated as an 
unscheduled injury pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Defendants assert the injury involves structures of the body, which have 
traditionally been considered to be part of the shoulder.  For instance, defendants urge 
any injury to the rotator cuff should be considered to be part of the shoulder and point 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
out that prior case law from this agency has referred to rotator cuff injuries as injuries to 
the shoulder.  Indeed, this agency and the Iowa Supreme Court have previously 
indicated an injury to structures surrounding the glenohumeral joint constitute an injury 
to the shoulder and are compensable as an unscheduled injury.  See Alm v. Morris 
Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 N.W.2d 161 (1949); Nazarenus v. Oscar Mayer & 
Co., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 281 (App. 1982).  Defendants contend that 
similar injuries should still be considered injuries to the “shoulder” and compensated as 
a scheduled injury pursuant to the statutory change at Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
Claimant responds that Iowa’s workers’ compensation statutes are supposed to 
be interpreted liberally in favor of the injured worker.  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 14 (Iowa 1993); Beier Glass Co. v. Brundidge, 329 N.W.2d 280, 283 (Iowa 
1983).  Therefore, claimant contends any ambiguity in the law should be interpreted in 
favor of the claimant and result in the shoulder being defined under the statute as only 
the glenohumeral joint. 
Pursuant to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated for a loss or a loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2) (a)-(u) (2017) or for a loss of earning capacity under section 
85.34(2)(v) (2017).  The extent of scheduled member benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is 
“limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993).  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a)-(t) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
The Iowa Legislature modified Iowa Code section 85.34 in 2017.  Subsection 
85.34(2) (On) [sic] was added.  The subsection is now renumbered to 85.34(2)(n) 
(2018).   It reads: 
For the loss of a shoulder, weekly compensation is paid based on four 
hundred weeks. 
The Iowa Legislature also added Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w).  It provides the 
manner for determining functional disability or loss of percentage of permanent 
impairment.  The subsection provides:   
w.  In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “t”, or paragraph “u’ when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American Medical 
Association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “t”, or paragraph “u” when determining 
functional impairment and not loss of earning capacity. 
With respect to case law regarding the new shoulder statute, there has been 
minimal interpretations at the administrative level.  In Agee v. EFCO, Corp. Inc., File 
Nos. 5065304, 5064099, (Arb., October 22, 2019), a deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner determined a shoulder injury should be calculated according to the 
schedule.  The rationale behind the deputy’s decision was: 
Claimant urges a finding that the February 21, 2018, injury extends 
beyond the right shoulder.  No medical provider has rendered an opinion 
that the February 21, 2018 injury extends beyond the shoulder.  Surgery 
was performed on claimant’s right shoulder.  Both Dr. Galles and Dr. 
Bansal have analyzed the permanent impairment pursuant to the AMA 
Guides using impairment ratings for the shoulder.  It is found that claimant 
has proven a permanent injury to the right shoulder but has not 
demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that the February 21, 
2018 injury extends beyond the right shoulder. 
Agee at page 7. 
Later in the same arbitration decision, the deputy expounded: 
The Iowa legislature enacted significant amendments to the Iowa workers’ 
compensation laws, which took effect in July 2017.  As part of those 
amendments, the legislature specified that injuries to the shoulder should 
be compensated as scheduled member injury on a 400-week schedule.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2018).  It has long been understood that 
an injury must be compensated as a scheduled injury if the legislature saw 
fit to list the injured body part in Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (a-(u).  
Williams v. Larson Construction Co., 255 Iowa 1149, 125 N.W. 248 
(1963).  Having found that claimant did not prove his February 21, 2018, 
injury extended beyond the right shoulder.  [sic] I conclude that the injury 
should be compensated as a scheduled member injury pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2018). 
Agee, at page 10.  (It is noted for the record, this case was not appealed.  It became 
final agency action.) 
In another arbitration decision, decided just days following Agee, a different 
deputy held there were no expert opinions to support a finding that a November 1, 2017 
work injury extended beyond the shoulder.  In Hospodarsky v. Quaker Oats Company, 
File No. 5061912, (Arb., October 30, 2019), the deputy concluded: 
The next question is the extent of disability.  Under the statutory change, 
shoulder injuries are considered to be functional rather than industrial 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
disabilities.  A shoulder injury is based on a four-hundred-week schedule.  
The evidence supports a finding of a shoulder injury rather than a whole 
body injury.  There are no expert opinions that support a finding that the 
November 1, 2017, injury extended beyond the shoulder.  Therefore, the 
determination of extent must be measured by examining the claimant’s 
functional loss. 
Hospodarsky at page 7. 
The same deputy continued on page 9 of her decision in Hospodarsky: 
While the Supreme Court has not examined the current statute, based on 
past precedent, the legislature’s designation of the shoulder injury as a 
functional loss is within their power.  Therefore, claimant’s shoulder loss 
will be examined as a functional loss.  Dr. Hart assigned a 4 percent 
impairment of the right upper extremity while Dr. Mathew assessed a 20 
percent upper extremity impairment.  Claimant testified that she works the 
same job and has no formal accommodations or restrictions; however, she 
has made personal modifications due to weakness in her shoulder.  Dr. 
Mathew is a physical and rehabilitation expert.  His restrictions were 
based on his opinions regarding claimant’s ability to function on a day-to-
day basis.  Because of his expertise, his opinion regarding claimant’s 
functional use of her shoulder is given more weight.  Based on the 
foregoing expert opinions and claimant’s own testimony, it is determined 
she has sustained a 20 percent functional impairment of her left shoulder 
arising out of the work injury. 
Hospodarsky at page 9.  (It is noted for the record, this case was not appealed, and 
became final agency action.) 
In both of these decisions, the parties did not present specific evidence as to the 
anatomical structure or definition of the shoulder.  On the other hand, the undersigned 
issued a decision in a factually similar case in Chavez v. MS Technology, L.L.C., File 
No. 5066270 (Arbitration February 5, 2020).  In Chavez, the parties made specific 
arguments about the anatomical structures and medical definition of the shoulder.  A 
physician in the Chavez case provide specific medical opinions delineating the 
structures in and around the shoulder joint.  In that case, the physician explained that 
rotator cuff tendons attach to the scapula and, at least some of them, are proximal to 
the glenohumeral joint.  Accordingly, the undersigned determined that the injury 
involved structures proximal to the glenohumeral joint, resulting in an injury to the body 
as a whole.  Id. 
The present case is more closely aligned with Chavez than with either Agee or 
Hospodarsky.  Claimant’s injuries in this case involve “two anatomically distinct shoulder 
area injuries.  One is to her labrum that is not located proximal to the glenohumeral joint 
space and the second is to her infraspinatus that is proximal to the glenohumeral joint 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
space.”  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 87)  Having accepted this medical explanation as fact, this 
deputy concludes claimant has established she sustained an injury to the left shoulder 
and an injury that extends beyond, or proximal, to the left shoulder.  Therefore, the 
undersigned concludes this injury is not limited to a scheduled member injury of the left 
shoulder but should be compensated as an unscheduled injury pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v). 
The salient issue to address is whether claimant is entitled to have her 
permanency benefits calculated by the industrial method or whether claimant is only 
entitled to have her permanency calculated by the functional impairment/loss method 
per the 2017 legislative changes to Iowa Code section 85.34 (2)(v) (2017).  The relevant 
portion of the subsection provides: 
v.  In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “t” hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred.  A determination of the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury.  If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee’s earning capacity.   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017). 
There is crucial language under the 2017 legislative changes to 85.34(2)(v) that 
involves industrial disability when an employee returns to work following an injury.  The 
language is whether the injured worker receives the same or greater salary, wages or 
earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury.  In this case, the parties 
stipulated, “If Claimant’s injury is to the ‘whole body’ no industrial loss is assessed at 
this time due to Claimant’s greater earnings.”  (Hearing Report Attachment)  
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant’s recovery is limited to an award of her functional 
impairment rating.   
However, the parties dispute whether the functional impairment rating should be 
awarded based upon an upper extremity impairment rating or should be converted to a 
“whole person” impairment rating before being awarded.  It is noted the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, have been adopted by 
administrative rule as applicable.  876 IAC 2.4.  The AMA Guides initially assign a 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
shoulder impairment rating to the upper extremity.  However, having found the injury 
includes structures proximal to the shoulder, or glenohumeral joint, this deputy 
concludes the impairment rating should be converted to the whole person before being 
awarded. 
Unscheduled injuries are compensated based upon a 500-week schedule.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v).  Having accepted Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating of 5 percent 
of the whole person, the undersigned concludes claimant is entitled to an award of 25 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits for her permanent functional impairment. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
The parties also dispute the proper commencement date for permanent partial 
disability benefits.  Claimant contends permanent partial disability benefits should 
commence on July 31, 2018.  Defendants contend the permanent partial disability 
benefits should commence on January 10, 2019.  This deputy accepted Dr. Bansal’s 
declaration of maximum medical improvement but found it occurred on September 4, 
2018. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2):  
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is 
medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury 
has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined by the use of the guides to the evaluation 
of permanent impairment, published by the American Medical Association, 
as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant 
to chapter 17A. 
Having accepted Dr. Bansal’s opinion maximum medical improvement was 
achieved and having found, it was achieved on September 4, 2018, it would be 
appropriate to rate claimant impairment at that time.  Therefore, the undersigned 
concludes permanent disability benefits should begin as of September 5, 2018.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2). 
Accrued benefits shall be paid in a lump sum, together with interest, as allowed 
by law.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 
1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 
5054686 (App. April 24, 2018). 
 
Ms. Deng asserts a claim for penalty benefits.  She asserts the defendants 
unreasonably denied weekly benefits.  Defendants deny this claim, asserting they had a 
reasonable basis for denial of benefits. 
 
 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that 
were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse. 
b. 
The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award 
benefits under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the 
following facts: 
(1) 
The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) 
The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 
1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 16 
 
 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
Weekly compensation payments are due at the end of the compensation week.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d 229, 235. 
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Davidson v. Bruce, 593 
N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999).  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 338 (Iowa 2008).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
Claimant proved a delay in payment of permanent partial disability benefits after 
September 4, 2018.  Defendants, a little over a month later, paid ten weeks of 
permanent disability benefits.  However, they again delayed benefits after receipt of Dr. 
Bansal’s impairment rating. 
Having found defendants did not demonstrate a contemporaneous and 
reasonable basis for delay in permanent disability benefits, the undersigned concludes 
claimant met her burden of proof and defendants failed to meet their burden of proof.  
Therefore, this deputy concludes penalty benefits, in some amount, are appropriate. 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases.  Id. at 237.  In this regard, the Commission 
is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed with a maximum 
penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits.  Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).   
In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 
the employee’s injury and wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996). 
In this case, the delays were not significant.  There is no evidence of a past 
record of penalties against these defendants.  This case involves one of the initial 
applications of the new 2017 statutory changes.  While the undersigned concludes a 
penalty is appropriate, this deputy concludes a penalty of $1,000.00 is sufficient to meet 
the purposes of Iowa Code section 86.13 under this set of facts. 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 17 
 
 
The final issue for determination is the matter of costs.  Iowa Code section 86.40 
states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall 
be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010).  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009). 
Claimant requests costs for her filing fee totaling $100.00 and for her service fee 
totaling $6.91.  Both are reasonable and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant 
also seeks assessment of Dr. Bansal’s supplemental report.  Dr. Bansal’s supplemental 

DENG V. FARMLAND FOODS, INC. 
Page 18 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
report charges were $356.00.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 87C)  This deputy finds the report fee to 
be reasonable and assess that as a cost against defendants.  Iowa Code section 86.40. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant shall pay unto claimant twenty-five weeks (25) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing from September 5, 2018 and payable at the rate 
of six hundred twenty-eight and 46/100 dollars ($628.46). 
Defendants shall pay interest on all past due weekly benefits as required by Iowa 
Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all benefits paid prior to hearing 
against the benefits awarded pursuant to the parties’ stipulation on the hearing report. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s medical mileage in the amount of one 
hundred seventy-one and 20/100 dollars ($171.20). 
Defendants shall pay claimant one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in penalty 
benefits. 
Defendants shall pay claimant’s costs as detailed in the body of the decision and 
totaling four hundred sixty-two and 91/100 dollars ($462.91). 
Defendants shall file all reports as required by law. 
Signed and filed this _25th __ day of February, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
       
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Jennifer Zupp (via WCES) 
Eric Lanham (via WCES) 
MICHELLE A. MCGOVERN 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
