Case Number: 21012709.01
Case Title:  HANSON, RANDALL V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hanson Randall-21012709.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RANDALL HANSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 21012709.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
SECURITY, 
  : 
    
 
 
  :                   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                           
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ZURICH AMERICAN INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes: 1801; 1802; 1803; 1804; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
4100; 1700; 1701 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Randall Hanson, filed a petition for workers’ compensation benefits 
against Fortune Brands Home & Security, employer, and American Zurich Insurance 
Co, insurer. In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the 
Order of the Commissioner the hearing was held on December 15, 2023, via Zoom. The 
case was considered fully submitted on January 19, 2024, upon the simultaneous filing 
of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-13, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-11, Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-H, along with the testimony of the claimant. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits; 
 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent disability benefits, and, if so, the 
extent; 
 
3. If claimant is entitled to permanent disability benefits and is not found to be 
permanently and totally disabled, whether claimant is entitled to benefits 
pursuant to the odd lot doctrine;  
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-31  14:08:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 2 
 
4. The commencement date of permanent benefits;  
 
5. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit of the sick pay/disability income 
paid to claimant;  
 
6. Penalty. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The parties have stipulated that claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in 
the course of his employment on April 16, 2021. They further agree the injury was the 
cause of some temporary disability as well as the cause of a permanent disability. 
Defendants stipulate claimant was off work from May 7, 2021, up to January 29, 2023.  
The parties agree that if claimant is entitled to permanent disability benefits, these 
benefits are calculated as a nonscheduled injury.  
At the time of the injury, the claimant's gross earnings were $748.68 per week. 
The claimant was married and entitled to two exemptions. Based on the foregoing, the 
weekly benefit rate is $503.06. 
Defendants waive all affirmative defenses. Defendants also agree claimant is 
entitled to some reimbursement of the IME but assert that the amount is limited by Iowa 
Code section 85.  
Claimant agrees defendants have paid sick pay or disability income from June 5, 
2021, through December 3, 2021 in the amount of $18,119.13. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Randall Hanson was a 62-year-old person at the time of the hearing. At all 
relevant times hereto, he was a married person with two exemptions.  
He is a right-handed person.  He graduated from high school in 1979. After high 
school, he enrolled at a community college and received a diploma in auto mechanics in 
1982. In 1984, he returned to community college and achieved an associate degree in 
accounting. In 1989, he achieved a bachelor’s degree in accounting and management 
from Upper Iowa University.  
His prior work history includes an auto mechanic, portrait taker, and meat 
packing plant laborer. (See Defendants’ Exhibit F:46; testimony) In 1997, claimant 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 3 
 
obtained a position at defendant employer through a temporary agency and became a 
full-time employee of the defendant employer on or around September 1997 where he 
worked continuously until his termination. (See DE F:47; testimony)  
He has basic computer skills which include surfing the Internet, filling out forms, 
online banking, answering and receiving emails. He has poor typing skills. He does not 
use word processing or spreadsheet applications.  
Before his injury, he had no history of neck problems nor any treatment to his 
neck. Generally, his health was fair prior to the injury. He had some underlying health 
issues including type 2 diabetes, A-fib, and arthritis in the left elbow and knees.  
Prior to April 16, 2021, he had no work restrictions, nor was there any medical 
condition that prevented him from working or doing tasks at home. Claimant was placed 
on an unpaid leave of absence by defendant employer on May 6, 2021. On April 1, 
2022, claimant was notified by defendant employer that as of March 31, 2021 [sic], (it is 
likely the letter refers to 2022) that claimant had exhausted all leave of absence options 
and accommodation requests and was thus terminated. (Claimant’s Exhibit 3:64)  
Claimant had been granted FMLA from 6/5/21-8/27/21, non-FMLA leave from 
8/28/21-12/3/21 and then a new request to remain off work from 12/4/21-3/3/22. (CE 
3:64; DE G) Claimant was allowed to return to work without restrictions on August 1, 
2022. (CE 8:92) Claimant did not return to work and has not worked since his injury 
except for one day at Autozone.  
At the time of his injury, he was working for defendant employer as a builder. (CE  
5:69) His duties as a builder included the ability to assemble and/or build cabinets 
through the use of machines, equipment, material handling, among other tasks. (CE 
5:69) Physical requirements included being capable of manual labor, ability to operate 
large machinery, basic math, computer, reading and writing skills and ability to work 8-
hour shifts while standing. (DE B:6)  On or about April 16, 2021, claimant went to the 
dumpster to throw something away. There was an electric pallet jack near the dumpster. 
He tried to maneuver by it but tripped and started to fall. He reached out his arm to try to 
catch himself but was unsuccessful and ultimately fell to the ground, landing on his left 
side and jamming his right shoulder against either the pallet or pallet jack.  
He was unable to finish his shift and went home. At home, the pain subsided but 
when he returned to work the following day, he noticed pain in his right side. His right 
little finger and right side of his right hand was numb. He went to the in-house therapist 
on April 19, 2021, who documented that claimant was seen for wellness, pain and 
limited right shoulder movement along with pinky and right finger numbness. (DE A:5) 
Claimant was given restrictions of no overhead reaching and no lifting for up to two 
weeks. Id. Claimant continued to seek out treatment with the in-house nurse on April 26, 
27 and 29, 2021. Id.  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 4 
 
On May 7, 2021, claimant was seen by Jonathon Fields, M.D., at UnityPoint-
Allen Occupational Health Center for the bilateral hand and finger numbness. (Joint 
Exhibit 1:2) Dr. Fields marked this as non-work related and returned claimant to work on 
the same day with no restrictions. (JE 1:3) On May 11, 2021, the in-house medical 
record reads as follows: “Randy states that he went to doctor last Friday who reported 
that numbness in hands was non-work related and unsure of cause. States that his R 
shoulder is feeling better but the numbness has been constant.” (DE A:5) The last in-
house medical record is on May 13, 2021, and states “90% improvement noted in right 
shoulder; still numbness and tingling in right 4th and 5th digits.” Id.  
Claimant’s symptoms persisted and he took his complaints to his family practice 
doctor, Stanley Nickarz, M.D., who saw claimant on May 7, 2021. (JE 2:3) At this visit, 
he reported pain in the right side and numbness in the left ring and pinky finger.  
In the June 8, 2021, EMG report, Brian O’Shaughnessy, M.D., wrote that the 
severity of claimant’s nerve injury resulted in the dysfunction not well localized. (JE 
3:11) He was not able to localize slowing at the elbow so there was a consideration that 
the dysfunction at the wrist was from the ulnar nerve. Id. The moderate dysfunction at 
the median nerve motor and sensory fibers in the carpal tunnel bilaterally was less likely 
to be related to the symptoms of abnormalities in the fifth and ulnar aspect of the fourth 
digit of both hands. Id. There was no cervical radiculopathy found. Id. Dr. 
O’Shaughnessy believed that part of the severity of the ulnar nerve symptoms were 
likely due to some underlying neuropathy from claimant’s diabetes. (JE 3:11)  
After the June 8, 2021, EMG which showed bilateral ulnar neuropathy, claimant 
was scheduled for surgery by Thomas S. Gorsche, M.D. (JE 3:11-13; JE 4:14) Dr. 
Gorsche performed ulnar nerve release with submuscular transposition on claimant on 
July 19, 2021. (JE 4:22) This surgery did not relieve claimant’s symptoms.  
In a June 10, 2021, disability form filled out by Dr. Nickarz, the question of 
whether the medical condition was work related was answered “unknown.” (JE 2:5) The 
date of the injury was designated as April 15, 2021. (JE 2:6)  
On June 22, 2021, another disability form was filled out by Dr. Nickarz stating 
claimant’s diagnosis was ulnar nerve dysfunction, likely cubital tunnel syndrome. (JE 
2:7)   
At the August 12, 2021, postsurgical follow-up, Dr. Gorsche thought the pain 
might be stemming from the neck and sent claimant for an MRI of the cervical spine.  
(JE 4:18) The August 17, 2021, MRI showed severe central stenosis and cord 
compression at C3-C4 as well as severe central stenosis at C2-C3. (JE 6) Dr. Gorsche 
recommended surgery and referred claimant to Dr. Buchanan. (JE 4:20)  
He was seen by Dr. Buchanan on September 13, 2021, who referred claimant to 
the UIHC Department of Neurosurgery and Neurology given the complexity of 
claimant’s symptoms post ulnar nerve release. (JE 7:26)  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 5 
 
Claimant testified that he began to have weakness in his legs and felt like he was 
losing strength and balance. He was finding it difficult to walk.  
On September 29, 2021, claimant was deemed handicapped by his family 
practice provider Katie M. Bries, ARNP, due to the inability to walk without the use of an 
assistive device. (JE 8:28) The stated reason was osteoarthritis of the knees. Id. 
Claimant said at hearing that he was unaware the neck issues could cause instability 
and leg weakness. (Tr., p. 24) 
Claimant began physical therapy at the referral of Dr. Kettman in ARNP Bries’ 
office. (JE 10:73) At the initial evaluation on January 18, 2022, claimant reported 
bilateral hand numbness and instability in his legs. Id. The therapist noted that the goal 
for claimant was for him to be able to ambulate five to six minutes without rest. (JE 13, 
p. 91). 
On January 24, 2022, claimant was seen by Matthew Howard, M.D., who noted 
claimant was experiencing worsening balance issues and urinary urgency. Claimant 
was unable to walk without assistance and was in a wheelchair for this visit.  
On January 26, 2022, claimant underwent an evaluation by Chad Abernathey, 
M.D., for a fourth neurosurgical opinion. (JE 11:76) Dr. Abernathey agreed with the prior 
surgical opinions that due to claimant’s severe stenosis and degenerative changes, 
surgical decompression was warranted. (JE 11:77) Dr. Abernathey also concluded that 
claimant’s April 16, 2021, episode was a substantial contributing cause which 
accelerated claimant’s underlying asymptomatic condition. (JE 11:78) Dr. Abernathey 
also opined that since the patient’s symptoms were persistent since his injury, the 
condition would be permanent until surgically corrected. Id.  
At UIHC, Hiroyuki Oya, M.D. ordered a C-spine CT which showed multilevel 
degenerative changes causing severe bony spinal canal stenosis at C2-C4 and mild to 
moderate bony spinal canal stenosis at C6-C7. (JE 9:39) There was mild nonspecific 
cortical thickening and coarsening of the trabecular pattern involving the upper cervical 
spine between the C2 and C6 levels, most prominent at C2 and C3. (JE 3:39)  
At the January 24, 2022, follow up with Dr. Howard, it was noted that claimant 
had weak grip, loss of dexterity, worsening balance and urinary urgency. (JE 9:40) He 
did not have neck pain or radiculopathy. Id. His motor exam was normal except for 4/5 
wrist extension, 4/5 finger flexion, and 4/5 finger extension bilaterally with 4/5 wrist 
flexion on the left as well. Id. At the visit, claimant was in a wheelchair. Id.  Dr. Howard 
diagnosed claimant with cervical spondylosis with myelopathy and recommended 
surgery to prevent the progression of myelopathy. (JE 9:42) Dr. Howard explained that 
the surgery may not help with numbness or balance but was mostly preventative. Id.  
On February 24, 2022, claimant underwent a C2 through C7 laminoplasty for 
decompression of the cord performed by Dr. Oya. (JE 9:52-53) Following the surgery 
claimant reported neck pain. (See e.g. JE 9:57)  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 6 
 
At the April 18, 2022, visit with Dr. Howard claimant reported improvement. (JE 
9:62) The notes indicate that his symptoms had resolved and claimant clarified at 
hearing that the numbness in his hands went away and his grip and arm strength 
improved. (See JE 9:62) He went to physical therapy to work on his balance. (JE 13)  At 
the August 1, 2022, visit, he reported to Dr. Scott Seaman, a resident at UIHC, that his 
instability and ability to walk had improved but that he was still having difficulty walking 
which he attributed to his knees. (JE 9:63)  
On August 17, 2022, claimant was issued a work release by Dr. Seaman and he 
was cleared to return to work without restrictions. (JE 9:67)  
Around August 17, 2022, Dr. Oya signed an opinion letter agreeing that 
claimant’s work injury of April 19, 2019, more likely than not aggravated, lit up or 
accelerated claimant’s pre-existing cervical spine stenosis. (JE 9:68) Dr. Oya did not 
provide any opinion on permanency, impairment or restrictions as claimant was not yet 
at MMI. Id.  
On September 1, 2022, claimant was seen by ARNP Bries at his family practice 
clinic for a regular health check-up for his diabetes. (JE 8:29) During that visit, his neck 
presentation was normal and nontender, but he was prescribed diclofenac for his neck 
pain. (JE 8:30-31)  
His last medical visit was with Dr. Howard on January 30, 2023. (JE 9:70) 
Claimant reported some residual numbness as well as imbalance issues. Id. He walked 
with a cane but required a wheelchair for longer distances. Id. Because it had been one 
year since claimant’s surgery, Dr. Howard wrote, “this may be the extent of his recovery 
from spinal cord injury. Given his current neurological condition, I do not think he can go 
back to his past job, working on cabinets and standing all day.” (JE 9:72) On May 1, 
2023, Dr. Howard assigned claimant a 15 percent whole person impairment based on 
the cervical DRE chart Table 15-5. (See CE 1:30)  
On June 14, 2023, Dr. David Segal, a neurosurgeon, issued a report based on 
his evaluation of claimant on May 16, 2023. (CE 1:5) At the time of the examination, 
claimant reported pain in the posterior neck, bilateral hands, the entire right shoulder 
joint, the elbow, wrist and hand to pinky and half of the ring finger.  (CE 1:8)  The neck 
pain was 3 on a 10 scale, the right shoulder was 4 on a 10 scale, and the right elbow 
was 3 on a 10 scale.  Id.  Claimant also shared he had bladder urgency and 
incontinence, loss of balance, numbness and tingling in the right wrist, hand, and pinky 
and ring finger, as well as weakness in his bilateral grip and bilateral legs. Id. Claimant’s 
biggest limiting factor was his balance issues and problems with walking. Id.   
Claimant was tender to palpation at the neck along the surgical incision with 
some tenderness in the AC joint. (CE 1:13) He exhibited ulnar nerve sensory loss in 
both, reduced motor skills in the upper and lower extremities, worse on the right than 
the left, and an antalgic, shuffling gait. (CE 1:13)  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Segal opined that the records indicate that the cervical myelopathy began 
after the April 16, 2021, injury and progressed to the point where claimant’s basic 
function was compromised due to spinal cord dysfunction. (CE 1:16) The injury resulted 
in both cervical myelopathy as well as ulnar neuropathy. It was Dr. Segal’s opinion that 
these conditions should be treated separately for the purposes of rating. (CE 1:16)  
For the spinal cord, Dr. Segal noted that the injury likely bruised the spinal cord, 
causing it to swell, resulting in more compression and less room in the area of the 
severe stenosis. (CE 1:17) The longer the myelopathic spinal cord is compressed, the 
greater the chance of permanent damage. Id. Even though claimant did not have 
significant neck pain, claimant’s presentation of arm pain and balance dysfunction was 
not unusual. (CE 1:18)  
For the ulnar neuropathy, Dr. Segal wrote that claimant jamming his right arm 
against the pallet was sufficient to cause ulnar neuropathy on the right. (CE 1:18) When 
he landed on the left, he likely injured the left cubital tunnel as well. (CE 1:18) Dr. Segal 
also noted that even if claimant did not suffer traumatic ulnar neuropathy, his symptoms 
were likely generated by the need for surgery which did result in ulnar neuropathy. (CE 
1:18) Claimant’s medical records pertaining to his diabetes as well as his osteoarthritis 
in his knees were not part of Dr. Segal’s medical history. Claimant testified at hearing 
that these two issues were not discussed with Dr. Segal at the examination. (Tr., pp. 60-
61)  
Dr. Segal set claimant’s MMI date as of the last visit with Dr. Howard on January 
30, 2023. (CE 1:27) Claimant had plateaued at that time and claimant has had no 
further treatment nor is any treatment planned. Id.  
For the spinal cord injury, Dr. Segal assessed at 57 percent whole person 
impairment based on 9 percent for claimant’s condition of single level decompression 
with five levels of decompression with residual symptoms and an additional 5 percent 
for the 5 level surgery for a total of 14 percent; a 14 percent range of motion 
impairment; and 42 percent impairment for his gait impairment.  (CE 1:28)  
For the bilateral neuropathy, Dr. Segal assessed a 7 percent upper extremity 
impairment or 4 percent whole person impairment rating due to bilateral sensory loss 
measured by loss of grip strength. (CE 1:30) Motor weakness was not included in this 
rating as it was accounted for in the corticospinal tract rating. Id. 
Dr. Segal disagreed with the rating of Dr. Howard who placed claimant in the 
DRE Cervical Category III as Dr. Segal argued that DRE Cervical Category III is for 
single level cervical radiculopathy or fractures without residual symptoms. (CE 1:31)  
Dr. Segal recommended permanent work restrictions as follows:  
 Sitting:  45 minutes, then move, max 6 hours per day 
 Standing:  10 minutes with a cane, then sit down, max 2 hours per day 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 8 
 
 Walking:  5 minutes with a cane, then sit down, max 1 hour per day 
 Reaching Overhead:  No restrictions 
 Fine Motor:  Occasionally 
 Fine Motor, repetitive:  Never 
 Use of Vibratory Tools:  Never 
 Lifting/Carrying:  5-10 pounds in the left arm (balance is an issue, as he 
must use cane) 
 Pushing/Pulling:  20 pounds Occasionally (if he can use the cart as 
support) 
 Stairs:  Rarely 
 Kneeling:  Never 
 Crouching/Squatting:  Never 
 Ladders:  Never 
Note: 
Constant = 5.5 hours/day, >2/3 of the day 
Frequent = 2.5 – 5.5 hours/day, 1/3 – 2/3 of the day 
Occasionally = 0 – 2.5 hours/day, 0 – 1/3 of the day 
Rarely = 0 – 0.5 hours/day 
Dr. Segal also recommended evaluation or consideration for management of 
pain, residual right and left ulnar neuropathy by a specialist, for adjacent segment 
disease, and an aggressive inpatient rehab program. (CE 1:32)  
For his services, Dr. Segal charged $4,666.67 for the record review, face-to-face 
meeting with the claimant, and drafting of the impairment rating and report. (CE 11:126)  
Barbara Laughlin, M.A. conducted an employability assessment of claimant on 
November 7, 2023. (CE 2) Based on the opinions, impairments and restrictions set forth 
by Dr. Segal, Ms. Laughlin opined claimant sustained a 100 percent occupational loss 
of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations in the closest match occupations, good match 
occupations, and unskilled occupations post injury. (CE 2:57) It was also her opinion 
that based on all of the claimant’s factors including medically imposed limitations, age, 
and experience, claimant would not be able to obtain work of any quantity, quality or 
dependability. (CE 2:57) For her services, Ms. Laughlin charged $1,127.00. 
Claimant went on to apply for SSD which was granted with an onset date of May 
6, 2021.  
Currently, claimant needs a cane to walk or stand. After a few steps, he feels 
very unstable as if he is going to fall. He uses a wheelchair for any distance more than 
100 feet. He believes he could drive approximately an hour on his own.  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 9 
 
He tried to work for Autozone but could not last more than a single day. It was a 
supervisory job but he stood for long periods of time and could not climb a ladder to 
retrieve parts from shelves.  
He does not believe he can stand for more than five minutes before he becomes 
shaky and unstable. He continues to have issues with his hands including numbness 
and loss of grip strength. He experiences constant neck pain worsened by prolonged 
sitting. He has difficulty with household chores such as cooking and washing dishes. He 
testified that he does not believe he could return to any prior position nor did he feel like 
he could do accounting work.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
 The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
 The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 10 
 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
 A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
The first issue is what body parts were injured as a result of the April 19, 2021, 
fall. Dr. Fields, who saw claimant shortly after the fall, documented that he believed that 
the numbness in claimant’s hands was not work related. Dr. O’Shaughnessy, who 
authored the EMG report, was not able to localize symptoms at the elbow and believed 
some of claimant’s nerve damage was the result of his underlying diabetes related 
neuropathy. Dr. Nickarz, claimant’s primary care physician, referred claimant to Dr. 
Gorsche after the positive EMG results. Dr. Gorsche then performed ulnar nerve 
transposition believing that the ulnar nerve was the cause of the numbness and 
weakness in the fingers. When claimant’s condition did not improve, he was then 
referred to a neurosurgeon, Dr. Buchanan, who found the results puzzling and sent 
claimant to the UIHC. It was at the UIHC that Dr. Howard determined claimant was 
suffering cervical spondylosis with myelopathy due to compression. Dr. Oya, at UIHC, 
would go on to perform surgery as the longer the compression is in place, the more 
serious and long lasting the damage. The surgery resolved much of claimant’s hand 
problems, but he continued to have instability in his lower extremities. This outcome 
was anticipated by Dr. Howard who wrote that the surgery was mostly preventative.  
Dr. Segal opined that the ulnar neuropathy was part of the symptoms that 
resulted from the spinal cord damage. Dr. Fields was the only one to conclude that the 
ulnar neuropathy was not related to the work injury. Dr. Fields is not a neurosurgeon. 
Dr. O’Shaughnessy believed that some of the nerve damage was the result of the 
underlying diabetes; however, legal causation only requires the injury be a cause of the 
symptoms, not the only cause. 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 11 
 
Dr. Segal stated that claimant had symptoms, exam findings and diagnostic 
testing positive for ulnar neuropathy. This is consistent with the diagnoses made by Dr. 
O’Shaughnessy as well as Dr. Howard. Dr. Segal’s causation conclusions are also 
consistent with the mechanism of claimant’s injury—falling and jamming his right arm—
as well as the treatment provided to claimant. Therefore it is found that claimant 
sustained an injury of both cervical myelopathy and ulnar neuropathy as a result of a 
work injury.  
Claimant also maintains that his inability to stand is related to his work injuries. 
Defendants argue that claimant’s pre-existing conditions of diabetes and arthritis are the 
primary causes of claimant’s current condition. As stated earlier, Dr. O’Shaughnessy 
believed some of claimant’s nerve damage was the result of his underlying diabetes-
related neuropathy.  
Defendants argue that Dr. Segal’s opinion should be given less weight because 
he is not a treating physician but rather an expert retained by claimant. However, Dr. 
Segal’s position is consistent with the other medical providers. Dr. Abernathey, a doctor 
retained by defendants to provide a fourth opinion, Dr. Howard, the claimant’s treating 
physician, Dr. Oya, the surgeon, and Dr. Segal opined claimant suffered nerve 
compression in his neck as a result of the April 19, 2021, fall which necessitated surgery 
and that the nerve compression lit up or aggravated claimant’s pre-existing conditions. 
While claimant did have pre-existing conditions including severe osteoarthritis, he was 
able to do his job with no restrictions and had no significant medical care leading up to 
the date of the fall.  
On January 20, 2023, Dr. Howard opined that claimant could not return to his 
past job working on cabinets and standing all day. This is consistent with Dr. Segal’s 
opinion regarding claimant’s inability to stand. Dr. Howard’s statements were issued on 
a day when Dr. Howard observed claimant walking with a cane as well as claimant’s 
need for a wheelchair for long distances. There was no notation in the record that these 
assistive devices were unnecessary. Rather, Dr. Howard went on to state that it was 
likely claimant’s recovery from the surgery had plateaued.  
There are two discordant notes in the medical records. The first is the work 
release without restrictions issued by Dr. Seaman at UIHC on August 17, 2022. Dr. 
Seaman saw claimant on August 1, 2022, where claimant shared that his instability and 
ability to walk had improved but he was still having difficulty walking which he attributed 
to his knees. Claimant is not a medical doctor. What he believed to be the medical 
cause of his symptoms weighs little compared to the opinions of his treating surgeons 
and other experts. Around August 17, 2022, Dr. Oya opined that the claimant’s work 
injury aggravated claimant’s pre-existing cervical spine condition and that claimant’s 
neck surgery was to prevent further damage. Dr. Howard warned claimant prior to the 
surgery that the hand numbness and instability might not be resolved by the surgery. At 
his January 20, 2023, visit with Dr. Howard, Dr. Howard opined that claimant’s physical 
condition was likely as good as it would get and that “given his current neurological 
condition” claimant would not be able to do his past job. Dr. Howard did not state that 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 12 
 
the claimant’s inability to stand all day was related to osteoarthritis, but rather claimant’s 
neck injury.  
The second issue is that of Dr. Howard’s May 1, 2023, opinion where he 
assigned only a 15 percent impairment of the whole person based solely on the neck 
condition using the DRE rating in Table 15-5. There is no explanation for this as there is 
no opinion report by Dr. Howard in evidence. The only evidence of Dr. Howard’s rating 
is in the report of Dr. Segal.  
Dr. Segal used the ROM rating. (See CE 1:28) Figure 15-4 presents a decision 
tree when evaluating impairment for the spine. (See AMA Guides, 5th Ed, p. 380) If an 
individual has a multi-level injury, the ROM method should be used to evaluate 
impairment. Id. On February 24, 2022, claimant underwent a C2 through C7 
laminoplasty for decompression of the cord performed by Dr. Oya. Therefore, the 
appropriate method for evaluating claimant is the ROM method and not the DRE 
method that Dr. Howard used. Dr. Segal’s impairment rating used the ROM method and 
therefore, it is Dr. Segal’s ROM method that is adopted herein.  
Further, as it was previously determined claimant sustained an ulnar nerve injury 
in addition to the cervical myelopathy, Dr. Howard’s omission for a rating of the upper 
extremities is another reason that Dr. Segal’s opinion is given greater weight. Finally, 
Dr. Segal’s rating is more consistent with Dr. Howard’s objective findings and opinions 
at the January 20, 2023 visit.  
Dr. Segal’s rating is adopted in full as it fairly and accurately reflects claimant’s 
current symptoms and restrictions related to the April 19, 2021, fall.  
Defendants are correct that Dr. Segal places a great deal of emphasis on 
claimant’s minimal ambulation and use of assistive devices, but this is not inconsistent 
with Dr. Howard’s opinion of January 20, 2023. While claimant does have osteoarthritis, 
he was not under any doctor’s care of his knees and not working under any restrictions 
prior to the work injury. There is no medical doctor that opined claimant’s osteoarthritis 
in the knees is the cause of his current inability to stand and walk and his need for 
assistive devices. The unrebutted expert opinion on the issue of claimant’s limited 
ambulation and need for assistive devices is Dr. Segal’s who relates it to claimant’s 
neck injury.  
ARNP Bries did fill out a handicapped form citing claimant’s knees as the reason 
for the need for the handicapped designation, but this form was filled out before it was 
learned that claimant’s balance issues and instability were caused by nerve damage in 
his neck.  
Claimant did acknowledge he had falls at work prior to his work injury, but there 
is no testimony that those falls were caused by claimant’s knee condition or some other 
hazard at work or home.  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 13 
 
Claimant is currently under active management for arthritis and diabetes; 
however, even though claimant has those underlying conditions, those conditions were 
not preventing him from working, walking or standing. Claimant has been evaluated or 
treated by five neurosurgeons and none attribute claimant’s conditions to diabetic 
neuropathy. The fact that Dr. Segal did not mention the diabetes does not mean he was 
unaware of the claimant’ condition and, in fact, the summary of Dr. O’Shaughnessy’s 
6/8/21 treatment record notes claimant has a history of diabetes. None of the 
neurosurgeons felt that claimant’s diabetic condition was important enough to include it 
in a differential diagnosis.  
Thus claimant’s inability to stand for long periods of time is also found to be 
related to his work injury. 
 Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
Claimant was a 62-year-old person at the time of the hearing. While he once 
obtained a bachelor’s degree in accounting nearly 35 years ago, his most relevant work 
history is as a meat packing plant laborer and a cabinet builder. He has worked for 
defendant as a cabinet builder since 1997, or around twenty-five years. His work 
restrictions are such that he cannot stand, sit or walk for any significant period of time. 
He has difficulty using his hands due to numbness and weakness. Vocational expert 
Barbara Laughlin opined claimant would not be employable. Ms. Laughlin does base 
her conclusions on the restrictions and ratings put forth by Dr. Segal, but as Dr. Segal’s 
opinions are adopted herein, Ms. Laughlin’s opinions are not based on invalid 
conclusions.  
Even if it was found that the ulnar neuropathy was not related to the work injury, 
claimant’s inability to sit, stand or walk would prevent him from returning to work in the 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 14 
 
labor market. His accounting degree, if more recent, might have allowed claimant to 
transition into a sedentary office position, but his inability to sit, stand or walk would still 
prevent him from being able to do all the essential tasks of an office job. Claimant has 
not seriously looked for work, and in other cases that factor would be weighed more 
heavily, but in a person who has difficulty sitting, standing or walking more than five 
minutes at a time, the lack of motivation to look for new work is understandable. A job 
search is not a prerequisite to a finding of permanent total disability if such a search 
would be futile. Lulic v. Waterloo CSD, File No. 5057597 (App. May 23, 2019). 
Claimant also attempted to return to work and obtained a supervisory position at 
Autozone. He was not able to complete more than a day of work. Based on the 
foregoing, it is determined claimant is permanently and totally disabled.  
The commencement date for permanent total disability benefits shall be in effect 
at the time of the injury. Iowa Code section 85.34(3)(a); Sandhu v. Nordstrom, Inc., File 
No. 5046628 (App. Jan. 24, 2019). No healing period benefits are considered since 
claimant is found to be permanently and totally disabled.  
However, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(3)(d), an employee is not entitled 
to compensation for PTD while the employee is receiving unemployment compensation. 
Defendants assert claimant received unemployment benefits until June 4, 2021. (DE 
G:59) Therefore, the commencement date of permanent total benefits begins on April 
19, 2021, and continues until May 7, 2021, and is suspended until June 5, 2021, and 
continuing forward on that date. 
CREDIT 
Defendants assert they are entitled to a credit for the short-term disability 
benefits paid to claimant. This issue was disputed by claimant. §85.38 benefits paid to 
the claimant under the short-term disability policy must be taken into account as the 
“obvious purpose” of Iowa Code section 85.38(2) is to avoid duplication of payments by 
an employer. Defendants paid disability benefits to claimant from June 5, 2021, to 
December 3, 2021, pursuant to a short-term disability policy. (Ex G:52, 59) The policy 
indicates that the employee’s contribution was 100 percent. Id.  
 An employer seeking a credit for short-term disability benefits pursuant to 
section 85.38(2) bears the burden of establishing the following: 
1) that benefits were received under a group plan,  
2) contribution to that plan was made by the employer,  
3) the benefits should not have been paid if workers’ compensation benefits 
were received, and  
4) the amounts to be credited or deducted from payments made or owed under 
Chapter 85.  
Miller v. Maintainer Corp. of Iowa, Inc., File No. 5020192 (App. Dec. 2, 2009).  

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 15 
 
Per exhibit G, claimant was paid short-term disability, although the amount of the 
benefits was not clear. The plan was provided by the employer; however, there is no 
evidence regarding whether the contribution to that plan was made by the employer. 
The work code indicated that the plan was funded by the employee. (DE G:64) It was 
also not clear from the documents in Exhibit G whether the benefits would not have 
been paid if workers’ compensation was received. Finally, there is no indication of how 
much claimant received in short-term disability; only that the claimant’s salary at the 
time was $714.00. (DE G:52) Based on the foregoing, defendants did not meet their 
burden to establish entitlement to a credit.   
MEDICAL 
Defendants denied that the ulnar neuropathy is related to the work injury and 
therefore there is no authorization defense for those medical bills.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Given that it was found that claimant sustained both ulnar neuropathy as well as 
cervical myelopathy as a result of the work injury, the requested medical bills in 
claimant’s exhibit 10 are ordered to be reimbursed by defendants.  
IME  
The Supreme Court published two opinions on the issue of IMEs: Sandlin v. Mid 
American Construction and Rife v. P.M. Lattner Manufacturing. In those decisions, the 
Iowa Supreme Court has determined that the report as well as the examination are all 
covered under Iowa Code section 85.39 so long as the fees are reasonable.“[T]he 
employee is entitled to the reasonable cost of the examination accompanying the 
physician’s determination of the impairment rating, not merely the component cost of 
the impairment rating itself.” Mid Am. Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 841 (Iowa 
2024). The Code “provides for reimbursement of the reasonable cost of the examination 
to determine the impairment rating, and the examination encompasses the records 
review, the physical examination and testing, and a written report.” Id. at 846; see also 
Iowa Code § 85.39(2). 
 The reasonableness of the fee for an IME “is to be based on the typical fee 
charged in the locale where the examination is performed.” Id. at 841. “Whether the fee 
is reasonable is a question of fact, and the commissioner’s finding of reasonableness is 
to be affirmed if supported by substantial evidence.” Id. at 841.   

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 16 
 
Dr. Segal’s report is 30 pages long. It contains an extensive review of claimant’s 
medical records, explanation of the injury process, detailed range of motion 
measurements, and impairment calculations. He identifies sixteen different steps in the 
creation of his report and evaluation of the claimant. (CE 1:34) He opined that his fee 
was reasonable based on his training, the time spent with the claimant, the time spent 
preparing the report, the extensive review of the medical records, the time spent by the 
staff to prepare the file, and the overall complexity of the case. There was no contrary 
evidence that the fee was not reasonable. It is found Dr. Segal’s fee is reasonable, and 
the entirety of the fee is deemed reimbursable by defendants pursuant to the holdings of 
the Iowa Supreme Court.  
PENALTY  
Claimant seeks an assessment of a penalty benefit.  
  
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 86.13 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 
N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  
 
Delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable investigation is 
not unreasonable.  Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 
(Iowa 1995).   
 
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  An issue of law is fairly debatable if 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 
(Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which 
would support a finding favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 
N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).  
 
An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).  
The employer’s failure to communicate the reason for the delay or denial to the 
employee contemporaneously with the delay or denial is not an independent ground for 
imposition of a penalty, however.  Keystone Nursing Care Center v. Craddock, 705 
N.W.2d 299 (Iowa 2005). 
 
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 17 
 
As of the date of the hearing, defendants paid weekly benefits for the periods of 
February 24, 2022, to November 2, 2022 in the amount of $18,119.13. (DE E:38) The 
first benefit check was paid on May 4, 2022, and represented the period between 
February 24, 2022, to May 4, 2022. (DE E:36) After the initial lump sum payment on 
May 4, 2022, another payment was not sent until May 31, 2022. (CE 7:73). Thereafter, 
weekly benefit payments were made up to September 7, 2022. (CE 7:73) Benefit 
payments ceased and then resumed on October 31, 2022. Id. Several catch-up 
payments were made representing the periods between September 1, 2022, through 
October 26, 2022. Id. Another payment on November 2, 2022, represented the period of 
October 27, 2022, through November 2, 2022. 
Thus, claimant has established that there was a delay in the payment of benefits 
for the benefits of February 24, 2022, to April 27, 2022, and then from September 8, 
2022, to October 26, 2022.  
On January 28, 2022, claimant’s counsel contacted defendants’ counsel via 
email requesting benefit payments due to the report of Dr. Abernathey. (CE 8:80-8:83) 
On March 17, 2022, defendants’ counsel relayed that “in light of the opinion of Dr. 
Abernathy [sic], my client will accept compensability of the claimed injury and assume 
care under Iowa Code sec. 85.27.” (CE 8:84) Dr. Abernathey’s opinion was issued on 
January 26, 2022 and received by defendants on January 28, 2022. Up until that time, 
defendants could be entitled to the fairly debatable defense, although Dr. Abernathey’s 
opinion was the fourth neurosurgeon opinion. However, by January 28, 2022, 
defendants’ fairly debatable argument loses substance. At that point, there were two 
neurosurgeons who agreed claimant was suffering a cervical compression injury as a 
result of his work fall on April 16, 2021, and no other doctors that disagreed with Dr. 
Howard or Dr. Abernathey. Yet, no acceptance of responsibility came until March and 
no payment until May. Even if defendants had a reasonable basis to deny the claim, this 
was not conveyed to claimant during the delay. Defendants assert that the ulnar 
neuropathy was in dispute and therefore the case was still fairly debatable; however, 
given Dr. Abernathey’s opinion that claimant was suffering a cervical condition and that 
cervical condition was the result of the work injury, the claim was no longer fairly 
debatable even with the earlier erroneous diagnosis of Dr. Fields.  
Defendants argue that there were complications of short-term disability and 
unemployment payments, but those issues were not laid out for claimant. No 
explanation was provided. The right to unemployment benefits ended in June 2021, six 
months prior to when Dr. Abernathey issued his causation opinion, and thus could not 
be considered part of claimant’s eligibility for temporary benefits in 2022.  Short-term 
disability payments also ceased at the end of 2021. Further, despite claimant 
undergoing a serious multi-level surgery to his neck, no permanency was considered 
and no investigation appears to have taken place other than the gathering of medical 
records and the exchange of emails with claimant’s counsel who was requesting 
payment of benefits but received none beyond November 2, 2022. Again, there was no 
communication with claimant as to why a permanency evaluation was not obtained.   

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 18 
 
On October 14, 2022, counsel for defendants sent an email to counsel for 
claimant informing claimant that benefits would be terminated based on the full-duty 
release by the UIHC dated August 1, 2022, and sent to claimant on August 24, 2022. 
(CE 8:91) No Auxier letter was sent to claimant via claimant’s counsel until November 1, 
2022. (CE 8:92) 
Claimant asserts that benefits were terminated without notice to claimant and 
while an Auxier letter was not sent in October, an email was sent which qualifies as 
communication under the statute. However, defendants have paid no other benefits 
since November 2, 2022, despite the promise to pay Auxier benefits and permanency. 
(Ex. 8:94). 
Based on the foregoing, claimant is entitled to a 40 percent penalty benefit for the 
late paid benefits from January 28, 2022, to April 27, 2022 (9 weeks), and for the late 
paid benefits from September 8, 2022, to October 26, 2022 (7 weeks), as those were 
tardy by approximately three months and seven weeks, respectively. Defendants 
acknowledged claimant was entitled to a 20 percent permanent impairment benefits and 
yet have still not paid. The amount of permanent benefits above 20 percent could be 
argued as fairly debatable. Claimant is entitled to a penalty benefit of 50 percent of 100 
weeks of unpaid permanent penalty benefits.  
COSTS  
Claimant seeks reimbursement for the filing fee of $103.00 and the vocational 
report of Ms. Laughlin in the amount of $1,127.00. The term “practitioner” is not 
preceded by the qualifier “medical” and thus the agency’s position has been that the 
reasonable costs of a vocational evaluation falls under 4.33 and can be assessed as a 
practitioner report cost. IAC 4.17. Reports are covered in IAC rule 876 4.33 wherein the 
claimant can request that costs be taxed by the deputy to a prevailing party. Expenses 
and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be 
paid to the witnesses, doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness 
is called or by whom the report is requested.  Rule IAC 876 4.33. As claimant has 
prevailed in this case and the report of Ms. Laughlin was beneficial and her fee 
reasonable, the cost of her report is assessed to the defendants in addition to the filing 
fee.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED:  
That defendants are to pay unto claimant permanent total disability benefits at a 
rate of five hundred three and 06/100 dollars ($503.06) commencing on April 19, 2021, 
to May 7, 2021, and recommencing on June 5, 2021, and continuing during the period 
of permanent total disability. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 

HANSON V. FORTUNE BRANDS HOME & SECURITY 
Page 19 
 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
That defendants shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33 
including the report of Barbara Laughlin and the transcript.  
That defendants shall reimburse claimant for the cost of the IME in full.  
That defendants shall pay a 40 percent penalty benefit for 16 weeks of late paid 
benefits and a 50 percent penalty benefit for 100 weeks of late paid benefits.   
 
Signed and filed this __31st __ day of May, 2024. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
Bryan Brooks (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
