Case Number: 5806495
Case Title:  SANDLIN, MARSHALL V. MID AMERICA CONSTRUCTION
Doc Type:    Decision - Supreme Court
Source:      Sandlin, Marshall-5806495.Supreme Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF IOWA 
 
No. 22–0471 
 
Submitted December 14, 2023—Filed February 9, 2024 
 
 
MID AMERICAN CONSTRUCTION LLC and GRINNELL MUTUAL, 
 
 
Resisters, 
 
vs. 
 
MARSHALL SANDLIN, 
 
 
Applicant. 
 
 
On review from the Iowa Court of Appeals. 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Scott D. Rosenberg, 
Judge. 
 
An employee seeks further review of court of appeals decision that limited 
his reimbursement for an independent medical examination under the 2017 
amendment to Iowa Code section 85.39(2). DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS 
AFFIRMED IN PART AND VACATED IN PART; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT 
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND REMANDED WITH INSTRUCTIONS. 
 
Waterman, J., delivered the opinion of the court, in which all justices 
joined. 
 
Stephen W. Spencer and Christopher S. Spencer of Peddicord 
Wharton, LLP, West Des Moines, for appellants. 
 
Zeke R. McCartney of Reyolds & Kenline, LLP, Dubuque, for appellee. 
 
 

 
2 
  
WATERMAN, Justice. 
In this appeal, we must determine whether the court of appeals correctly 
applied Iowa Code section 85.39, as amended in 2017, to limit an employee’s 
reimbursement for an independent medical examination (IME). The workers’ 
compensation commissioner awarded the full $2,020 charged by the physician, 
who opined that his own charge was reasonable. The district court affirmed, and 
we transferred the employer’s appeal to the court of appeals, which reduced the 
reimbursement to $500 based on its interpretation of the amendment as limiting 
reimbursement to the impairment rating alone without the accompanying 
examination. We granted the employee’s application for further review. 
On our review, we hold that the employee is entitled to the reasonable cost 
of the examination accompanying the physician’s determination of the 
impairment rating, not merely the component cost of the impairment rating 
itself. Under the 2017 amendment, reasonableness is to be based on the typical 
fee charged in the locale where the examination is performed. To determine the 
rating, the physician in this case examined and tested the claimant and reviewed 
records. Section 85.39, as amended, continues to allow reimbursement for the 
complete “examination” to ascertain the impairment rating, including these 
activities. The employee bears the burden to prove the reasonableness of the fee. 
Whether the fee is reasonable is a question of fact, and the commissioner’s 
finding of reasonableness is to be affirmed if supported by substantial evidence. 
Here, however, the commissioner failed to make a finding required under the 
2017 amendment as to the fee typically charged in that locale. Accordingly, we 
affirm in part and remand the case for the commissioner to conduct further 
fact-finding on that issue. 

 
3 
  
I. Background Facts and Proceedings. 
Marshall Sandlin, then age 42, began working at Mid American 
Construction LLC as a laborer in May 2017. On September 6, Sandlin was 
working in Dubuque on a two-story deck removing rotten boards. He was 
standing on a step ladder removing a trim board about ten feet off the ground 
when the ladder gave way. As he fell onto the concrete floor, his left foot caught 
on the ladder. Sandlin’s foot hurt, but he tried to “walk it off.” When he remained 
unable to put any weight on his foot without pain, he called his boss, who told 
him to come see him. His boss looked at Sandlin’s foot and told him to “go home 
and put ice on it.”  
Sandlin stayed home for a few days, but his pain persisted. His boss told 
him to “[j]ust give it more time [and] just stay off work.” Frustrated, Sandlin told 
his employer he needed to see a doctor. On Saturday, September 9, Sandlin, on 
his own initiative, saw Dr. Frederick Isaak at Medical Associates Clinic—his 
primary physician and the only clinic open that weekend. Dr. Isaak ordered 
X-rays that showed a possible fracture in Sandlin’s fifth metatarsal. Dr. Isaak 
advised him to keep his foot elevated, use ice, and take ibuprofen for pain.  
Dr. Isaak referred Sandlin to a podiatrist, Dr. Tracy Hughes, at Medical 
Associates Podiatry. Sandlin saw Dr. Hughes on September 13. She noted 
Sandlin’s continued reports of pain and ordered Sandlin to wear a boot and use 
crutches. Sandlin returned to see Dr. Hughes the next month. Dr. Hughes 
observed that Sandlin’s foot was improving and advised that he could return to 
work “full time without restrictions in 1 week.” 
On December 14, Sandlin underwent an IME by Dr. Erin Kennedy at 
Tri-State Occupational Health. The parties dispute how this IME was set. 
Sandlin later testified that Mid American’s insurance carrier, Grinnell Mutual, 
had its medical case manager schedule the examination and directed Sandlin to 

 
4 
  
see Dr. Kennedy; the insurer argues that Dr. Hughes referred Sandlin to 
Dr. Kennedy. Regardless, Dr. Kennedy performed the examination in under 
thirty minutes and determined that Sandlin had reached maximum medical 
improvement. She assigned Sandlin a 0% impairment rating. Dr. Kennedy did 
note, however, that Sandlin continued to experience minor symptoms resulting 
from the fracture. The examination fee totaled $174.25. Other records show 
Dr. Kennedy regularly performs examinations for employers’ insurers, including 
Grinnell Mutual. 
In June 2018, Sandlin’s counsel arranged for another IME by Dr. Mark 
Taylor at Medix Occupational Health Clinic in Cedar Rapids. Dr. Taylor spent 
more time examining Sandlin than Dr. Kennedy, spending about one hour with 
Sandlin. Unlike Dr. Kennedy, Dr. Taylor used instruments to test Sandlin’s 
range of motion in his foot and ankle. He also made Sandlin perform walking 
and stretching exercises to determine Sandlin’s discomfort in his foot, and he 
spent time reviewing Sandlin’s medical history and records. Dr. Taylor diagnosed 
Sandlin’s injury and assigned a 2% impairment rating to Sandlin’s left foot for 
his work injury. Dr. Taylor also prepared a report outlining his findings, 
concluding with the following statement on his fees: 
The fees for this examination are reasonable based upon my 
training and certification in performing such examinations as a 
Board Certified specialist in Occupational and Environmental 
Medicine, as well as certification as an Independent Medical 
Examiner by the American Board of Independent Medical 
Examiners[,] the time spent with the examinee obtaining the history 
and performing the examination, the time spent in preparing this 
report, [and] the time spent by my staff preparing the file for use in 
preparing this report.  
Dr. Taylor sent an invoice to Sandlin’s counsel for $2,020. The invoice provided 
the following fee breakdown: 
• IME Exam 1st Hour: $700  

 
5 
  
• IME Exam time greater than 1 hour: $209  
• IME Report 1st hour: $700 
• IME Report time greater than 1 hour: $411 
Neither the invoice nor Dr. Taylor’s report addressed the fees typically charged 
in the Cedar Rapids area for impairment ratings.  
Sandlin sought reimbursement from Grinnell Mutual under Iowa Code 
section 85.39 (2018). Grinnell Mutual responded that it “will not be paying out 
the 2% rating assessed by Dr. Taylor” and “will not be reimbursing [Sandlin] for 
the IME report.” Grinnell Mutual claimed that Sandlin was only “entitled to 
reimbursement of a reasonable fee for another impairment rating, not a full 
blown [IME].”  
Sandlin filed a petition for arbitration seeking compensation benefits and 
full reimbursement for Dr. Taylor’s examination. The parties stipulated that 
Sandlin “suffered an injury to his left foot which arose out of and in the course 
of employment on September 6, 2017.” But Mid American disputed whether 
Sandlin suffered a permanent disability, the extent of any disability, and his 
eligibility to get his IME expense reimbursed.  
A deputy workers’ compensation commissioner conducted an evidentiary 
hearing. Sandlin testified that he “has a dull, throbbing pain in the mid to side 
of [his] foot” and that he is unable to engage in hobbies “as much as he did 
before” the injury. The deputy found Sandlin’s testimony “believable.” Exhibits 
introduced into evidence included Dr. Hughes’s report, Dr. Taylor’s report and 
invoice for his IME, and the letter from Grinnell Mutual denying reimbursement. 
Mid American introduced Dr. Kennedy’s IME report and invoice as well as a 
separate document from Dr. Taylor’s office, Medix, entitled “Examination Fees 
7/1/2015–Present” setting forth the following fee schedule:   

 
6 
  
Independent Medical Exam 
Physician time billed at $95 per 
15-minute increment. 
$1400 Base Fee 
Rush IME Report 
Inside of 1-week from appt 
date/Inside of 3-weeks from appt 
date. 
$750/$600 
Impairment Rating/Restrictions 
Exam 
Includes cost for one body part. 
Additional $150 per addit body part. 
$500 Flat Fee 
Rush IR Report 
Inside of 3-weeks from appt date. 
$300 
File Review  
$95 per ¼ hour 
Phone Conference  
$95 per ¼ hour 
Letter Fee 
$95 per ¼ hour 
IME Cancel Fee 
Less than 2-weeks notice 
$500 
Impairment Rating Cancel Fee  
Less than 2-weeks notice 
$250 
IME No-Show Fee  
$750 
Impairment Rating No-Show Fee 
$300 
The deputy’s arbitration decision found Sandlin suffered a 2% impairment 
rating to his left leg and ruled that Sandlin qualified for reimbursement under 
Iowa Code section 85.39. The deputy ordered Mid American to reimburse 
Sandlin for his IME costs in the full amount of $2,020. The arbitration decision 
was silent as to the fee typically charged in Cedar Rapids for an IME. 
Mid American filed a motion for rehearing, arguing that it did not “retain” 
Dr. Kennedy to evaluate Sandlin’s impairment; therefore, he was ineligible for 
reimbursement for the IME by Dr. Taylor under Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
Mid American alternatively argued that it only owed the cost of Dr. Taylor’s 
impairment rating, not the rest of the examination charges, and that his charges 

 
7 
  
were unreasonable. Finally, Mid American requested modification of the deputy’s 
arbitration decision based on the parties’ stipulation that Sandlin had injured 
his foot, not his leg. The deputy modified the decision to refer to the foot. But the 
deputy disagreed with Mid American about the IME costs. The deputy 
determined that Sandlin “was directed to see Dr. Kennedy by the insurance 
carrier,” meaning that Mid American “retained” Dr. Kennedy. The deputy left the 
reimbursement award of $2,020 intact, without addressing what fees are 
typically charged in the Cedar Rapids area. 
Mid American appealed to the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner. The 
commissioner affirmed the deputy’s finding that Sandlin suffered a 2% 
impairment rating and affirmed the deputy’s award of the full $2,020 cost of 
Dr. Taylor’s IME. The commissioner found that Grinnell Mutual’s medical case 
manager sought out “the appointment with Dr. Kennedy for the purposes of 
obtaining an impairment rating” and concluded that Mid American thereby 
“retained” Dr. Kennedy. The commissioner also found the costs of the IME were 
reasonable. The commissioner placed little weight on the bill for Dr. Kennedy of 
$174.25 without any breakdown or explanation of the charges or any disclosure 
of a fee-reduction agreement with the insurer. The commissioner found 
Dr. Taylor’s explanation of the IME costs persuasive, however, and determined 
that Dr. Taylor’s bill was reasonable. The commissioner addressed the Medix fee 
schedule and stated that “[p]resumably, this would be a case in which the less 
expensive impairment rating/restrictions exam would be appropriate.” But the 
commissioner found that this “presumption” was “outweighed by Dr. Taylor’s 
statement that his fees . . . are reasonable.” The commissioner ordered 
Mid American to reimburse Sandlin $2,020—the full amount charged for the 
IME. The commissioner made no finding as to the amount typically charged in 
that locality. 

 
8 
  
Mid American filed this action for judicial review. The district court 
affirmed the commissioner’s findings, including the impairment finding and the 
IME reimbursement of $2,020. Specifically, the district court reasoned: 
Therefore, while the legislature amended the law so that a 
reasonableness determination must address impairment ratings, it 
did not go so far as grant reimbursement solely for impairment 
ratings. As Petitioners point out, IMEs can have components beyond 
impairment ratings. They may also have opinions on causation, 
permanent restrictions, additional treatment, and maximum 
medical improvement for example. . . . Additionally, the amendment 
added a point of reference for reasonability comparisons, which is 
“based on a typical fee charged by a medical provider in the local 
area where the examination is conducted.” Iowa Code § 89.39(2). 
The Commissioner applied facts to law when he determined that Dr. 
Kennedy’s fee breakdown is not an appropriate comparison to Dr. 
Taylor. He found that Petitioners did not indicate whether Dr. 
Kennedy had fee-reduction agreements in place, which resulted in 
an incomplete picture of her fees and thus not a proper point of 
comparison to Dr. Taylor. On the other hand, the Commissioner 
found Dr. Taylor’s fee statement reasonable, including the time 
spent on the report and time spent reviewing Sandlin’s records. The 
Commissioner committed no error of law when he found that Dr. 
Taylor’s full IME charge is allowable under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Likewise, the Commissioner’s findings of fact and application of law 
to facts are supported by substantial evidence and are not irrational. 
(Citations omitted.) 
Mid American appealed. Without challenging the 2% impairment rating, 
Mid American argued that “Sandlin was not entitled to reimbursement for the 
IME, and if he was, the amount was unreasonable.” Mid American reiterated that 
it did not retain Dr. Kennedy to perform an examination to determine an 
impairment rating under section 85.39(2), and so Sandlin was ineligible for 
reimbursement for another IME by his chosen physician. Alternatively, 
Mid American argued that even if Sandlin was entitled to reimbursement for 
Dr. Taylor’s IME expense, Mid American should only reimburse Sandlin the 
reasonable cost of the impairment rating itself, not any “additional costs to 
provide other opinions beyond impairment or even necessitate reviewing a great 

 
9 
  
deal of records.” Sandlin countered that Mid American’s insurer had scheduled 
the appointment with Dr. Kennedy and thereby “retained” her within the 
meaning of section 85.39(2). Sandlin also argued that section 85.39(2) requires 
reimbursement of the reasonable fee for the “examination,” not just the 
impairment rating, and that substantial evidence supported the commissioner’s 
finding that Dr. Taylor’s IME fee was reasonable.  
We transferred this case to the court of appeals. The court of appeals 
affirmed the district court’s conclusion that “substantial evidence support[ed] 
the commissioner’s determination that the employer and insurer, via the medical 
case manager, chose Dr. Kennedy to perform the examination.” But the court of 
appeals reversed on the reasonableness of the IME costs, finding that 
section 85.39(2) provides for the “reasonableness of a fee” to be “based on the 
typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating.” The 
court of appeals found that the 2017 amendment to section 85.39(2) “only allows 
for reimbursement of an examination based on the typical fee charged for an 
impairment rating, not the extent of information a full IME entails” and reduced 
the award to the $500 flat fee for an impairment rating.  
We granted Sandlin’s application for further review. 
II. Standard of Review. 
We review the commissioner’s “legal interpretations of Iowa Code 
chapter 85 for errors at law rather than giving deference to those 
interpretations.” Gumm v. Easter Seal Soc’y of Iowa, Inc., 943 N.W.2d 23, 28 
(Iowa 2020). “[W]e accept the commissioner’s factual findings when supported 
by substantial evidence.” Id. (alteration in original) (quoting Bluml v. Dee Jay’s 
Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 84 (Iowa 2018)). Substantial evidence means that “we must 
affirm [the commissioner] if there is enough evidence to support the finding,” 
IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001) (en banc), even if “we may 

 
10 
  
draw different conclusions from the record.” Coffey v. Mid Seven Transp. Co., 831 
N.W.2d 81, 89 (Iowa 2013). “Under [Iowa Code] section 17A.19(10)(f), we may 
reverse, modify, or grant other appropriate relief when important findings of a 
workers’ compensation decision were not supported by substantial evidence.” 
Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 209 (Iowa 2010). 
It is a “well-established rule that chapter 85 is liberally construed in favor of the 
employee, with any doubt in its construction being resolved in the employee’s 
favor.” Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 859 (Iowa 2009). 
III. Analysis. 
We must decide whether the court of appeals erred in interpreting 
section 85.39(2) to limit the IME reimbursement to $500. First, we must 
determine the meaning of Iowa Code section 85.39(2) as amended in 2017. We 
hold that section 85.39(2) provides for reimbursement of the reasonable cost of 
the examination to determine the impairment rating, and the examination 
encompasses the records review, the physical examination and testing, and a 
written report. The court of appeals erred by limiting reimbursement to the 
impairment rating alone, without including the accompanying examination, and 
we vacate that part of the court of appeals decision.  
Second, we must determine whether the district court erred in upholding 
the commissioner’s award for the full $2,020 charged by Dr. Taylor for his IME. 
The commissioner failed to make a finding of fact necessary under the 2017 
amendment: the fee typically charged in that local area. We reverse the district 
court on that issue and remand the case for further factfinding by the 
commissioner.  
A. The Meaning of Iowa Code Section 85.39(2) as Amended in 2017. 
Sandlin argues that the district court and commissioner correctly interpreted 
section 85.39 to provide for reimbursements for the full examination and should 

 
11 
  
not be limited to only reimbursement for the impairment rating. Sandlin argues 
that the physician must review medical records and conduct a full examination 
to avoid “pulling a number out of thin air.” Mid American argues section 85.39, 
as amended, limits reimbursement to the impairment rating component of the 
examination, as the court of appeals held.  
We begin our analysis with the text of the statute. We quote in full Iowa 
Code section 85.39 as amended in 2017, with the language added that year in 
bold: 
1. After an injury, the employee, if requested by the employer, 
shall submit for examination at some reasonable time and place and 
as often as reasonably requested, to a physician or physicians 
authorized to practice under the laws of this state or another state, 
without cost to the employee; but if the employee requests, the 
employee, at the employee’s own cost, is entitled to have a physician 
or physicians of the employee’s own selection present to participate 
in the examination. If an employee is required to leave work for which 
the employee is being paid wages to attend the requested 
examination, the employee shall be compensated at the employee’s 
regular rate for the time the employee is required to leave work, and 
the employee shall be furnished transportation to and from the place 
of examination, or the employer may elect to pay the employee the 
reasonable cost of the transportation. The refusal of the employee to 
submit to the examination shall forfeit the employee’s right to any 
compensation for the period of the refusal. Compensation shall not 
be payable for the period of refusal. 
2. If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by 
a physician retained by the employer and the employee believes this 
evaluation to be too low, the employee shall, upon application to the 
commissioner and upon delivery of a copy of the application to the 
employer and its insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer 
the reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee’s own choice, and reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred for the examination. The physician chosen by the 
employee has the right to confer with and obtain from the 
employer-retained physician sufficient history of the injury to make 
a proper examination. An employer is only liable to reimburse an 
employee for the cost of an examination conducted pursuant to 
this subsection if the injury for which the employee is being 
examined is determined to be compensable under this chapter 
or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is 

 
12 
  
being examined is determined not to be a compensable injury. 
A determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an 
examination made pursuant to this subsection, shall be based 
on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an 
impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted. 
2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 15 (codified at Iowa Code § 85.39 (2018)) 
(emphasis added). 
Section 85.39 “is devoted to the examination of an injured worker for the 
purpose of ascertaining ‘the extent and character of the injury’ for purposes of 
paying benefits in the event of a disability resulting from the injury.” Des Moines 
Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 2015) (quoting 
Daugherty v. Scandia Coal Co., 219 N.W. 65, 67 (Iowa 1928)). In subsection 1, 
the employer may request the employee submit to an examination that is 
conducted by a physician of the employer’s choice, and the employee must 
attend the examination or forfeit their right to any compensation “for the period 
of refusal.” Iowa Code § 85.39(1). We conclude that substantial evidence 
supports the commissioner’s finding that Dr. Kennedy was chosen by the 
employer’s insurer to conduct that examination of Sandlin, and we affirm the 
court of appeals decision and district court ruling on that disputed issue. 
In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the 
employer and the employee. See id. § 85.39(2); Young, 867 N.W.2d at 844 (“The 
statutory process balances the competing interests of the employer and employee 
and permits the employee to obtain an independent medical examination at the 
employer’s expense.”). Subsection 2 entitles the employee to receive an 
examination if the employee believes the evaluation made by the employer’s 
physician was too low. Iowa Code § 85.39(2); Young, 867 N.W.2d at 844. The 
employee’s own examination “is known as an IME because the examination is 
independent of the examination done by the physician selected by the employer.” 

 
13 
  
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 843–44. Here, Dr. Kennedy found zero impairment, which 
Sandlin believed was too low, triggering his statutory right to an IME by a 
physician of his choosing—Dr. Taylor. 
Subsection 2, as amended in 2017, continues to expressly require the 
employer to reimburse the employee for the “reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice.” Iowa Code § 85.39(2) 
(emphasis added). This “is consistent with the overall approach under the 
workers’ compensation statute that makes the employer responsible for the 
medical care of an employee.” Young, 867 N.W.2d at 846; see Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(1) (“The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter or 
chapter 85A, shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies therefor and shall allow reasonably necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for such services.”). 
The 2017 amendment added three sentences to the end of subsection 2. 
2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 15 (codified at Iowa Code § 85.39 (2018)). The first two 
sentences bar an employee from reimbursement if their injury is not 
compensable. Id.; Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023). 
Today’s case turns on the third sentence: “A determination of the reasonableness 
of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this subsection, shall be based on 
the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in 
the local area where the examination is conducted.” 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 15 
(codified at Iowa Code § 85.39 (2018)). The fighting issue in this case is whether 
the amendment narrowed the scope of reimbursement from the reasonable cost 
of the examination to the reasonable cost of the impairment rating alone. As the 
district court correctly concluded, “[T]he amendment added a point of reference 
for reasonability comparisons, which is ‘based on a typical fee charged by a 

 
14 
  
medical provider in the local area where the examination is conducted.’ ” 
(Quoting Iowa Code § 85.39(2).) 
Mid American argued, and the court of appeals agreed, that Sandlin 
should only be reimbursed for the cost of an impairment rating listed on the 
Medix fee schedule as $500, not the accompanying examination. We disagree. In 
our view, the commissioner and district court correctly interpreted the statute to 
allow the cost of the accompanying examination. 
When determining the meaning of a statute, a core canon of statutory 
interpretation requires us to construe the statute as a whole. See Iowa Ins. 
Inst. v. Core Grp. of Iowa Ass’n for Just., 867 N.W.2d 58, 72 (Iowa 2015); Antonin 
Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 167–69 
(2012) [hereinafter Scalia & Garner, Reading Law] (stating that this canon “calls 
on the judicial interpreter to consider the entire text, in view of its structure and 
of the physical and logical relation of its many parts”). Throughout section 85.39, 
the term “examination” is used twelve times—five times in subsection 1 and 
seven times in subsection 2. See Iowa Code § 85.39. Subsection 2 states that the 
employee shall “be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.” Id. 
§ 85.39(2) (emphasis added). Under the 2017 amendment, the employer must 
reimburse the employee “for the cost of such an examination [only] if the injury 
. . . is determined . . . to be a compensable injury.” 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 15 
(codified at Iowa Code § 85.39 (2018)) (emphasis added). Finally, the last 
sentence added in 2017 again refers to “the reasonableness of a fee for an 
examination.” Id. (emphasis added). Read as a whole, the statute still allows for 
the employee with a compensable injury to be reimbursed for the reasonable cost 
of the “examination.” See Iowa Code § 85.39. The legislature did not change the 

 
15 
  
target of the fee reimbursement—i.e., the examination—when it amended the 
statute. The legislature instead defined how “the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination” would be determined—i.e., “based on the typical fee charged by a 
medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the local area.” Id. 
§ 85.39(2). Under our “whole text” analysis, reimbursement is not limited to the 
impairment rating but includes the accompanying examination. 
The 2017 amendment effectively necessitates fact-finding by the 
commissioner on the fees typically charged in the local area where the 
examination is performed. Parties may offer evidence of the fees typically charged 
in that locality to support or challenge the fee charged in a particular case. And 
the amendment allows consideration of the agency’s own experience adjudicating 
IME reimbursement claims in the local area where the examination is performed. 
In Nguyen v. Hy-Vee, Inc., the commissioner observed that “many IMEs come 
before the agency, which allows the [commissioner] to use agency experience and 
expertise to conclude that [the physician’s] charges are in line with those of an 
occupational medicine doctor with a practice in the . . . [local] area performing 
an evaluation of permanent impairment in accordance with the [AMA] Guides.” 
Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n, No. 21003118.03, 2023 WL 7128682, at *32 
(Oct. 20, 2023). We agree. 
Under section 85.39, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commission “has 
long awarded the full cost of an independent medical evaluation, including 
review of medical records and opinions pertaining to causation, restrictions, and 
future medical care.” Rekic v. Seehase Masonry, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n 
No. 5059846, 2019 WL 1326344, at *12 (Mar. 19, 2019); see, e.g., Eisenbacher v. 
United 
Parcel 
Serv., 
Iowa 
Workers’ 
Comp. 
Comm’n 
No. 979203, 
1993 WL 13021569, at *3, *6 (Feb. 9, 1993) (awarding the employee the full cost 
of the IME, which was “conducted for purposes of litigation in order to obtain a 

 
16 
  
rating of impairment”); Spike v. AALFS Mfg., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n 
No. 913731, 1993 WL 13016106, at *5, *7 (Jan. 29, 1993) (awarding the 
employee the full cost of the IME and travel expenses). If the legislature wanted 
to change this practice, it could have amended the language allowing “the 
reasonable fee for a subsequent examination” to instead say that an employee 
could be reimbursed “the reasonable fee for an impairment rating.” But it chose 
not to. “[W]e look to the language chosen by the legislature and not what the 
legislature might have said.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, LLC, 878 N.W.2d 
759, 770 (Iowa 2016). 
Other canons support our interpretation. A statute is to be “liberally 
construed with a view to promote its objects.” Iowa Code § 4.2. We have stated 
that section 85.39 “should be accorded a logical, sensible construction which 
gives harmonious meaning to related sections and accomplishes the legislative 
purpose.” IBP, Inc. v. Harker, 633 N.W.2d 322, 325 (Iowa 2001) (quoting 
McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 188 (Iowa 1980)); see Scalia & 
Garner, Reading Law 63 (“A textually permissible interpretation that furthers 
rather than obstructs the document’s purpose should be favored.”). And when 
ambiguity arises in chapter 85, we liberally construe the statute in favor of the 
employee. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d at 859–60; see also Bluml, 920 N.W.2d at 91 
(stating that “we have long applied the workers’ compensation statute ‘broadly 
and liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective’ ” (quoting Xenia Rural 
Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 2010))). 
“The primary purpose of the workers’ compensation statute is to benefit 
the worker and his or her dependents, insofar as statutory requirements permit.” 
Harker, 633 N.W.2d at 325 (quoting McSpadden, 288 N.W.2d at 188); see also 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 846 (stating that “the overall approach under the workers’ 
compensation statute [is to] make[] the employer responsible for the medical care 

 
17 
  
of an employee”). The purpose of section 85.39(2) is to “balance[] the competing 
interests of the employer and employee and permit[] the employee to obtain an 
independent medical examination at the employer’s expense.” Young, 867 
N.W.2d at 844. Reading the amended statute to continue requiring the 
reimbursement of the subsequent examination while clarifying how the 
reasonable fee is to be determined is a logical and sensible reading that furthers 
the purpose of the workers’ compensation statute. See Bluml, 920 N.W.2d at 91.  
Next, we construe the phrase “to perform an impairment rating.” Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2). “Perform” is a key word in the last sentence of section 85.39(2). 
“Perform” does work. “Canons of statutory interpretation require that every word 
and every provision in a statute is to be given effect, if possible, and not deemed 
mere surplusage.” Vroegh v. Iowa Dep’t of Corr., 972 N.W.2d 686, 703 (Iowa 
2022) (emphasis in original); Scalia & Garner, Reading Law 174. Thus, we must 
determine what it means “to perform an impairment rating” as a physician. Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2) (emphasis added). We interpret this language in context with a 
related amendment that added a new subsection to section 85.34. See Scalia & 
Garner, Reading Law 252 (describing the “Related-Statutes Canon” as 
encouraging “laws dealing with the same subject . . . [to] be interpreted 
harmoniously”). This new subsection requires that “the extent of loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment” be “determined solely by utilizing the 
guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association,” otherwise known as the AMA Guides. Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(x). Prior to 2017, “the [AMA] Guides were a tool the agency could use 
when determining the extent of permanent disability caused by an employee’s 
work injury,” but use of the guides was not required by statute. Nguyen, Iowa 
Workers’ Comp. Comm’n, 2023 WL 7128682, at *27. “The [AMA] Guides contain 
a process for physicians to use when evaluating permanent impairment[,] with 

 
18 
  
the impairment rating punctuating that process.” Id. (“Under the [AMA] Guides, 
the evaluation of permanent impairment is inextricably intertwined with 
assigning an impairment rating.”). Thus, the commission has repeatedly found 
a physician’s impairment rating to be unpersuasive when they do not use the 
AMA Guides. 15 John Lawyer & James R. Lawyer, Iowa Practice Series Workers’ 
Compensation § 15.3, at 228 (2022–2023 ed. 2022); see also Shrum v. Boldt Grp., 
Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n No. 5067317, 2020 WL 7338305, at *3 
(Dec. 7, 2020).  
The AMA Guides direct the physician to conduct various tasks to 
determine an impairment rating. The physician should determine whether the 
employee is at maximal medical improvement. Linda Cocchiarella & Gunnar 
B. J. Andersson, AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 19 (5th 
ed. 2001) [hereinafter AMA Guides]. The physician should know about any past 
injuries to the employee, and they do this by reviewing past medical records. Id. 
at 11–12. The physician should determine whether the work injury caused the 
impairment. Id. at 11; see also Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, No. 20–1206, 
2021 WL 3890603, at *4 (Iowa Ct. App. Sep. 1, 2021) (finding that “there can be 
no disability determination arising out of a disability evaluation without a 
determination there was causation”). The physician should conduct a physical 
examination 
to 
assess 
the 
employee’s 
status 
and 
perform 
accurate 
measurements. AMA Guides 21. The physician should determine a diagnosis. Id. 
at 22. Under the AMA Guides, a physician is to conduct multiple tasks to perform 
an employee’s impairment rating. We construe section 85.39 together with 
section 85.34 to conclude that the “examination” required “to perform an 
impairment rating” must include the foregoing steps required under the AMA 
Guides. 

 
19 
  
This reading of the statute is bolstered by language used earlier in 
section 85.39(2). There, the legislature recognized there must be more to perform 
an impairment rating than simply giving a percentage. For example, 
section 85.39(2) allows “[t]he physician chosen by the employee . . . the right to 
confer with and obtain from the employer-retained physician sufficient history 
of the injury to make a proper examination.” Iowa Code § 85.39(2). It would be 
nonsensical to give the employee’s chosen physician the right to confer with the 
employer’s chosen physician and obtain and review records but then deny 
reimbursement for that part of the IME. 
We construe section 85.39(2) as amended in 2017 to require the employer 
to reimburse the reasonable cost of the examination that is conducted by a 
physician of the employee’s own choosing. The reasonableness of the fees will be 
analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically charge to perform the 
impairment rating examination—which may include “the costs of reviewing 
medical records, conducting a physical examination, opining on causation, 
assessing permanent impairment, assigning restrictions, and addressing further 
treatment recommendations.” Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm’n No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022). The court 
of appeals erred by basing the award on the impairment rating alone, without 
including the accompanying examination. 
B. The Reasonableness of Dr. Taylor’s IME Fee. We turn now to the 
commissioner’s finding that Dr. Taylor’s $2,020 IME fee was reasonable. We hold 
that the burden is on the claimant to show the reasonableness of his chosen 
physician’s IME fee. See Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e) (“Ordinarily, the burden of 
proof on an issue is upon the party who would suffer loss if the issue were not 
established.”); see also Pexa v. Auto Owners Ins., 686 N.W.2d 150, 156 (Iowa 
2004) (stating “the plaintiff has the burden to prove the reasonable value of the 

 
20 
  
[medical] services rendered”). The reasonableness of Dr. Taylor’s fee is a question 
of fact to be decided by the commissioner. See Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 
552 N.W.2d 143, 154 (Iowa 1996). The commissioner’s factual findings are 
binding on appeal if supported by substantial evidence. Gumm, 943 N.W.2d at 
28.  
The district court ruled that substantial evidence supported the 
commissioner’s finding that Dr. Taylor’s $2,020 IME fee was reasonable. An 
appellate court cannot substitute its judgment for the factfinder and find the 
facts anew. See Harpole, 621 N.W.2d at 418. The court of appeals erred by 
resetting the reimbursement amount to $500 based on a schedule of what 
Dr. Taylor apparently charges for an impairment rating alone. But we are unable 
to affirm the commissioner’s $2,020 award because in our view, the 
commissioner’s analysis and factfinding were incomplete considering the 2017 
amendment to section 85.39(2). 
We agree the commissioner properly considered Dr. Taylor’s written 
opinion that “his fees, including the time spent with claimant, the time spent on 
the report[,] and the time spent reviewing claimant’s records, are reasonable.” 
See Pexa, 686 N.W.2d at 156 (“The reasonable value of medical services can be 
shown by evidence of the amount paid for such services or through the testimony 
of a qualified expert witness.”). But in our view, under the 2017 amendment, an 
additional step is required in the agency factfinding: the reasonableness finding 
is to be “based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an 
impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2). That step is missing in the commissioner’s decision. Sandlin 
offered no evidence as to what fees are typically charged in the Cedar Rapids 
area, and the commissioner made no finding on that issue. Today’s opinion in 
this case is our first to clarify the meaning of the final sentence added in the 

 
21 
  
2017 amendment to section 85.39(2). Under analogous circumstances, we have 
remanded the case to reopen the evidentiary record for additional agency 
fact-finding. See Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209 (remanding the case “for additional 
evidence to allow for a full and complete resolution of the issues presented under 
the legal standards clarified in this decision”). We take the same approach today. 
On remand, the parties may introduce additional evidence, and the 
commissioner shall make the reasonableness finding as provided under section 
85.39(2) “based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an 
impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2). The commissioner should then award a reasonable fee for 
Dr. Taylor’s examination.  
IV. Disposition. 
For these reasons, we affirm the decision of the court of appeals and the 
district court judgment that Dr. Kennedy was chosen by the employer’s insurer 
to conduct that examination of Sandlin. We vacate the court of appeals decision 
that reduced Dr. Taylor’s IME fee award to $500, and we reverse the district 
court ruling that awarded $2,020. We remand the case to the district court for 
entry of an order of remand for further proceedings before the workers’ 
compensation commissioner consistent with this opinion. 
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS AFFIRMED IN PART AND VACATED IN 
PART; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, 
AND REMANDED WITH INSTRUCTIONS. 
