Case Number: 22700818.04
Case Title:  GREENE, JEFFERY V. THORPE PLANT SERVICES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Greene Jeffery- 22700818.04M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
JEFFERY GREENE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
    File No. 22700818.04 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :             ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE  
 
 
  : 
THORPE PLANT SERVICES, INC., 
  :                            DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
STARR INDEMNITY AND LIABILITY CO.,  :  
 
 
  :                        Headnote: 2701            
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Jeffery Greene.   
 
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on September 25, 2023. 
Claimant appeared personally and through his attorney Nicholas Cooling.  Defendants 
appeared through their attorney Tyler Block.  The proceedings were digitally recorded. 
That recording constitutes the official record of this proceeding.  
 
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023, Order, the undersigned has been 
delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
 
The hearing record consists of: 
 
 Defendants’ Exhibit A 
 
Claimant was the only witness to provide testimony.  Counsel for both parties 
provided argument.  The record closed at the end of the end of the alternate medical 
care telephonic hearing.  
 
ISSUE 
 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care in the form of: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Sep-27  10:56:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GREENE V. THORPE PLANT SERVICES, INC.  
Page 2 
 
 
 Authorization to continue treating with Amanda Ruxton, D.O., and a ruling 
stating defendants do not have the right to change the authorized 
provider from Dr. Ruxton.  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
 
On July 17, 2022, claimant sustained a work-related injury to his neck, upper 
back, head, and bilateral upper extremities.  (See Petition; Hearing Testimony).  
Defendants admitted liability for the injury and authorized treatment with Amanda 
Ruxton, D.O., a general practitioner. (Hearing Testimony; Addendum to Defendants’ 
Answer).  Eventually, Dr. Ruxton referred claimant to Nazih Moufarrij, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon. (Hearing Testimony).   
On March 14, 2023, Dr. Moufarrij performed cervical fusion surgery on claimant. 
(Addendum to Defendants’ Answer).  Claimant testified he has had three follow-up 
appointments with Dr. Moufarrij, the last appointment taking place approximately two 
months ago. (Hearing Testimony).  Claimant indicated Dr. Moufarrij told him he could 
come back for treatment if needed. (Id.). The Addendum to Defendants’ Answer 
indicates that Dr. Moufarrij released claimant from his care on July 5, 2023, stating no 
further follow-up care was needed. (Addendum to Defendants’ Answer).  Dr. Moufarrij’s 
treatment records were not submitted into evidence for the hearing.  
On September 12, 2023, defense counsel emailed claimant’s counsel stating an 
appointment had been made for claimant with John Estivo, D.O., an orthopedic 
Specialist at Mid Continent Orthopedics. (Exhibit A, pp. 3-4).  The appointment was to 
take place on September 28, 2023.1  (Id. at 4).  Defense counsel’s email indicated that 
Dr. Estivo was the new authorized treating physician, and would oversee claimant’s 
physical therapy and medical care through maximum medical improvement. (See id. at 
1-4).  Claimant’s counsel emailed back, objecting to defendants’ transfer of care and 
expressing dissatisfaction with the care defendants offered. (Id. at 2).  The 
communication from claimant’s counsel objects to Dr. Ruxton being replaced as the 
authorized provider, but it does not mention Dr. Moufarrij. (Id. at 1).  At the hearing, 
claimant stated that someone from Dr. Estivo’s office called him to confirm the 
September 28th appointment. (Hearing Testimony).  Claimant testified that the individual 
called the appointment an independent medical exam (IME). (Id.).  Defendants deny the 
September 28th appointment is an IME. (Id.).   
On September 13, 2023, claimant filed a petition for alternate medical care 
requesting “to continue treatment with his current authorized treating provider, Dr. 
Amanda Ruxton.”  (See Petition).  At the hearing, claimant testified that he was still 
                                                 
1 Defendants also made claimant an appointment with Eva Henry, M.D., a neurologist. (Ex. A, p. 4).  
Claimant has not expressed dissatisfaction with this appointment, and testified that he plans to attend the 
appointment. (Hearing Testimony).  That appointment is not implicated in this alternate care proceeding.   

GREENE V. THORPE PLANT SERVICES, INC.  
Page 3 
 
having symptoms, including numbness and tingling in his hands, headaches, a dead-
feeling in his right arm, and reduced strength. (Hearing Testimony).  Claimant testified 
that Dr. Ruxton has proscribed him nerve medication, which he feels he still needs, that 
he trusts her, and would like her to continue to act as the authorized physician for his 
work injury. (Id.).  Claimant also testified that Dr. Black, his family physician, prescribes 
him pain medication. (Id.).  It is unclear whether defendants are covering the costs of 
those medications, or if Dr. Black has been designated as a treating physician for this 
claim. (Id.).  Defendants indicated Dr. Estivo is authorized to prescribe claimant 
necessary medications. (Id.).  
Claimant has not requested a return appointment with Dr. Moufarrij since his last 
visit in July 2023. (Hearing Transcript).  Defendants also have not attempted to 
schedule a follow-up appointment with Dr. Moufarrij since claimant’s last appointment. 
(Id.).  At the hearing, claimant’s counsel stated that he was seeking a ruling from the 
agency declaring that defendants cannot change his authorized providers. (Id.).  
Claimant’s counsel also requested follow-up appointments with Dr. Ruxton and Dr. 
Moufarrij. (Id.).   
The Addendum to Defendants’ Answer states that claimant’s injuries are 
orthopedic in nature, and he needs treatment from an orthopedic doctor. (Addendum to 
Defendants’ Answer).  It declares “[t]here is no indication that medical treatment with a 
general practitioner is needed in this case.” (Id.).  At hearing, defense counsel indicated 
defendants would authorize a return appointment with Dr. Moufarrij, if claimant 
requested it and Dr. Moufarrij agreed. (Hearing Testimony).  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted compensability for a workplace 
injury has a right to control the care provided to the injured employee.  Ramirez-Trujillo 
v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016).  The relevant statute provides 
as follows: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . . The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).   

GREENE V. THORPE PLANT SERVICES, INC.  
Page 4 
 
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id. An 
application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant is 
dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical 
care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather, 
the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably 
suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. See 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment and seeking 
alternate care, claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is 
unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 14(f)(5); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.    
An employee’s desire for a different “reasonable” treatment plan does not make 
the employer-authorized care unreasonable.  See Long, 528 at 124.  A finding that the 
treatment requested by the claimant is reasonable does not result in an implicit finding 
that the authorized treatment is unreasonable. Id.  The employee must prove the care 
being offered by the employer is unreasonable to treat the work injury, not that another 
treatment plan is reasonable. Id.; See also Lynch v. Bursell, 870 N.W.2d 274 (Table) 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2015).  Determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact.  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123.  
 
In his petition, claimant requested ongoing care with Dr. Ruxton.  Claimant, 
however, underwent a cervical fusion.  Given his course of treatment, it stands to 
reason that he should receive follow-up care from an orthopedic doctor trained in the 
procedure and its recovery.  Defendants have offered follow-up care with Dr. Estivo.  Dr. 
Estivo is an orthopedic specialist.  Dr. Ruxton is a family provider/general practitioner.  
In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997), the 
supreme court held that “when evidence is presented to the commissioner that the 
employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is ‘inferior 
or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the employee, … the 
commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate care.”  There is no 
evidence in the record indicating that the care offered by Dr. Estivo is inferior or less 
extensive than that being sought with Dr. Ruxton.  Dr. Estivo is an orthopedic specialist 
and defendants have indicated he is authorized to proscribed medications and oversee 
claimant’s course of physical therapy.  Under this record, claimant has not met his 
burden to prove that the care offered by defendants is unreasonable.  
Claimant makes two other requests in this alternate medical care proceeding: 1) 
a ruling from the agency declaring that defendants cannot change his authorized 
providers, and 2) a follow-up appointment with Dr. Moufarrij.  Claimant’s request for a 
follow-up appointment with Dr. Moufarrij is not on his alternate care petition; thus it is 
not properly before the agency in this proceeding.  See, e.g., 876 IAC 4.6.  Additionally, 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) requires an employee to notify defendants of his or her 
dissatisfaction with care before applying to the agency for alternate medical care. 
According to the statute, this requirement is intended to give the parties an opportunity 

GREENE V. THORPE PLANT SERVICES, INC.  
Page 5 
 
to reach an understanding on future care for the employee, before asking the agency to 
intervene.  There is no evidence claimant requested a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Moufarrij prior to making the verbal request at hearing, let alone that he expressed 
dissatisfaction with defendants’ response.   At the hearing, defendants agreed to 
authorize a return appointment with Dr. Moufarrij, if requested by claimant, making this 
issue moot and an order unnecessary.  Given this, claimant’s request that the agency 
order a follow-up appointment with Dr. Moufarrij is denied.  
The undersigned finds claimant’s request for an order declaring that defendants 
cannot change his authorized providers problematic. Every controversy brought before 
this agency is fact specific.  The undersigned cannot issue a blanket prohibition on 
defendants’ ability to authorize new providers before claimant has even established 
facts showing it necessary.  The language of Iowa Code section 85.27(4) empowers the 
agency to “order other care,” upon reasonable proof of necessity.  Claimant, however, is 
not asking the agency to order other care; he is asking for an order constraining 
defendants’ legal right to direct care without proof of necessity.  This request appears to 
be outside the statutory authority provided in Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  Claimant’s 
request for an order declaring that defendants cannot change his authorized providers 
is denied.  If claimant feels defendants have denied a specific treatment or failed to 
provide reasonably medically necessary care, he can file a petition for alternate medical 
care under Iowa Code section 85.27, requesting the agency order that specific 
treatment/care. 
Under this record, claimant has not met his burden to prove the care offered by 
defendants is unreasonable.  Claimant’s petition for alternate care is denied.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
 
Claimant’s petition for alternate care is DENIED. 
 
 
Signed and filed this _____27th ____ day of September, 2023. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Nick Cooling (via WCES) 
Tyler Block (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
