Case Number: 21005287.01
Case Title:  GRAVES, MICHAEL V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Graves, Michael-21005287.01.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
AMERICAN HEALTHCARE 
MANAGEMENT SERVICES, LLC, and 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
 
         Petitioners, 
 
vs. 
 
MICHAEL P. GRAVES, 
 
         Respondent. 
 
      
Case No. CVCV068958 
 
 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR  
JUDICIAL REVIEW  
 
The above captioned matter came before the Court on July 18, 2025.  The petitioners, 
American Healthcare Management Services, LLC and West Bend Mutual Insurance Company, 
were represented at the hearing by Michael Roling and Morgan Borron.  The respondent, Michael 
P. Graves (“Graves”), was represented by Trever Hook.  After hearing the arguments of counsel, 
reviewing the court file, the briefs filed by both parties and the certified administrative record, the 
court now enters the following ruling.  
I. 
BACKGROUND FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS. 
 
Graves is a 58-year-old male who was employed as the maintenance director at two nursing 
homes operated by Accura of Pleasantville, a subsidiary of American Healthcare Management.  
His work duties consisted of general plumbing, electrical, carpentry, and flooring work.  Graves 
also did side work outside of his regular occupation that consisted of truck driving and lawn 
care/snow removal.  On April 14, 2021, while performing electrical work at the Pleasantville 
facility, he sustained an electrical shock injury when a defective plug caused electrocution, 
immobilizing him until the circuit breaker tripped.  Graves was transported to Knoxville hospital’s 
emergency department via ambulance and later transferred to the University of Iowa emergency 
department for neurological evaluation.  He presented with confusion, weakness, numbness, and 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 10

 
2 
 
 
diffuse pain.   
Prior to the 2021 injury, Graves had an electrocution in 2000.  This caused him to have 
ongoing neuropathic symptoms.  Although he received intermittent treatment for back and joint 
pain, he had maintained full-time employment and physically strenuous side jobs until the 2021 
incident.  Following the 2021 injury, Graves experienced progressive neurological deterioration, 
including worsening pain, weakness, loss of sensation in the right arm and leg, and urinary 
incontinence.  Notably, Graves exhibited a marked decline in function from the 2021 injury, going 
from working 40–60 hours per week and doing physical side jobs to being wheelchair-bound prior 
to surgery.   Unable to perform his job duties, Graves was terminated from his employment on 
October 26, 2021.  Radiological imaging of Graves revealed thoracic spinal stenosis and 
myelomalacia, which treating neurosurgeon, Dr. Trevor Schmitz, attributed to a material 
aggravation caused by the electrocution.  Upon the recommendation of Dr. Schmitz, Graves 
underwent a T8–L2 posterior spinal decompression and fusion surgery on December 9, 2021.   
Several consulting physicians retained by petitioners, Drs. Boarini, Broghammer, and 
Gutmann, opined that the spinal pathology was degenerative and unrelated to the electrical injury, 
based on normal EMG results and medical literature.  However, Dr. Schmitz, supported by Dr. 
Doty along with vocational and psychological evaluations, maintained that the electrocution 
materially aggravated preexisting conditions.  Graves returned to work in March 2022 in a limited 
capacity with accommodations, including assistance from his son.  He continues to suffer residual 
symptoms, including leg weakness, back pain, and decreased endurance.  Dr. Schmitz opined that 
Graves had reached maximum medical improvement on October 17, 2022, and assigned Graves 
25 percent whole person impairment.  A vocational expert, Phil Davis, M.S., concluded that 
Graves is unable to return to his prior work or self-employment due to his permanent restrictions 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 10

 
3 
 
 
and reduced earning capacity.   
Psychologically, Graves was diagnosed with major depressive disorder related to his injury 
and disability.  Treating psychologist, Dr. Deb Steinmann, and independent psychiatric examiner, 
Dr. Kunal Patra, both attributed his mental health condition to the electrocution and resulting 
physical limitations.  Validity testing confirmed no symptom exaggeration.  Dr. Patra assigned a 
45 percent whole person impairment due to psychiatric injury, finding the condition permanent.  
Six witnesses, including family members and coworkers, consistently described a dramatic decline 
in Graves’ physical function and demeanor since the injury.  Prior to the injury, Graves was 
described as “always working” and “happy-go-lucky.” D0008, Certified R. at 103 (04/25/2025).  
Post-injury, he is fatigued, withdrawn, and significantly limited in daily and occupational tasks.   
Petitioners accepted the incident as a work-related injury but denied any resulting 
permanent disability or causation of mental health injury.  They terminated medical benefits before 
Grave’s spinal surgery and relied on medical opinions based on records reviews without in-person 
examinations.  At the arbitration hearing, the deputy commissioner found petitioners were 
responsible for all of Graves’ medical and treatment expenses as his injury arose out of and in the 
course of his employment and that he had suffered permanent impairment and mental health injury 
from the 2021 electrocution. 
 
Petitioners filed an application for rehearing asserting that the deputy commissioner erred 
in multiple findings: that claimant was credible, that he proved a permanent disability from the 
work injury, that he is entitled to temporary and permanent disability benefits, that defendants are 
responsible for past medical and mileage expenses, that he is entitled to reimbursement for Dr. 
Schmitz's impairment rating under Iowa Code section 85.39, and that they must pay the costs of 
the arbitration proceeding.  The commissioner affirmed the deputy commissioner’s decision, 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 10

 
4 
 
 
finding Graves credible and the deputy commissioner’s assessment of Graves’ disability and 
benefits appropriate. 
 
On April 8, 2025, petitioners filed a petition for judicial review in the district court.  
petitioners argue the commissioner erred in finding Graves’ claims and testimony credible and 
erred in shifting the burden of proof to petitioners. 
II. 
SCOPE AND STANDARD OF REVIEW. 
 
The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code Chapter 17A, governs the scope of the 
court’s review in workers' compensation cases.  Iowa Code § 10A.322; Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  A party challenging agency action bears the burden of 
demonstrating the action's invalidity and resulting prejudice.  Iowa Code § 17A.19(8)(a).  The 
Court is not bound by an agency’s legal conclusions and may correct misapplications of the law.  
Ginsburg v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 508 N.W.2d 663, 664 (Iowa 1993); Sallis v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 
437 N.W.2d 895, 896 (Iowa 1989). Factual findings are binding if supported by substantial 
evidence when the record is viewed as a whole.  IBP, Inc. v. Iowa Emp. Appeal Bd., 604 N.W.2d 
307, 311 (Iowa 1999).  Substantial evidence is evidence that a reasonable person would find 
adequate to reach a conclusion. Id.   Ultimately, the workers' compensation law should be liberally 
construed to accomplish the object and purpose of the legislation: to benefit the worker and his 
dependents.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176, 180 (Iowa 1985).  
III. 
MERITS. 
 
The issue before this court is whether the commissioner applied the correct legal standards 
for evaluating credibility, expert testimony, burden of proof to award benefits to Graves under 
Iowa Code sections 17A.19(10)(c), (j), and (m). 
 
Iowa Code sections 17A.19(10)(c), (j), and (m) provide: 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 10

 
5 
 
 
10. The court may affirm the agency action or remand to the agency for further 
proceedings. The court shall reverse, modify, or grant other appropriate relief from 
agency action, equitable or legal and including declaratory relief, if it determines 
that substantial rights of the person seeking judicial relief have been prejudiced 
because the agency action is any of the following: 
… 
c. Based upon an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation 
has not clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency. 
 
… 
j. The product of a decision-making process in which the agency did not consider a 
relevant and important matter relating to the propriety or desirability of the action 
in question that a rational decision maker in similar circumstances would have 
considered prior to taking that action. 
… 
m. Based upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable application of law to 
fact that has clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the 
agency. 
 
The petitioners are claiming error with the agency’s interpretation of the law; therefore, the 
question on review is whether the agency’s interpretation was erroneous.  See Meyer, 710 N.W.2d 
at 219.  If the error was erroneous, the court may substitute its interpretation for the agency’s.  Id. 
(citing Clark v. Vicorp Rests., Inc., 696 N.W.2d 596 (Iowa 2005)).  Additionally, the petitioners 
are challenging the commissioner’s application of law to the facts.  In this assessment, courts must 
defer to the agency’s application of law to the facts.  Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 457, 
465 (Iowa 2004).   
A. Credibility 
The petitioners argue that the deputy commissioner and commissioner erred in concluding 
that Graves was a credible witness because Graves gave dishonest testimony regarding his prior 
symptoms and prior treatments related to his previous medical conditions that resulted in fabricated 
medical opinions.  Graves argues that his memory is not perfect from the injury and that his treating 
physicians were aware of his medical history and condition when rendering their opinions.  
As the factfinder in worker’s compensation proceedings, the commissioner has the 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 10

 
6 
 
 
authority to assess the credibility of testimony and determine the weight of evidence.  IBP, Inc. v. 
Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621 (Iowa 2000).  This stems from the fact-finder’s superior vantage point 
to make credibility determinations due to their ability to consider firsthand the demeanor and 
appearance of the parties.  Neimann v. Butterfield, 551 N.W.2d 652, 654 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996).  
Therefore, the court will “accord deference to the agency’s decision on witness credibility.”  Clark 
v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue and Fin., 644 N.W.2d 310, 315 (Iowa 2002).  However, the court is not 
bound to the agency’s credibility findings if substantial evidence does not support the agency’s 
decision.  See Woodbury Cnty. v. Iowa C.R. Comm’n, 335 N.W.2d 161, 164 (Iowa 1983).  
In this case, the deputy commissioner detailed her reasoning regarding the claimant’s 
credibility in the arbitration decision:  
With respect to the claimant’s credibility, I found him to be a very credible witness. 
There was nothing about his demeanor at the time of the hearing that gave me 
reason to doubt his veracity. Defendants point to Dr. Schmitz’s records, in which 
claimant denied prior symptoms, despite having had some prior treatment for back 
and neck pain, as well as prior neuropathic symptoms and a long-standing 
prescription for gabapentin. However, when asked about this at hearing, claimant 
clarified that he did not have the same severe pain prior to the electrical injury. He 
testified that he occasionally treated for back pain prior to the electrical injury, but 
it was not equivalent to the severe pain he experienced after the electrical injury. 
The medical records support claimant’s testimony, as he never described his pain 
level at an 8 or 9 out of 10 prior to the electrical injury. Additionally, he was able 
to continue working over and on the weekends. There is nothing to indicate 
claimant intended to deceive Dr. Schmitz or any other health care provider about 
his prior condition. There is no evidence that claimant was experiencing the same 
severe and debilitating symptoms prior to the electrical injury on April 14, 2021. 
 
D0008 at 103 (internal quotations omitted).  On appeal, the commissioner affirmed the deputy 
commissioner’s decision that she correctly assessed the claimant’s credibility.  D0008 at 10.  The 
court finds the deputy commissioner thoroughly explained why she found Graves credible and 
addressed any inconsistencies that petitioners raised concerning Graves’ disclosures to Dr. 
Schmitz.  Graves explained at the hearing that his symptoms were much worse after the April 2021 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 10

 
7 
 
 
injury which is consistent with the medical records prior to his 2021 injury.  This is consistent with 
Drs. Schmitz, Patra, and Steinmann’s medical opinions.  Therefore, the court finds that the record 
contains substantial evidence to support finding Graves’ to be a credible witness. 
B. Expert Testimony 
The petitioners argue that Dr. Schmitz’s medical opinion cannot form the basis for the 
deputy commissioner’s decisions because Dr. Schmitz’s opinion was based on a lack of Graves’ 
previous medical history.  They additionally argue that the opinions rendered by Drs. Steinmann 
and Patra contain false and misleading information provided by Graves that are not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record.  Graves argues that Dr. Schmitz was most familiar with his 
condition and that his opinion is consistent with other evidence in the record.  He additionally 
argues that the opinions of Drs. Steinmann and Patra are supported by substantial evidence and the 
testimony of his six lay witnesses. 
 
“Medical causation presents a question of fact that is vested in the discretion of the 
worker’s compensation commission…therefore [the court] will only disturb the commissioner’s 
finding of medical causation is it is not supported by substantial evidence.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. 
Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 2011) (citing Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)).  In 
a worker’s compensation case, physicians conducting impairment ratings must adhere to the AMA 
Guides, which includes a physical examination of the claimant to accurately determine permanent 
partial disabilities.  See Mid-Am. Constr., LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 850-51 (Iowa 2024). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that: 
[A] physician should conduct a physical examination to assess the employee’s 
status and perform accurate measurements. The physician should determine a 
diagnosis. Under the AMA Guides, a physician is to conduct multiple tasks to 
perform an employee’s impairment rating. We construe section 85.39 together with 
section 85.34 to conclude that the “examination” required “to perform an 
impairment rating” must include the foregoing steps required under the AMA 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 10

 
8 
 
 
Guides.  
 
Id. at 854 (internal citations omitted). 
Here, the deputy commissioner’s reliance on Dr. Schmitz’s opinion over Drs. Boarini and 
Broghammar is supported by substantial evidence since Dr. Schmitz was the only medical expert 
who physically examined Graves in person.   Dr. Schmitz also saw Graves multiples times and 
performed the spinal surgery and is thus much more familiar with Graves’ condition than 
petitioner’s medical experts.  The deputy commissioner did not find Dr. Gutmann’s opinion 
persuasive as he did not address whether the electrical injury could have aggravated Graves’ 
underlying condition.  Additionally, Dr. Schmitz’s opinion was supported and consistent with 
Graves’ six lay witnesses who also testified to Graves’ significantly worse condition after his 2021 
injury.  This testimony is also consistent with Drs. Steinmann and Patra’s opinions concerning 
Graves’ mental condition.  Therefore, the court finds the commissioner did not err in giving the 
most weight to Dr. Schmitz’s medical opinion concerning Graves’ medical condition to award 
benefits to Graves.  The court finds there is substantial evidence in the record to support the 
commissioner’s decision. 
C. Burden of Proof 
The petitioners argue that the deputy commissioner committed legal error by shifting the 
burden of proof from Graves to the petitioners along with the commissioner who affirmed the 
decision in its entirety.  Graves argues the because the petitioners did not raise the burden of proof 
error in their appeal to the commissioner, the issue has not been preserved for judicial review in 
the district court.  
“Misallocation of the burden of proof by an administrative body is an error at law which 
may require reversal.”  Northwestern Bell Tel. Co. v. Iowa State Com. Comm’n, 419 N.W.2d 712, 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 10

 
9 
 
 
715 (Iowa 1988) (citing Peoples Mem’l Hosp. v. Iowa C.R. Comm’n, 322 N.W.2d 87, 92 (Iowa 
1982)).  But only issues which are properly presented and considered by the workers’ 
compensation commissioner may be appealed to the district court.  Myers v. F.C.A. Servs. Inc., 
592 N.W.2d 354, 358 (Iowa 1999).  
In this case, petitioners did not raise the burden of proof issue in their appeal to the 
commissioner.  The commissioner does not address the issue in his appeal decision, and the 
petitioners do not mention a shifting of the burden of proof in their appeal brief.  Even if this court 
were to examine the burden of proof issue, there is no evidence in the record to support petitioners’ 
claim that the burden of proof was shifted from Graves to the petitioners.  In her decision, the 
deputy commissioner explains why she gave more weight to the opinion of Dr. Schmitz over Drs. 
Boarini, Broghammer, and Gutmann as not being as comprehensive and not offering an 
explanation as to why Graves’ condition was worse after the 2021 injury.  This is an analysis to 
accurately determine the weight of the evidence – not a shifting of the burden of proof to the 
petitioners. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND DISPOSTION. 
 
For all the reasons set forth above, the court concludes the commissioner did not err in his 
interpretation and application of the law to the facts in assessing Graves’ credibility, the expert 
testimony presented, and the shifting burden of proof issue to award Graves benefits. 
IT IS THE ORDER OF THE COURT that the Iowa workers’ compensation 
commissioner’s appeal decision is AFFIRMED. 
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 10

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV068958
AMERICAN HEALTHCARE ET AL VS MICHAEL GRAVES
Type:
ORDER OF DISPOSITION
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2025-08-13 10:22:55
E-FILED                    CVCV068958 - 2025 AUG 13 10:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 10 of 10
