Case Number: 22700159.01
Case Title:  MCCAULEY, JULIE V. POLK COUNTY IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      McCauley Julie-22700159.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JULIE MCCAULEY, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
File No. 22700159.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :              ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
POLK COUNTY, IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
     Head Notes: 1108.20; 2401 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Julie McCauley, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Polk County, Iowa, self-insured employer.  This matter was 
heard on November 16, 2022, with a final submission date of December 21, 2022.   
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 13, Defendant’s Exhibits A through I, and the testimony of claimant. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
employment. 
 
2. Whether claimant’s claim for benefits is barred by application of Iowa Code 
section 85.23. 
 
3. Whether claimant waived her right to workers’ compensation benefits under a 
global settlement agreement. 
 
4. Whether claimant’s injury resulted in a temporary disability. 
 
5. Whether claimant’s injury resulted in a permanent disability; and if so, 
 
6. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Mar-17  07:30:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
7. The commencement date of benefits. 
 
8. Whether there is a causal connection between the injury and the claimed 
medical expenses. 
 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care under Iowa Code 
section 85.39. 
 
10. Credit. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant was 54 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant graduated from high 
school.  Claimant took a medical terminology and transcription course at a community 
college.  (Hearing Transcript, pages 14-15) 
 
Claimant has worked as a secretary and an administrative assistant.  She has 
worked as a receptionist for a county health facility.  Claimant worked as a secretary for 
the agency director at the Iowa Department of Human Services.  (Tr., pp. 17-19) 
 
Claimant began her employment with Polk County on January 6, 2020, as an 
executive secretary for the Polk County Board of Supervisors.  (Tr., p. 21) 
 
Claimant’s job duties at Polk County included, but were not limited to, answering 
phones, scheduling, doing transcription, assisting and reporting directly to supervisors.  
The supervisors claimant reported to were Matt McCoy and Bob Brownell, and Polk 
County Administrator, Mark Wandro.  Another executive secretary, Heather Ksiazek, 
reported directly to supervisors Steve Van Oort, Angela Connolly, and Tom 
Hockensmith.  Claimant testified that she also assisted Ms. Ksiazek when required. (Tr., 
pp. 20-22) 
 
Claimant’s prior medical history is relevant.  Claimant testified in deposition that 
she had treated for anxiety since 1999.  (Defendant’s Exhibit E, page 37, deposition 
page 65)  In 2017 claimant was hospitalized for a bleeding ulcer related to use of 
NSAIDs.  (Joint Exhibit 1, pages 1-2) 
 
Claimant treated for panic attacks three times in 2017.  She said that she has 
had treatment for panic attacks since 2017.  (Ex. E, p. 38, depo p. 66)  
 
Claimant testified that the work environment at Polk County was very stressful.  
Claimant said her job was a “very unpleasant place to work.”  She said her co-worker, 
Ms. Ksiazek, told her, in so many words, that if something was missed on a Board of 
Supervisors’ schedule, support staff would get “thrown under the bus.”  Claimant said 
the work environment, for the Polk County Board of Supervisors, was very toxic.  (Tr., 
pp. 23-24) 
 
Matt McCoy testified he is a supervisor for the Polk County Board of Supervisors 
since 2018.  (Ex. H, p. 67, depo pp. 6-7)  Mr. McCoy testified that since he began his 
employment in 2018, he has had consistent conflicts with colleagues every day.  He 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 3 
 
testified that another supervisor, Mr. Hockensmith, did not want his office next to Mr. 
McCoy’s as Mr. McCoy was gay.  (Ex. H, p. 67, depo pp. 7-8) 
 
Mr. McCoy testified that prior to Polk County, he had worked at Principal, Ruan 
Transportation, and the Des Moines Chamber of Commerce.  From 1996 through 2018 
Mr. McCoy served as a state senator.  Mr. McCoy testified that, “everything’s unusual at 
Polk County.  And I would say that it has been the -- the most unprofessional, 
challenging, hostile workplace that I’ve ever experienced or could even dream of 
experiencing.”  (Ex. H, p. 72, depo pp. 26-27) 
 
Mr. McCoy was asked about the relationships at the Board of Supervisors during 
the period claimant worked as an executive secretary.  He responded, 
A: 
I would say that it continued to be caustic.  Very adversarial; 
backbiting, backstabbing, negative in terms of -- you know, the 
atmosphere, teamwork process.  Very gossipy, very cold. 
Q: 
And that -- that same environment, Miss McCauley would have 
been a part of on a day-to-day basis; correct? 
A: 
She would have been -- she would have been ground zero, center 
of all that. 
(Ex. H, p. 68, depo p. 12) 
 
Mr. McCoy has been involved with two ongoing lawsuits regarding Polk County.  
(Ex. H, p. 77, depo pp. 47-48) 
 
Sarah Boese testified, in deposition, she began employment with Polk County in 
2008.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 11, page 58, deposition page 7)  She testified that in 2020 
she was director of communications for the Board of Supervisors.  (Ex. 11, p. 58, depo 
pp. 7-8)  She testified that in January of 2020 she supervised claimant and Ms. Ksiazek.  
(Ex. 11, p. 59, depo p. 10) 
 
Ms. Boese testified that from January of 2020 through June of 2020 the work 
environment at Polk County was “great.”  (Ex. 11, p. 60, depo pp. 13-14; Ex. 11, p. 62, 
depo p. 24)   
 
Ms. Boese testified that from March of 2020 through June 2020 claimant never 
expressed any concerns regarding her work environment.  (Ex. 11, pp. 62-63, depo pp. 
24-25)  She testified that during that period of time claimant never gave any notice of an 
injury.  (Ex. 11, p. 63, depo p. 25)  Ms. Boese testified that claimant never reported a 
hostile work environment while working at Polk County.  (Ex. 11, p. 64, depo p. 29) 
 
The record indicates Ms. Boese has filed a lawsuit against Mr. McCoy and Polk 
County.  (Ex. H, p. 77, depo p. 47) 
 
Jim Nahas, the former HR director for Polk County, also has sued Polk County 
regarding alleged wrongful termination.  (Ex. 5) 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
Claimant said that within the first 2-3 weeks she began working at Polk County, 
she felt increasing anxiety and stress.  She said she also began experiencing increased 
heartburn, acid reflux, and nausea.  (Tr., pp. 22-24, 33) 
 
Claimant testified that on February 28, 2020, she felt nauseous and sick.  She 
said she did not believe she could leave the area in front of the Board of Supervisors’ 
office based on what Ms. Ksiazek had told her.  Claimant said she eventually vomited in 
a garbage can and lost control of her bladder.  She said she finished her work that day.  
(Tr., pp. 29-31) 
 
Claimant said she went home after work on February 28, 2020.  She said her 
symptoms worsened and she eventually went to the emergency room.  (Tr., pp. 33-34)   
 
On March 1, 2020, claimant was evaluated at UnityPoint Emergency 
Department.  Claimant reported that she had nausea, was dizzy, and had rectal 
bleeding.  Claimant had abdominal pain that began one week prior.  Claimant indicated 
she had GI bleeding two years prior.  (JE 2, p. 28)  Claimant was assessed as having 
an acute upper GI bleed and acute blood loss anemia.  (JE 2, p. 32) 
 
Claimant was hospitalized until March 4, 2020.  (JE 2, p. 41)  During that time 
she was given a blood transfusion and given omeprazole intravenously.  (JE 2, p. 41)  
Claimant underwent upper GI endoscopy.  Claimant was diagnosed with having two 
bleeding duodenal ulcers, esophagus narrowing, reflux and acute blood loss with a 
generalized anxiety disorder.  (JE 2, pp. 39-40) 
 
Claimant testified that when she was in the hospital, she was seen by her 
primary care physician, Louis Schneider, D.O.  Claimant testified she told Dr. Schneider 
her job was very stressful.  She said Dr. Schneider told her, at that time, that the 
bleeding ulcers were caused by her job stress and that she needed to get a new job.  
(Tr., pp. 35-36)  There are no notations in the medical records from Dr. Schneider’s visit 
indicating that claimant’s bleeding ulcers were caused by her job stress.  
 
Medical records indicate Dr. Schneider wrote a discharge summary for claimant’s 
hospital stay.  There is no indication in those records claimant’s ulcers were caused by 
her stress at work.  (JE 2, pp. 40-41; Tr., p. 79) 
 
Claimant testified that when she was hospitalized, she texted Mr. McCoy and 
notified Ms. Ksiazek and Mr. Wandro.  (Tr., pp. 36-37) 
 
Claimant returned to work following her hospitalization.  She testified on her first 
day back she told Mr. McCoy she had bleeding ulcers and that her doctor told her that 
her bleeding ulcers were related to work.  (Tr., pp. 37-38) 
 
In deposition, Mr. McCoy was asked when claimant told him her ulcers were 
work related.  Mr. McCoy responded, “I don’t think I ever received that kind of notice 
from Miss McCauley.”  (Ex. 10, p. 42, depo p. 35)  Later in his deposition, Mr. McCoy 
confirmed that claimant did not provide him with notice of a work injury regarding her 
ulcers.  (Ex. 10, p. 42, depo p. 36)  He reiterated in deposition that claimant never 
reported a work injury to him.  (Ex. 10, p. 44, depo p. 41) 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
Mr. McCoy also testified later in the deposition in March of 2020 claimant alerted 
him to her bleeding ulcers and that they “. . . could potentially be related to the stress at 
-- at Polk County.”  (Ex. 10, p. 46, depo p. 50) 
 
Claimant testified that she continued to receive treatment for bleeding ulcers after 
her return to work.  (Tr., pp. 38-39)  Claimant testified that when she returned to work, 
her panic attacks at work increased.  She said she had increased stress at Polk County, 
due in part to Covid and other tensions in the office.  (Tr., pp. 50-51)  She said her 
anxiety was helped, somewhat, in that she was allowed to work some days from home 
during the pandemic.  (Tr., pp. 50-52) 
 
On March 11, 2020, claimant was evaluated by Dr. Schneider in follow-up.  
Claimant was assessed as having a duodenal ulcer and anemia due to blood loss.  
Claimant was told to use her same medications for anxiety and was given tips on how to 
deal with gastric reflux.  (JE 3, pp. 46-50) 
 
On May 20, 2020, claimant filed a resignation letter to Polk County.  Claimant 
indicated she accepted another job more suited to her skillset.  Claimant indicated her 
last day in the office was to be June 3, 2020.  (Ex. A, p. 1) 
 
Claimant said that Mr. McCoy asked her to have an exit interview upon leaving 
Polk County.  She said she had an exit interview with Mr. McCoy and Mr. Nahas.  She 
said she later typed up notes from that interview.  (Tr., p. 57)  These notes are found in 
Exhibit 2.   
 
Claimant indicated in the exit interview profanity was routinely used in the Polk 
County Supervisors’ office.  She indicated she routinely heard supervisors talking 
disparagingly and cursing other supervisors and staff.  (Ex. 2, p. 4)  Claimant said she 
was told by a co-worker that staff was not to take breaks, vacations, or personal days.  
(Ex. 2, p. 4) 
 
Claimant indicated she was micromanaged by Ms. Ksiazek.  She said that the 
Polk County Board of Supervisors’ office was a very stressful place to work.  (Ex. 2, p. 
4) 
 
Claimant indicated Mr. McCoy told her Sarah Boese was concerned about her 
performance.  Mr. McCoy indicated Ms. Boese also expressed concerns that claimant 
had prior employment litigation and was concerned about her employment with Polk 
County.  (Ex. 2, p. 6)  Claimant said she had a very negative and stressful experience in 
working at the Polk County Supervisors’ office.  (Ex. 2, p. 7) 
 
Ms. Boese testified in deposition that exit interviews were not conducted during 
the time that claimant worked at Polk County.  She also indicated it was very unusual 
that an exit interview was conducted without her presence.  (Ex. 11, p. 64, depo p. 32) 
 
Claimant left Polk County officially on June 4, 2020.  On June 4, 2020, claimant 
made a request to be paid for unused sick leave or vacation.  The application appears 
to indicate that claimant’s request was untimely as claimant worked at Polk County for 
less than six months.  (Ex. 3) 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
In July of 2020 e-mails to Mr. McCoy, claimant indicated that she was aware of 
the policy requiring an employee to be employed for six months in order to be paid for 
unused vacation.  She asked Mr. McCoy that the requirement be waived given the 
“hostile work environment” she worked in.  (Ex. C) 
 
On August 3, 2020, claimant was evaluated by Dr. Schneider.  Claimant had 
anxiety and rib pain.  Claimant had a history of anxiety.  Claimant’s anxiety was high.  
Claimant was kept on the same medication and was counseled to lose weight.  An x-ray 
was requested regarding claimant’s rib pain.  (JE 3, pp. 53-56) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schneider on August 11, 2020.  Claimant had increased 
fatigue.  Claimant’s anxiety again was noted to be high.  Claimant was kept on the same 
medication and again was counseled to lose weight.  (JE 3, pp. 57-60) 
 
On June 1, 2020, Jeffrey Edgar, an attorney for Polk County, sent a release via 
email to claimant.  The email indicated that “. . . we will need you to sign off on the 
attached release in order to process your vacation payout.”  (Ex. 4) 
 
On September 4, 2020, claimant had a psychotherapy counseling session with 
Emily Poss, M.A., L.M.H.C.  Claimant had anxiety over being alone, worrying about 
being sick and worrying about having panic attacks.  Claimant also reported getting sick 
at work and being hospitalized for bleeding ulcers.  (JE 4, pp. 81-82)  Claimant also 
indicated she was working as an assistant to the director at DHS and was happy at her 
job.  (JE 4, p. 84) 
 
On or about September 10, 2020, claimant signed a document titled “Settlement 
Agreement, Release, Indemnity, and Covenant Not to Sue.”  Claimant said she 
contacted two attorneys before she signed the release and returned it to Polk County.  
In her email returning the release, claimant indicated: “Thank you for this exception to 
policy and agreeing to pay me out my accrued vacation hours.  It is much appreciated.”  
(Ex. B, p. 2)  
 
The release at issue reads in relevant part: 
 
McCauley was an employee with Polk County and has requested 
payout of vacation she accrued.  Polk County policy requires an employee 
to be employed with Polk County six months or more in order to be eligible 
for vacation payout upon termination.  Because McCauley was employed 
less than six months with Polk County, she was not entitled to a vacation 
payout.  However, in a good faith attempt to resolve any claim(s) 
McCauley may have with respect to her short period of employment at 
Polk County, the parties have agreed to enter into this Settlement 
Agreement, Release, Indemnity and Covenant Not to Sue. 
 
The parties have agreed to compromise and settle all of 
McCauley’s claims related to her employment with Polk County.  Based on 
the mutual promises and covenants exchanged and for other good and 
valuable consideration, the adequacy and receipt of which are 
acknowledged, the parties agree:   

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 7 
 
1.  Releases.  
(a) Releasing Party and Released Parties: McCauley, on behalf of 
herself, her heirs, executors, successors, assigns (collectively “Releasing 
Party”), does hereby declare the full and complete settlement of any claim 
of any kind or nature whatsoever that she may now have or may have in 
the future against Polk County, Iowa, its elected officials, employees, 
agents, successors and assigns (collectively “Released Parties”) arising 
out her employment with Polk County. 
 
(b) Claims Released.  That claims released through this Settlement 
Agreement, Release, Indemnity and Covenant Not to Sue shall include 
and extend to any and all claims, demands, causes of action, and/or 
liabilities of or against the Released Parties, whether known or unknown, 
that McCauley may have against the Released Parties, including, but not 
limited to, any action(s) arising under the federal Fair Labor Standards 
Act, Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (and any amendments), Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (and any amendments), Iowa Code chapter 216, Iowa 
Code chapter 85, 85A and 86, Iowa Code chapter 91A, and any other kind 
of claims; attorney fees; interest and court costs.   
(Ex. B, p. 3) 
On September 15, 2020, claimant returned to Ms. Poss for counseling.  Claimant 
had issues with relationships.  Claimant was assessed as having a generalized anxiety 
disorder.  (JE 4, pp. 85-86) 
 
On September 25, 2020, claimant returned in follow up to Ms. Poss.  Claimant 
indicated difficulty again with relationships.  She was assessed as having a generalized 
anxiety disorder.  (JE 4, pp. 87-88) 
 
Claimant returned two more times for counseling with Ms. Poss in October 2020 
regarding issues with relationships.  Claimant discussed things that triggered her 
anxiety.  She was also worried about getting sick and dying.  (JE 4, pp. 89-92) 
 
In November and December claimant had three more counseling sessions with 
Ms. Poss.  Claimant was worried about getting sick and dying.  Claimant had stress at 
work.  Claimant wanted to end a relationship with a friend who was “toxic.”  Claimant 
was assessed as having a generalized anxiety disorder.  (JE 4, pp. 93-98) 
 
In January, February and March of 2021 claimant saw Ms. Poss four more times 
for counseling.  Claimant had relationship issues with a friend and with her ex-husband.  
Claimant was worried about being alone.  Claimant was assessed as having a 
generalized anxiety disorder.  (JE 4, pp. 99-106) 
 
On April 28, 2021, claimant was evaluated by Angela Veenstra, ARNP.  Claimant 
had reflux problems and trouble swallowing.  (JE 3, p. 66) 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
On May 3, 2021, claimant had a telephone visit with Dr. Schneider.  Dr. 
Schneider changed claimant’s mental health medications.  Claimant had dizziness.  
Claimant was treated with medication.  (JE 3, pp. 69-70) 
 
On July 23, 2021, claimant underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD).  
(JE 3, pp. 71-72)  Records indicate claimant had improved symptoms with reflux 
following the EGD.  (JE 3, pp. 73-74) 
 
In a May 22, 2022, letter written by claimant’s counsel, Dr. Schneider opined that 
the work environment claimant was subject to at Polk County was a substantial 
contributing factor in the development of claimant’s two bleeding duodenal ulcers on or 
around March 1, 2020.  (Ex. 7, p. 22) 
 
Dr. Schneider also opined the work environment at Polk County was a 
substantial contributing factor regarding claimant’s increasing mental-psychological 
symptoms.  He opined that since leaving Polk County, claimant’s GI condition had 
resolved, and her mental and psychologic condition had improved.  Dr. Schneider 
indicated that since claimant had left Polk County, claimant has not had further GI 
issues.  Dr. Schneider recommended claimant continue to see him for medical 
management of mental health issues.  (Ex. 7, p. 23) 
 
In a September 24, 2022 report, Paul Conte, M.D., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an independent medical evaluation (IME).  Dr. Conte 
opined that claimant had a 9 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole 
regarding her GI problems.  He opined the stress involved at claimant’s work was a 
substantial causal factor for the development of her ulcer.  Dr. Conte opined that the 
care claimant received was reasonable and necessary.  (Ex. 8, pp. 27-28) 
 
Dr. Conte opined that claimant needed continued therapy with omeprazole.  
Claimant had reached maximal medical improvement (MMI) for her condition as of July 
23, 2021.   
 
Dr. Conte opined that claimant’s job at Polk County was a significant contributing 
factor or aggravating factor to increase symptoms of anxiety.  Dr. Conte could not opine 
whether claimant sustained a permanent disability in regard to her mental health 
condition.  He did not place any permanent restrictions on claimant regarding her 
mental health.  (Ex. 8, pp. 29-30) 
 
In an October 13, 2022 letter, Joseph Chen, M.D., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following an IME.  Dr. Chen opined that claimant’s work environment was only 
a minor factor leading to her peptic ulcer disease.  (Ex. G, p. 61) 
 
Dr. Chen indicated claimant had a long history of personal stressors that could 
contribute to her peptic ulcer disease.  Claimant had a long history of anxiety.  He noted 
that none of the treatment notes for claimant’s ulcer or anxiety, following the alleged 
work injury, indicated claimant’s work at Polk County was a factor in causing her ulcer 
or mental health issues.  Based on this, he opined that claimant had several personal 
medical conditions contributing to the development of her peptic ulcer.  These 
conditions included her prior use of NSAIDs, anxiety disorder, panic attacks, and other 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 9 
 
personal stressors.  (Ex. G, pp. 60-63)  He opined that claimant’s work environment was 
only a minor contributing factor that led to a temporary exacerbation of her ulcer.  (Ex. 
G, pp. 63-64) 
 
Dr. Chen indicated claimant was at MMI as of June 1, 2020.  He indicated 
claimant did not require additional medical treatment.  He opined that claimant had no 
permanent impairment regarding her alleged work injury at Polk County.  (Ex. G, pp. 64-
65) 
CONCLUSION OF LAW 
 
The first issue to be determined is if claimant sustained an injury that arose out of 
and in the course of employment.  Claimant alleges she sustained a mental/mental 
injury caused by the work-related incident. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3).   
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.   A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable rather than merely possible.   George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).      
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.   The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
 Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, 
is also relevant and material to the causation question.   The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.   The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.   St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).   Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.   Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).      
 
Nontraumatically caused mental injuries are compensable under Iowa Code 
section 85.3(1).   Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995).    
Mental injury cases that do not include a physical injury are referred to as 
“mental/mental” injuries.   “Mental /mental” injuries require a somewhat higher standard 
to show causation than physical injury or a “physical/mental” injury.   The Iowa Supreme 
Court has held this difference does not violate equal protection.  Asmus v. Waterloo 
Community School Dist., 722 N.W.2d 653 (Iowa 2006).      

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
Under Dunlavey, mental injuries caused by work-related stress are compensable 
if, after demonstrating medical causation, the employee shows that the mental injury 
was caused by workplace stress of greater magnitude than the day-to-day mental 
stresses experienced by other workers employed in the same or similar jobs, regardless 
of their employer.  Id. at 857.      
 
Both medical and legal causation must be resolved in claimant’s favor before an 
injury arising out of and in the course of the employment can be established.  To 
establish medical causation, the employee must show that the stresses and tensions 
arising from the work environment are a proximate cause of the employee’s mental 
difficulties.  If the medical causation issue is resolved in favor of the employee, legal 
causation is examined.   Legal causation involves a determination of whether the work 
stresses and tensions the employee experienced, when viewed objectively and not as 
the employee perceived them, were of greater magnitude than the day-to-day mental 
stresses workers employed in the same or similar jobs experience routinely regardless 
of their employer.      
 
The employee has the burden to establish the requisite legal causation. 
 Evidence of stresses experienced by workers with similar jobs employed by a different 
employer is relevant; evidence of the stresses of other workers employed by the same 
employer in the same or similar jobs will usually be most persuasive and determinative 
on the issue.   Id. at 858. 
 
Claimant’s credible testimony at hearing and at deposition was that the 
workplace at Polk County was a toxic work environment.  Claimant credibly testified the 
environment in the office at Polk County was dysfunctional.  She credibly testified that 
profanity was routinely used in the workplace.  She credibly testified supervisors 
routinely gossiped and mocked other supervisors and Polk County employees.  (Tr., pp. 
23-27, 50-51, 68-69) 
 
Claimant’s testimony was corroborated by the testimony of Mr. McCoy who 
indicated that from 2018 to 2022 Polk County offices were subject to ongoing conflict.  
Mr. McCoy testified that the work environment at Polk County was unprofessional, 
challenging and a hostile workplace.  (Ex. 10, p. 40) 
 
As noted, at the time of hearing, there are at least two lawsuits filed against Polk 
County regarding the workplace environment.  It is true that allegations in both legal 
actions have yet to be proven.  However, this litigation, along with claimant’s credible 
testimony at hearing and in deposition, the deposition of Mr. McCoy, and the exit 
interview of claimant, all suggest that the office where claimant worked at Polk County, 
from January of 2020 through May of 2020, was a hostile work environment.  Given this 
record, claimant has carried her burden of proof that the work stressors and tension she 
experienced at Polk County from January 2020 through June of 2020, were of a greater 
magnitude than the day-to-day stressors of a worker employed in a similar job.  
Claimant has carried her burden of proof regarding legal causation. 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
Regarding medical causation of her bleeding ulcers, three experts have opined 
on whether or not the stressors and tension at Polk County were the proximate cause of 
claimant’s bleeding ulcers. 
 
Dr. Schneider is claimant’s family physician and has treated claimant for an 
extended period of time.  In a letter written by claimant’s counsel, Dr. Schneider opined 
claimant’s work environment at Polk County was a substantial contributing factor to the 
development of claimant’s bleeding ulcers.  He based this opinion, in part, that while 
claimant did have bleeding ulcers in 2017, she had not received treatment for her ulcers 
from June of 2017 until approximately the date of injury.  (Ex. 7) 
 
Dr. Conte evaluated claimant once for an IME.  Dr. Conte also opined that the 
stress involved with claimant’s work was a substantial causal factor for the development 
of her bleeding ulcer.  (Ex. 8, p. 28) 
 
Dr. Chen saw claimant once for an IME.  He opined that “while it is possible that 
her reportedly ‘toxic’ work environment may have led to a temporary worsening of her 
peptic ulcer disease that developed over the initial 7 weeks of her employment with the 
Polk County Board of Supervisors from January to February of 2020, it is my medical 
opinion that her work environment was only a minor factor that led to her peptic ulcer 
disease.”  (Ex. G, p. 61) 
 
I respect the opinions of Dr. Chen.  However, as noted in the record, claimant’s 
last bleeding ulcer had resolved in June of 2017.  There is no record claimant had 
bleeding ulcers until the time of her date of injury.  Records indicate claimant worked in 
a very stressful and toxic work environment.  Even Dr. Chen acknowledges that 
claimant’s work environment may have resulted in a temporary worsening of her peptic 
ulcer disease.  Dr. Chen offers little rationale, given the temporal relationship between 
the toxic work environment and the bleeding ulcers, why the work environment was only 
a “minor factor” that led to claimant’s hospitalization.  Given this discrepancy, it is found 
that Dr. Chen’s opinion, that the work environment was only a “minor factor” in causing 
claimant’s bleeding ulcers, is not convincing. 
 
Dr. Schneider and Dr. Conte both opine claimant’s bleeding ulcer was caused by 
her hostile work environment.  Dr. Chen’s opinion regarding causation is found not 
convincing.  Given this record, claimant has carried her burden of proof regarding 
medical causation of her ulcers in regard to her work environment. 
 
Regarding the medical causation of claimant’s anxiety and depression, Dr. Chen 
opined that claimant’s work environment was only a minor factor in her anxiety.  (Ex. G, 
p. 61)   
 
Dr. Conte opined that claimant’s work environment aggravated claimant’s anxiety 
disorder, but could not give an opinion regarding permanent impairment regarding 
claimant’s mental health condition.  (Ex. 8, p. 29)  Dr. Conte based his opinion of 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 12 
 
causation to anxiety, in part, on an understanding that claimant was on an elevated 
dose of an anxiety medication during her time at Polk County.  (Ex. 8, p. 29)  There is 
no evidence in the record that the dosage of claimant’s anxiety medication increased 
during her employment with Polk County.  As noted, claimant sought mental health 
counseling from September 2020 through March of 2021 on approximately 12 
occasions.  Claimant’s work at Polk County is not mentioned in any of these visits.  (JE 
4)  Dr. Conte offers no explanation, if claimant’s work at Polk County aggravated her 
anxiety, why this is not expressed in any mental health treatment records.  Given this 
discrepancy, Dr. Conte’s opinions regarding medical causation of claimant’s anxiety 
disorder are found not convincing.   
 
Dr. Schneider, in a letter written by claimant’s counsel, also opined that 
claimant’s work environment was a substantial factor in the increase in claimant’s 
mental health problem.  (Ex. 7, p. 23)  Dr. Schneider’s opinion also fails to address the 
discrepancy between mental health treatment records, found in Exhibit 4, and his 
causation opinion.  For this reason, Dr. Schneider’s opinion regarding medical causation 
of claimant’s anxiety disorder, is found not convincing. 
 
Dr. Chen opined that claimant’s work environment was at most a minor factor in 
claimant’s anxiety.  The causation opinion of Dr. Schneider and Dr. Conte regarding 
claimant’s anxiety and her work environment are found not convincing.  Given this 
record, claimant has failed to carry her burden of proof her mental health condition was 
causally or materially aggravated by her work at Polk County.  
 
In summation, claimant has carried her burden of proof regarding medical and 
legal causation her ulcers were materially aggravated or caused by her work at Polk 
County. 
 
The next issue to be determined is whether claimant’s claim for benefits is barred 
by application of Iowa Code section 85.23. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 229 
Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91 (1940). 

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 13 
 
Claimant said she told Mr. McCoy she had a bleeding ulcer and told him the 
likelihood was that it was related to her work at Polk County.  (Tr., pp. 31, 36-38) 
Defendant did not dispute that they were aware of claimant’s bleeding ulcer.  
(Defendant’s Post-Hearing Brief, page 16)  However, defendant contends that claimant 
failed to notify Polk County her bleeding ulcers were caused by her work. 
Claimant did not file an injury report with Polk County.  She did not request 
medical treatment from Polk County.  When she returned to work after her illness, 
claimant did not contact the Risk Management department of Polk County for further 
medical treatment.  (Ex. E, p. 31, depo p. 40)   
Claimant testified that Polk County was unaware in September 2020 that she 
might have a workers’ compensation claim.  (Tr., p. 106) 
Claimant’s supervisor, Ms. Boese, testified that claimant never reported an injury 
to her.  (Ex. I, p. 95, depo p. 25) 
Mr. McCoy was asked when claimant told him her ulcers were work related.  Mr. 
McCoy responded, “I don’t think I ever received that kind of notice from Miss 
McCauley.”  (Ex. 10, p. 42, depo p. 35)  Later in his deposition, Mr. McCoy confirmed 
claimant did not provide him with notice of a work injury regarding her ulcers.  (Ex. 10, 
p. 42, depo p. 36)  He reiterated in deposition that claimant never reported a work-
related injury to him.  (Ex. 10, p. 44, depo p. 41) 
Later in his deposition, Mr. McCoy also testified that in March of 2020 claimant 
alerted him to her bleeding ulcers and that they “. . . could potentially be related to the 
stress . . .” at Polk County.  (Ex. 10, p. 46, depo p. 50) 
Claimant testified that when she had her exit interview, she told Mr. Nahas that 
the toxic work environment at Polk County had made her sick.  (Tr., pp. 57-58)  
Claimant composed and typed the exit interview notes in early June of 2020.  There is 
nothing in the exit interview notes indicating that claimant had a work-related injury 
regarding her ulcers.  There is nothing in the notes indicating that claimant gave notice 
to Mr. Nahas of a work-related injury regarding her ulcer condition.  (Ex. 2) 
Claimant did not complete an injury report.  She did not notify her supervisor, Ms. 
Boese, of a work injury.  She did not request treatment from Polk County.  She did not 
contact Risk Management at Polk County regarding further medical treatment.  At 
hearing, claimant admitted Polk County was not aware of her work injury as of 
September 2020.  Claimant testified she told Mr. McCoy her ulcers were a work injury 
caused by stress at Polk County.  On at least three occasions, Mr. McCoy testified that 
claimant never reported a work injury.  Mr. McCoy also testified that claimant told him 
her bleeding ulcers “. . . could potentially be related to the stress . . .” at Polk County.  
Claimant contends she told Mr. Nahas in her exit interview she had a work-related injury 
regarding her ulcers.  There is nothing in the exit interview notes, which were composed 
and typed by claimant, indicating that she gave notice of a work injury to Polk County. 
Given this record, defendant, Polk County, has carried its burden of proof that 
claimant failed to give notice of her injury as required under Iowa Code section 85.23.  

MCCAULEY V. POLK COUNTY, IOWA 
Page 14 
 
As claimant failed to give timely notice of her injury under Iowa Code section 85.23, 
claimant’s claim for benefits is barred.   
Having found claimant’s claim for benefits is barred by application of Iowa Code 
section 85.23, all other issues are moot. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That claimant shall take nothing from the proceedings. 
That both parties shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this __17th _ day of March, 2023. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
MaKayla Augustine (via WCES) 
 
Julie Bussanmas (via WCES) 
Meghan Gavin (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
  
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
