Case Number: 5065565
Case Title:  COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU, MARY V. WALMART STORES, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Coleman Mary-5065565d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARY COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5065565 
WAL-MART STORES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ILLINOIS NATIONAL INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :             Head Note Nos.:  1803, 2701, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Mary Coleman Duchesneau, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Wal-
Mart Stores, Inc. (hereinafter “Wal-Mart”), as the employer and Illinois National 
Insurance Company as the insurance carrier.  This case came before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Michelle A. McGovern for an arbitration hearing on April 
25, 2019, in Des Moines.  The hearing transcript was filed with the Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation on May 3, 2019. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted by the hearing deputy and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ 
stipulations will be made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
Claimant was the only witness that testified at hearing.  The parties offered Joint 
Exhibits 1 through 10.  Claimant offered Exhibits 1 through 9.  Defendants offered 
Exhibits A through F.  All offered exhibits were admitted as evidence in the case. 
Post-hearing briefs were filed on May 24, 2019.  The case was deemed fully 
submitted to Deputy McGovern on that date. 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner determined that Deputy 
Commissioner McGovern was unavailable to the agency.  Therefore, pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 17A.15(2), Commissioner Cortese delegated this file to the undersigned 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Mar-02  13:57:09     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
for preparation and filing of an arbitration decision.  Deputy McGovern returned to the 
agency before the undersigned could file this decision.  However, Deputy McGovern 
has now retired and is unavailable to the agency.   
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A.15(2), the undersigned inquired of the parties 
whether they believed demeanor of a witness is a substantial factor in the case.  The 
undersigned offered to hear those portions of the testimony again for which demeanor 
was considered a substantial factor.  On December 27, 2019, defense counsel 
confirmed via e-mail to the undersigned that defendants do not believe demeanor is a 
substantial factor in this case and that they have no objection to the undersigned 
drafting an arbitration decision without further evidentiary hearing.  On December 30, 
2019, claimant’s counsel similarly confirmed via e-mail that claimant does not have an 
objection based on demeanor.  Therefore, pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A.15(2) 
and the Commissioner’s Order of Delegation filed on December 30, 2019, the 
undersigned performs a review of the evidentiary record in this case and issues this 
arbitration decision at the direction of the Commissioner. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant proved her current neck condition is causally related to 
the April 2, 2012 work injury at Wal-Mart. 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
3. 
Whether claimant has proven entitlement to future treatment through 
Steven Quam, D.O. 
4. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, the 
extent of any such assessment. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Mary Coleman Duchesneau is a 59-year-woman who possesses a high school 
diploma.  (Transcript, pages 10, 41)  She attempted to enter the carpenters union but 
withdrew from her journeyman training when she became pregnant.  (Tr., p. 41)  She 
has worked a variety of jobs throughout her work life.  Among the jobs she has 
performed are carpentry work, janitorial work, retail sales, baking, dry cleaning, child 
care, as a cab driver, in a photo lab at Walgreens, as a cashier, customer service 
manager, merchandise supervisor, photo manager, deli merchandise supervisor, and as 
a people greeter/customer host at Wal-Mart.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 8, pp. 1-2) 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Ms. Coleman Duschesneau started her employment with Wal-Mart in 2003.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 8)  Although she worked various positions within the company, she 
eventually transferred and was working as the deli merchandise supervisor.  On April 2, 
2012, Ms. Coleman Duschesneau developed difficulties with both hands and arms, 
which she felt radiated up to her shoulders as well, as a result of using a Gemini. 
Although initial medical records did not report complaints of neck symptoms, Ms. 
Coleman Duchesneau testified that she experienced pain running into her neck as well.  
(Tr., p. 14)  She used this hand-held device (the Gemini) three to four hours a day to 
price and change pricing on deli items.  (Tr., p. 13)  Claimant also testified that she did 
not have any prior injuries to her hands, elbows, shoulders or neck before April 2012.  
(Tr., pp. 35-36)  No prior medical records are in evidence to document ongoing or pre-
existing problems with claimant’s hands, elbows, shoulders or neck. 
On April 2, 2012, claimant developed symptoms and could not release her grip 
on the Gemini.  She reported her condition to Wal-Mart management.  The company 
sent claimant for medical attention.   
Claimant was evaluated at Iowa Methodist Occupational Health and Wellness 
clinic on April 17, 2012.  The initial assessment was bilateral hand, elbow, shoulder and 
back strain related to repetitive work on a cumulative basis.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 1)  
Claimant was given bilateral carpal tunnel braces and elbow pads.  She was started on 
some anti-inflammatory and muscle relaxant medications.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 1) 
Unfortunately, initial conservative measures were not effective in relieving 
claimant’s symptoms.  She was referred for an EMG and orthopaedic consultation.  
(Joint Ex. 1, pp. 2-3)  Bill Koenig, M.D. performed the EMG on May 7, 2012 and 
identified very mild left carpal tunnel syndrome and very mild left cubital tunnel 
syndrome.  He identified no evidence for carpal or cubital tunnel syndrome on the right 
side.  (Joint Ex. 2) 
Michael A. Gainer, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon, evaluated Ms. Coleman 
Duchesneau on May 29, 2012.  Claimant reported decreased mobility, locking, popping 
and swelling and reported symptoms radiating in the arms bilaterally.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 1)  
Dr. Gainer assessed claimant with both cubital and carpal tunnel syndromes.  However, 
he recommended against operative intervention at that time.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 3) 
Dr. Gainer re-evaluated claimant on August 2, 2012.  At that appointment, he 
diagnosed claimant with carpal tunnel syndrome and a lesion of the ulnar nerve.  He 
noted he found no evidence of trigger finger during his evaluation.  However, he did not 
recommend surgical intervention and only instructed claimant to return to his office as 
needed.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 5) 
Unfortunately, claimant’s symptoms continued.  She was referred to John L. 
Gaffey, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon, for a second opinion.  Dr. Gaffey assessed her 
with bilateral upper extremity pain, numbness and tingling.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 1)  However, 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Dr. Gaffey noted that her history and clinical findings did not suggest carpal tunnel 
syndrome, cubital tunnel syndrome, or any nerve impingement.  He also opined that 
claimant did not demonstrate any significant tendinopathy.   
Dr. Gaffey recommended continued use of wrist splints, but recommended 
against any surgical intervention for the hands or arms.  Dr. Gaffey noted, “I do not 
believe that she has a nerve impingement that is treatable by a surgeon that would 
cause her significant relief.”  Instead, he recommended evaluation of claimant’s neck 
and referred her to a pain specialist, Steven R. Quam, D.O., for evaluation.  (Joint Ex. 4, 
p. 2) 
Dr. Quam initially evaluated claimant on September 28, 2012.  He diagnosed her 
with upper extremity pain and possible carpal and cubital tunnel syndrome bilaterally.  
(Joint Ex. 5, p. 1)  He recommended a cervical MRI and the possibility of a cervical 
epidural steroid injection.  He also increased her dosage of Gabapentin.  (Joint Ex. 5, 
pp. 3-4) 
The cervical MRI demonstrated a small central bulge at C4-5 as well as minimal 
disc bulges at C5-6 and C6-7.  (Joint Ex. 6)  Between December 2012 and May 2017, 
Dr. Quam performed numerous epidural steroid injections into claimant’s neck.  
Claimant testified that she has ongoing neck symptoms and that she gets migraines as 
a result of her neck pain.  (Tr., p. 33) 
Unfortunately, claimant’s hand and left shoulder symptoms never resolved.  She 
was ultimately referred to an orthopaedic surgeon, Ericka Lawler, M.D., at the University 
of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  Dr. Lawler evaluated claimant in October 2014.  She 
documented an event at work where claimant experienced a pop in her left shoulder 
while lifting a bicycle above her head.  Dr. Lawler documents no reports of neck pain 
from claimant, however.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 1)  Initially, Dr. Lawler joined with Dr. Gainer 
and Dr. Gaffey and recommended against any surgical intervention for claimant’s hands 
or elbows.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 4)  However, upon re-evaluation by a nurse practitioner at Dr. 
Lawler’s clinic, a referral for evaluation by a shoulder surgeon was made. 
James V. Nepola, M.D. evaluated claimant on February 16, 2015.  After 
attempting an unsuccessful injection in claimant’s left shoulder, Dr. Nepola 
recommended surgical intervention.  Dr. Nepola took claimant to surgery on June 5, 
2015.  He performed a left shoulder arthroscopy in which he resected claimant’s distal 
clavicle and performed a subacromial decompression in the left shoulder.  (Joint Ex. 8, 
p. 32) 
Dr. Nepola declared maximum medical improvement for claimant’s left shoulder 
on July 19, 2016.  He recommended permanent work restrictions that include no 
repetitive reaching away from claimant’s body or above shoulder height with the left 
arm.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 90)  Dr. Nepola ultimately opined that claimant sustained an 11 
percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of her left shoulder 
injury.  (Defendants’ Ex. D, p. 18)  He reiterated his permanent work restrictions for the 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
left shoulder that include no repetitive reaching away from the body or above shoulder 
with the left arm.  (Defendants’ Ex. D, p. 18) 
Claimant’s hand symptoms continued, however.  Ultimately, claimant returned to 
Dr. Lawler for injections and was later recommended for surgical intervention for 
bilateral carpal tunnel release and trigger finger releases.  In all, claimant underwent ten 
surgeries for her hands, including carpal and cubital tunnel releases as well as various 
trigger finger releases.  (Joint Ex. 8) 
Dr. Lawler declared maximum medical improvement for claimant’s various hand 
and finger issues on March 12, 2018.  She opined that claimant should not lift greater 
than 15 pounds with her right hand or repetitively grip with the right hand.  Dr. Lawler 
deferred to Dr. Nepola’s restrictions for the left upper extremity.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 116; 
Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 20)  However, Dr. Lawler recommended a functional capacity 
evaluation (FCE) be performed to objectively document claimant’s residual abilities.  
(Joint Ex. 8, p. 117) 
Unfortunately, the May 22, 2018 FCE was deemed invalid due to inconsistent 
performance by claimant.  The FCE suggested, if its demonstrated abilities were utilized 
as permanent restrictions, that claimant could only lift five pounds and that she would be 
in the sedentary work category.  (Joint Ex. 9) 
Ms. Coleman Duchesneau obtained an independent medical evaluation 
performed by Sunil Bansal, M.D. on March 15, 2018.  Dr. Bansal expressed concerns 
about claimant’s right shoulder, opined that the right shoulder was not at maximum 
medical improvement and recommended a right shoulder MRI.  Of course, no treatment 
has been provided for the right shoulder, nor was any recommended by Dr. Nepola 
during his evaluations. 
Dr. Bansal opined that claimant sustained cumulative injuries to both shoulders, 
both elbows, both hands, both wrists and fingers on both hands.  Dr. Bansal opined that 
the injuries were the result of overuse syndrome.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 17-20)  He 
assigned 3 percent of the whole person for the right shoulder, 3 percent of the whole 
person as a result of right carpal tunnel syndrome, as well as 11 percent of the whole 
person as a result of claimant’s left shoulder injury and 2 percent of the whole person as 
a result of the left carpal tunnel syndrome.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, pp. 21-22) 
Dr. Bansal also opined that claimant requires permanent work restrictions as a 
result of her injuries.  Specifically, Dr. Bansal opined that claimant should not lift greater 
than five pounds with either hand, should not lift over shoulder and should not frequently 
squeeze, pinch, grip or grasp with either hand.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 22) 
Defendants obtained an independent medical evaluation of their own with 
Charles D. Mooney, M.D. on October 5, 2018.  Dr. Mooney opined that claimant’s job 
activities at Wal-Mart were not a direct causal or specific aggravating factor for carpal 
tunnel syndrome or trigger finger.  He opined that claimant’s left shoulder injury was 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
also not related to her work duties at Wal-Mart.  Dr. Mooney deferred to the treating 
surgeons regarding the dates for maximum medical improvement.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, 
pp. 10-11) 
Dr. Mooney also concurred with Dr. Lawler and opined that claimant does not 
qualify for any permanent impairment related to carpal tunnel syndrome or trigger finger.  
He noted that there is significant psychological overlay and non-physiologic findings 
during his evaluation.  Dr. Mooney did assign a 10 percent upper extremity impairment 
rating for the distal clavicle resection in claimant’s left shoulder.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 
11)  Dr. Mooney assigned no permanent restrictions because claimant provided an 
inconsistent FCE and because of the psychological overlay he identified during his 
evaluation.  Dr. Mooney opined that claimant could advance her activities if she desired 
to do so.  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 12) 
Claimant’s counsel also wrote to Dr. Quam, requesting an opinion regarding 
causation of claimant’s various claimed injuries.  Dr. Quam did not provide an 
independent response, but signed claimant’s counsel’s correspondence.  In that 
correspondence, Dr. Quam appears to assign causation of claimant’s various conditions 
to her work duties at Wal-Mart.  Specifically, Dr. Quam opines via claimant’s counsel’s 
letter that claimant sustained cumulative injuries to the bilateral hands, bilateral elbows, 
bilateral shoulders and neck as a result of work duties at Wal-Mart.  (Claimant’s Ex. 9, 
p. 2)  No other physician has rendered a causation opinion regarding the cause of 
claimant’s neck condition. 
As I weigh and consider the competing medical evidence, I find the medical 
opinions of Dr. Lawler and Dr. Nepola to be the most convincing opinions in this record.  
Both were treating surgeons and had a chance to evaluate claimant numerous times in 
clinic and both evaluated claimant intra-operatively.  To the extent Dr. Bansal concurs in 
his causation opinions about the left shoulder, hands, elbows, and trigger finger 
conditions being related to claimant’s work at Wal-Mart, I accept those opinions as well.  
Similarly, to the extent that Dr. Quam causally relates the left shoulder, hands, elbows, 
and trigger fingers, I find those opinions to be convincing.  
I do not find the causation opinions of Dr. Mooney to be convincing in this 
situation.  Instead, I find the repetitive use of claimant’s hands likely to be the cause of 
her trigger fingers, carpal tunnel and left shoulder conditions. 
With respect to the right shoulder, I do not find the causation opinion of Dr. 
Bansal to be convincing.  Claimant requested no treatment for the right shoulder and did 
not complain significantly of right shoulder symptoms over the course of numerous 
evaluations with a pain specialist and various orthopaedic surgeons.  Dr. Nepola makes 
no mention of right shoulder symptoms and I find that claimant has not proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she sustained a right shoulder injury as a result of 
her work duties at Wal-Mart. 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
With respect to claimant’s alleged neck injury, the only physician that offers an 
opinion is Dr. Quam.  In response to claimant attorney’s letter, he includes the neck 
condition as causally related to work duties.  (Claimant’s Ex. 9, p. 2)  Given the lengthy 
treatment provided by Dr. Quam for the neck condition, I find his causation opinion 
credible and convincing.  Therefore, I find that claimant has proven she sustained a 
neck injury as a result of her work duties at Wal-Mart.  However, no physician has 
opined that the neck injury resulted in permanent restrictions or permanent impairment. 
I accept the work restrictions assigned by Dr. Lawler and Dr. Nepola as the 
applicable work restrictions.  I also accept their maximum medical improvement dates 
as most applicable.  I accept Dr. Lawler’s opinion that claimant sustained no permanent 
impairment as a result of the carpal tunnel syndrome or trigger finger conditions.  I also 
accept Dr. Nepola’s 11 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result 
of the left shoulder injury as most accurate.  Therefore, I find that claimant has proven 
an 11 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of her injuries and 
that she requires permanent work restrictions.  As the parties stipulated, claimant has 
proven permanent disability resulting from her work injuries, including the left shoulder 
and bilateral hands and arms. 
Ms. Coleman Duchesneau testified that she could not return to work in the 
carpentry field, performing the repetitive work of a cashier, performing the physical work 
of fire clean-up she performed at Service Master, or in the janitorial work she previously 
performed.  These are all accepted as accurate. 
Claimant asserted that she cannot return to work as a deli manager at Wal-Mart 
in her current condition.  Given that she used the Gemini three to four hours per day, 
this would likely violate the restrictions offered by Dr. Lawler.  Similarly, claimant 
testified she could not return to work in a photo lab at Wal-Mart or Walgreens.  She 
testified there were lifting duties in those jobs, which would likely exceed her restrictions 
from Dr. Lawler and Dr. Nepola. 
Ms. Coleman Duchesneau earned $13.50 per hour working at Wal-Mart on the 
date of injury.  She continues working for Wal-Mart and currently earns $15.60 per hour.  
(Tr., pp. 65, 67)  Accordingly, she has not sustained an actual loss of income as a result 
of the injuries on an ongoing basis.  Nevertheless, claimant has limited educational 
training.  At the age of 59, she is not likely to successfully retrain and it likely would not 
make economic sense for her to pursue further training at this time. 
With Dr. Lawler’s 15-pound lifting restriction with the right hand and the 
limitations imposed by Dr. Nepola for the left arm, claimant is precluded from returning 
to several prior employment positions.  She continues working for Wal-Mart, but her 
employment options are now significantly limited if she is terminated by Wal-Mart or 
elects to pursue alternate employment options.  On the other hand, claimant earns more 
at Wal-Mart.  I find that claimant sustained a moderate to significant loss of future 
earning capacity as a result of the April 2, 2012 work injuries at Wal-Mart. 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
Considering claimant’s age, educational and employment histories, her continued 
employment for Wal-Mart, her inability to return to several jobs she held in the past, the 
situs and severity of her injuries, including the numerous surgeries, her permanent work 
restrictions, permanent impairment, her motivation to continue working, as well as all 
other factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find claimant 
proved a 55 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the April 2, 2012 work 
injuries at Wal-Mart. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute between the parties is whether claimant proved her neck 
condition is causally related to the work injury on April 2, 2012 at Wal-Mart.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
In this case, I found that the only physician offering a causation opinion 
pertaining to claimant’s neck condition was Dr. Quam.  Given that Dr. Quam was a long-
time treating pain specialist for claimant’s neck, I found his unrebutted causation opinion 
credible and convincing.  Having found that claimant proved she sustained a neck injury 
as a result of her work duties at Wal-Mart, I conclude claimant proved she sustained a 
neck injury arising out of and in the course of her employment with Wal-Mart on April 2, 
2012.  The neck injury and resulting condition was considered as part of my analysis of 
permanent disability, although it was found that no physician imposed permanent 
restrictions or permanent impairment as a result of the neck condition. 
The next disputed issue between the parties is the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent disability benefits.  The parties stipulate that Ms. Coleman 
Duchesneau sustained permanent disability as a result of the April 2, 2012 work injury 
and that the injury should be compensated with industrial disability pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(u)(2012). 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Having considered the relevant industrial disability factors outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I found that claimant proved a 55 percent loss of future earning 
capacity as a result of the April 2, 2012 work injury at Wal-Mart.  This is equivalent to a 
55 percent industrial disability and entitles claimant to an award of 275 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u). 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
Ms. Coleman Duchesneau also asserts a claim for alternate medical care 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  Specifically, claimant seeks an order 
authorizing future treatment through Dr. Quam, for treatment of her neck. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
Having found that claimant proved a causal connection between her work duties 
at Wal-Mart and her alleged neck injury, I conclude that claimant is entitled to ongoing 
and future medical care for the neck condition.  Having found that Dr. Quam was a 
treating physician for the neck condition and that he causally connected it to claimant’s 
work activities, I conclude that claimant’s request for future medical care through Dr. 
Quam is reasonable. 
Defendants denied liability and authorized any further treatment through Dr. 
Quam based upon the medical opinions of Dr. Mooney.  I did not accept or find Dr. 
Mooney’s medical opinions to be convincing in this case.  Given that defendants are 
currently offering no additional treatment and that Dr. Quam recommends additional 
treatment for the neck, I conclude that claimant has established entitlement to an order 
for alternate medical care.  Specifically, I conclude claimant is entitled to an order of 
alternate medical care for future treatment of her neck to be through and at the direction 
of Dr. Quam. 
 
 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.   
 
Claimant has not introduced specific costs for reimbursement, other than the cost 
of filing her petition.  The filing fee is a permissible and reasonable cost.  876 IAC 
4.33(7).  I conclude that defendants should be ordered to reimburse claimant the cost of 
her filing fee, or $100.00. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant two hundred seventy-five (275) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated weekly rate of three hundred 
thirty-eight and 36/100 dollars ($338.36), commencing on August 9, 2016. 
Defendants shall be entitled to the stipulated credit noted on the hearing report 
against this award of benefits. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Dr. Quam is authorized and appointed as the treating physician for claimant’s 
neck injury.  All future causally related medical care of claimant’s neck shall be through 
or at the direction of Dr. Quam. 
If they have not already done so, defendants shall immediately reimburse 
claimant’s independent medical evaluation fee pursuant to their agreement to do so at 
the time of hearing. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s taxable costs totaling one hundred dollars 
($100.00). 
 
 

COLEMAN DUCHESNEAU V. WAL-MART STORES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
Defendants shall timely file all reports as required by 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this 2nd day of March, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jenna Green (via WCES) 
Lindsey Mills (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
