Case Number: 5060394
Case Title:  WILSON, ELMER G. V. TAMA PAPERBOARD
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Wilson Elmer-5060394D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ELMER WILSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5060394 
TAMA PAPERBOARD, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                     Head Note No. 1803 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Elmer Wilson, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Tama Paperboard, employer, and Ace American Insurance 
Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Nate Willems.  The 
defendants were represented by James Peters. 
The matter came on for hearing on January 27, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The voluminous record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 
1 through 14; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 9; and Defense Exhibits A through C.  It 
should be noted that at the conclusion of hearing, the record was held open for a period 
of thirty days to allow defendants to obtain and submit Defendants’ Exhibit C. 
The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to his spouse, Chris Wilson.  Marla 
Happel was appointed and served as court reporter for the proceeding.  The matter was 
fully submitted on April 12, 2021 after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained any permanent disability. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-12  12:53:55     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 2 
 
2. If the claimant has sustained any permanent disability, the extent of disability 
is disputed.  Defendants contend claimant is not at maximum medical 
improvement.  Claimant contends he is permanently and totally disabled.  
Alternatively, claimant contends he is in healing period. 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to penalty benefits. 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on September 1, 2016. 
3. The injury is a cause of temporary disability. 
4. The weekly rate of compensation is $787.68. 
5. Medical expenses are not in dispute. 
6. Credit is not in dispute. 
7. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Elmer Wilson, was 63 years old as of the date of hearing.  He resides 
in Toledo, Iowa.  He sustained a serious injury which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on or about September 1, 2016.  The primary issue in this proceeding 
is to determine whether he is at maximum medical improvement at the time of hearing. 
Mr. Wilson testified live and under oath at the video hearing.  He wore dark 
glasses and was shaking with apparent tremors during his testimony.  His affect was 
subdued.  I find his testimony to be credible.  He was a reasonably good historian under 
the circumstances.  His testimony generally coincides with the other evidence in the 
record.  There was nothing about his demeanor which caused me any concern about 
his truthfulness.  On the contrary, he appeared truthful and forthright. 
Mr. Wilson has worked at Tama Paperboard (hereafter, “Tama”) since 1991.  He 
has a high school education (South Tama County High, 1976) and has worked in 
physical, manual labor jobs for his entire life.  He served honorably in the United States 
Navy.  It is noted that he served on the Toledo City Council for 12 years.  At Tama, he 
worked numerous positions before he became a maintenance worker.  He was 
physically capable of performing all aspects of his job before his injury.  The parties 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 3 
 
stipulated that on September 1, 2016, Mr. Wilson sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment.  He was climbing down an anchored ladder into a 
pit on that date.  A bolt on the ladder broke and he fell backward hitting his head against 
the wall of the pit and then falling to the ground.  (Transcript, pages 21-22) 
The injury is well documented in the medical records and Mr. Wilson received 
treatment the same day.  (Jt. Ex. 1; Jt. Ex. 2)  He was treated through Mercy Care 
Tama where his symptoms were documented as head, neck and right hip pain, slow 
mental activity, blurry vision, loss of peripheral vision and dizziness.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 22-
23)  He was returned to work by the employer relatively quickly on light-duty.  By the 
end of September 2016, he started treating with a neurologist at Physicians’ Clinic of 
Iowa (PCI), Laurence Krain, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 5)  At that time, the medical notes 
documented symptoms including dull headache, occasional stabbing headache, 
persistent neck pain, difficulty concentrating, dizziness and word finding difficulties when 
speaking. Dr. Krain diagnosed post-traumatic headache, post-traumatic amnesia, 
postconcussion syndrome, mild traumatic brain injury and cervicalgia.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 53)  
Dr. Krain prescribed nortriptyline for the persistent headache and recommended a 
course of physical therapy. 
Mr. Wilson testified he never had any of these symptoms prior to the work injury.  
He testified that other than the hip pain initially documented, all of these symptoms have 
persisted since his work injury.  Mr. Wilson continued to treat with Dr. Krain throughout 
2016.  In December 2016, Dr. Krain noted a mild tremor.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62)  The tremor 
initially began in his fingers but gradually went up to his hands and arms.  He testified at 
hearing that he cannot use silverware normally or carry a plate without spilling.  (Tr., pp. 
26-27) 
In February 2017, Mr. Wilson was evaluated by a second neurologist, Michael 
Kitchell, M.D.  Dr. Kitchell performed a full evaluation and reviewed the history of his 
injury.  He documented the following symptoms at that time: 
Mr. Wilson has had some continued headaches, vision trouble, and 
dizziness as well as some concentration and memory problems since the 
head injury.  He says his headaches have never gone away, though they 
do get down to about a 2 on a 10-point scale at times.  He says in the 
morning when he awakens they are not as severe, but by the end of the 
day they can be more severe about 5 to 6.  He says the headaches seem 
to be worse when he is in crowds or with motion.  He says that when he is 
riding in a car he gets motion sickness now.  He says when he looks at the 
corn it makes him more dizzy.  He says the dizziness is like he is seasick 
or getting over a drunken period of time.  He says that it is a little bit of a 
motion or spinning sensation and it is worse when he has a headache.  
The dizziness and headache seem to go together.  His visual disturbance 
is like he has a loss of peripheral vision and he says he does not drive on 
the highway now because of that.  He says he does drive around town, 
but he is afraid that when he turns he does not seem to see as well, it is 
hard for him to see objects. 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 4 
 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 78)  From February 2017 through March 2018, Dr. Kitchell attempted six 
different medications for headaches which were all basically unsuccessful.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 
89) 
In June 2017, he was referred to Brian Steiner, Psy.D., for a mental health 
evaluation.  Dr. Steiner performed an MMPI, however, a formal diagnosis was not 
provided at the initial visit.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 92)  Dr. Steiner opined that Mr. Wilson is “a 
well-functioning individual psychologically and that there is no evidence to believe that 
psychological difficulties are adding to the symptoms which he is experiencing.”  (Jt. Ex. 
7, p. 93)  He has received mental health counseling through the date of hearing; his 
progress notes document symptoms experienced at the time of each visit.  (Jt. Ex. 7, 
pp. 94-136) 
Tama continued to provide light-duty for Mr. Wilson for about a year after the 
injury.  He was able to do some cleaning, however, he could not be near spinning 
equipment, lift heavy weights or go up and down stairs.  Chris Wilson, claimant’s 
spouse, testified that on occasion, his safety director had to drive him home from work.  
(Tr., p. 76)  Mr. Wilson testified that the safety manager eventually informed him he was 
too high a safety risk for falling.  (Tr., p. 29)  The parties submitted no other documents 
or evidence regarding the termination from employment other than the hearsay 
testimony of his wife.  (Tr., p. 79) 
Mr. Wilson’s spouse of 37 plus years, Chris Wilson, also testified at hearing.  Her 
testimony is highly credible and compelling.  She testified that after his termination, she 
helped him apply for jobs online with no success.  (Tr., p. 79)  In 2018, he sought 
assistance from Iowa Vocational Rehabilitation.  The IVR notes documented that Mr. 
Wilson “struggled to maintain focus during each of our meetings.”  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 55)  The 
Social Security Administration determined Mr. Wilson was totally disabled as of April 
2018.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 156) 
John Rayburn, M.D., treated Mr. Wilson from October 2018, through March 2019.  
He diagnosed cervicalgia, chronic pain and cervical spondylosis.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 183)  
He attempted various nerve blocks and injections, which did not provide much relief. 
In June 2019, Mr. Wilson was evaluated by a third neurologist, Christopher 
Groth, M.D., at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC).  Dr. Groth primarily 
evaluated Mr. Wilson’s tremor.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 162)  After a full work-up, including a DaT 
scan, he ultimately opined that the tremor was most likely caused by his head injury, 
rather than Parkinson’s disease or a medication side effect.  (Jt. Ex 9, p. 176)  The 
appropriate diagnosis is Parkinsonism.  I find Dr. Groth’s opinion compelling as it relates 
to the tremors. 
In September 2019, Randy Kardon, M.D., of UIHC Neuro-Ophthalmology Clinic 
evaluated Mr. Wilson.  He opined that the headaches were the main factor affecting Mr. 
Wilson’s vision issues.  He recommended attempting to address and reduce the 
migraines in order to control these symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 173) 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 5 
 
In December 2019, a fourth neurologist, Lara Lazarre, M.D., examined Mr. 
Wilson.  Dr. Lazarre primarily focused on the treatment of Mr. Wilson’s migraines.  She 
diagnosed “chronic common migraine without aura with intractable migraine with status 
migrainous.”  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 214)  She recommended a strict diet, sleep goals, stress 
control, including exercise and physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 215)  She has continued 
to treat Mr. Wilson since December 2019 up through the date of hearing.  She 
attempted different medications and even Botox injections.  None of these treatments 
have truly worked to date.  Dr. Lazarre has opined broadly that Mr. Wilson is not at 
maximum medical improvement for his headaches.  This opinion will be discussed 
further below.  Dr. Lazarre examined Mr. Wilson on November 3, 2020, documenting 
the following opinions: 
62 yo with concussion and chronic migraines that developed after a fall on 
9/2016 at work.  Has tried multiple medications- but it’s unclear he actually 
took the medications long enough to find out if there was a benefit given 
that workman’s compensation department has denied him refills many 
times.  While many people can have migraines for many years after an 
injury, it is low frequency of occurrence and I suspect in his case that a 
significant reason of why he hasn’t improved all these years later and has 
needed continued medical treatment is that he hasn’t had a chance to try 
medications long enough for it to prove effective or not.  He and his wife 
will collect information on the length of treatment of the prior medicines 
and we may retry prior treatments if he didn’t have a sufficient trial. 
This is frustrating for both the patient and myself.  Micromanagement from 
decision makers in the workman’s compensation [sic] department and 
legal team who have not graduated medical school and a neurology 
residency lack the knowledge base and experience to knowledgably weigh 
in on treatment options.  Other parties who do not meet this level of 
training should withhold exerting power over the treatment of my patient.  I 
believe doing so has been detrimental to the care of my patient and wildly 
irresponsible. 
(Jt. Ex. 12, p. 234)  Dr. Lazarre went on to recommend new medications to attempt to 
control Mr. Wilson’s symptoms. 
In June 2020, Mr. Wilson began a vision treatment program through Dr. D.M. 
Fitzgerald & Associates.  He participated in twenty-two visits which attempted to 
improve hand-eye coordination and improve his tremors.  (Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 243-247)  Mr. 
Wilson did not feel this treatment was effective.  (Tr., p. 38)  
In October 2020, Mr. Wilson underwent a valid functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) to determine his physical limitations.  The FCE placed him in the “lower medium” 
category allowing him to lift up to 25 pounds on an occasional basis.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 7)  
He was found to be unable to crouch and had significant deficits in using stairs.  (Cl. Ex. 
2, p. 7)  He was evaluated by Farid Manshadi, M.D., also in October 2020.  Dr. 
Manshadi reviewed the relevant medical records and examined Mr. Wilson.  He opined 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 6 
 
Mr. Wilson had sustained a 45 percent whole body impairment rating as a result of the 
work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 37)  Dr. Manshadi recommended prohibitive restrictions which 
would likely eliminate Mr. Wilson from gainful employment altogether.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 37)  
He also rendered opinions regarding maximum medical improvement, which will be 
discussed in greater detail below. 
Charles Mooney, M.D., performed an independent medical record review at the 
request of defendants on December 17, 2020.  (Def. Ex. A)  He reviewed a number of 
appropriate records and opined that many of Mr. Wilson’s symptoms or conditions were 
not, in fact, related to his work injury.  For example, he opined that the tremors, 
dizziness and cognitive difficulties were likely unrelated to the work injury.  (Def. Ex. A, 
pp. 8-10)  He did opine that “his only diagnosis related to the work injury is aggravation 
of underlying cervical spondylosis, migraine and possible cervicogenic headache.”  
(Def. Ex. A, p. 10)  For his work-related conditions, he opined Mr. Wilson sustained an 8 
percent whole body impairment and no restrictions.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 11)  I do not find the 
medical opinions of Dr. Mooney to be compelling.  His opinions are out of line with the 
opinions of the treating providers. 
In December 2020, Mr. Wilson was evaluated by a fifth neurologist, Nandakumar 
Narayanan, M.D., at UIHC, to follow up on the diagnosis of Parkinsonism.  He restarted 
the medication Sinemet and recommended some physical therapy specific to his 
condition.  (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 179-180) 
In addition to all of the foregoing evidence, the claimant obtained an expert 
vocational report from Barbara Laughlin.  She opined that Mr. Wilson has lost access to 
100 percent of the job market.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 84)  Vanessa May provided opinions for the 
defendants.  She opined that Mr. Wilson is employable in a variety of sedentary and 
light jobs.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 33) 
The first and primary issue in this case is whether Mr. Wilson is at maximum 
medical improvement as of the date of hearing.  While this issue shall be discussed in 
greater detail in conjunction with the law set forth in the next section, I find that the 
claimant’s condition has plateaued at the time of hearing and he is at maximum medical 
improvement.  While his current authorized treating physician, Dr. Lazarre, has provided 
hope that his condition will substantially improve, there is no good reason in this record 
to believe it will.  He has been treating for his condition since September 2016, mostly 
with various trials of medications, and nothing has helped.  His symptoms have only 
progressed over time.  By a preponderance of evidence, I find that claimant reached 
maximum medical improvement as of November 16, 2020.  It may have even been 
earlier than this, however, this is the best date I can find in the record before me.  I 
further find that a greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that Mr. Wilson is 
permanently and totally disabled. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant is at maximum medical 
improvement and, if so, when. 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 7 
 
  
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
In this case, defendants argue that claimant is not at maximum medical 
improvement.  Up through the date of hearing, defendants continued to pay healing 
period benefits.  Claimant argues his healing period ended as of November 2020, and 
permanency must be assessed. 
The imposition of a rating of permanent impairment is equivalent to an opinion 
that further significant improvement from the injury is not expected. Absent a showing 
that further improvement was expected, healing period ends when a permanent rating is 
given. Brown v. Weitz Company, File No. 830840 (App. March 13, 1990); Miller v. 
Halletts Materials, File No. 861983 (App. November 23, 1992). The persistence of pain 
does not prevent a finding that the healing period is over, provided the underlying 
condition is stable. Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 1993). Medical 
stability is viewed in terms of industrial disability; if it is unlikely that further treatment of 
pain will decrease the extent of permanent industrial disability, continued pain 
management will not prolong healing period. Id. at 392.  Specifically, when a condition is 
stable medically further treatment “may extend the length of the healing period if a 
substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result.  Id. at 391.  On the 
other hand, if the continued treatment is merely expected to assist with the symptoms 
rather than “decrease the extent of permanent disability” then the healing period should 
end.  Id. 
The expert medical opinions are conflicted to some degree on this issue.  Dr. 
Lazarre provided a very specific opinion to claimant’s counsel regarding “maximum 
medical improvement.”  In a form report on counsel’s letterhead, she opined that she did 
not believe “Elmer has yet reached maximum medical improvement.”  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 
238)  While this opinion is quite specific, it is not entirely clear.  When read in 
conjunction with her November 2020, treatment note, it is quite clear that Dr. Lazarre is 
adamant that further treatments should be attempted to improve Mr. Wilson’s 
symptoms.  Her opinion of the likelihood of success, however, is murkier.  I read her 
opinion to provide more of an optimistic and hopeful desire to attempt further treatment 
rather than an opinion that Mr. Wilson will be able to work if he simply tries the 
medications for a longer period of time.  Moreover, the phrase maximum medical 
improvement was never specifically defined to Dr. Lazarre so it is somewhat unclear, at 
least to some degree, what she meant.  While it is clear Dr. Lazarre believes that further 
medication treatments should be attempted and may provide significant benefits in 
controlling Mr. Wilson’s symptoms, she has not provided an opinion that this will likely 
reduce his industrial disability.  The reality is, Mr. Wilson has been off work for several 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 8 
 
years.  At the time of hearing he has attempted numerous medications from at least five 
different neurologists.  Importantly, based upon the evidence in the record, I believe Mr. 
Wilson wants to get better and would prefer to be working. 
Dr. Manshadi provided his own opinion regarding maximum medical 
improvement.  He provided an impairment rating and opined “Mr. Wilson will not be able 
to return to any gainful employment at this point due to all the above-mentioned 
diagnoses and symptoms.”  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 37)  Prior to hearing, he specifically opined 
that Mr. Wilson reached MMI on November 16, 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 185) 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, I find that it is unlikely that the 
claimant’s medical condition is likely to substantially improve.  I find his condition, after 
four and a half years of treatment, is stable and there is no good reason to believe that 
the further treatments recommended by Dr. Lazarre will bring substantial improvement 
to his disability.  Most likely, it could bring some minor improvement to some of his 
symptoms.  Of course, I hope I am wrong.  Fortunately, for all parties, if I am wrong 
there is a remedy.  Defendants may file a petition for review-reopening to have the 
matter reassessed.1 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
                                                                 
1 It is noted that, in some ways, this case is a highly academic exercise.  Since the phrase maximum medical 
improvement is assessed in terms of an injured worker’s industrial disability, the issue is whether there is likely to 
be a change of his condition which would prolong healing period.  This is essentially the same issue which would be 
presented in any review-reopening case. 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 9 
 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1961). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980) 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34.  
 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 10 
 
Although claimant is close to a normal retirement age, proximity to retirement 
cannot be considered in assessing the extent of industrial disability.  Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W. 2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  However, this agency does 
consider voluntary retirement or withdrawal from the work force unrelated to the injury. 
Copeland v. Boone’s Book and Bible Store, File No. 1059319, Appeal Decision 
(November 6, 1997). Loss of earning capacity due to voluntary choice or lack of 
motivation is not compensable.  Id. 
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995).  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894, (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark. 609 S.W.2d 102 
(1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. La. 
1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
Viewing the entire case file before me as a whole, I find that the claimant has 
proven permanent and total disability by a preponderance of evidence. 
Mr. Wilson was 63 years old at the time of hearing.  He has a high school 
diploma and a manual labor work history.  He is intelligent, industrious and hard 
working.  He has maintained successful, gainful employment for his entire working life 
up until this work injury.  Since the work injury, he was never able to resume true, 
gainful work. 
His overall condition is best summarized in the report of Dr. Manshadi, who set 
forth his diagnoses and impairment, as well as prohibitive restrictions, which include no 
stairs, no uneven or slippery surfaces, avoid bright lights and crowds, 10 pounds lifting, 
avoid stress, avoid bending, stooping and crouching.  (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 36-37)  He also had 
a valid functional capacity evaluation which documents his physical abilities of no lifting 
greater than 25 pounds and limiting elevated work.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  Furthermore, I find the 
vocational opinions of Barbara Laughlin to be compelling and credible.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 68) 
The only evidence in the record regarding claimant’s separation from 
employment suggests he was terminated for being a safety risk, which he likely was due 
to his condition.  It is noted that there is some dispute in the record regarding the 
medical causation of claimant’s tremor.  I have found that the tremors are likely related 
to the work injury based upon the opinion of Dr. Groth.  The symptom of tremors itself 
undoubtedly has a significant impact on his ability to work, however, he would be 
considered permanently and totally disabled regardless of this specific 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 11 
 
symptom/condition. 
Having found claimant is permanently and totally disabled, I conclude Mr. Wilson 
is entitled to permanent total disability benefits from the date he stopped working 
through the date of hearing and continuing.2 
The final issue is penalty. 
Claimant also seeks an award of penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 86.13.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the 
following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable 
investigation and evaluation by the employer or 
insurance carrier into whether benefits were owed 
to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and 
evaluation were the actual basis upon which the 
                                                                 
2 Ordinarily permanent total disability benefits commence as of the date of injury.  I find that the claimant worked 
light-duty for the employer for approximately one year after his work injury.  The exact date he was terminated is 
not in the record.  During this period of time, the claimant was paid wages while performing highly accommodated 
work.  He is, of course, not entitled to receive benefits during the period of time he was actually working.  Since 
the precise date of his termination is not in the record, the commencement date is the date he stopped working 
for wages.  

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 12 
 
employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the 
denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. 
Claimant alleges that a total of 11 checks were issued late and 13 checks 
contained underpayments.  Claimant alleges the total amount of late or underpaid 
benefits exceeds $8,000.00.  Defendants argue a continuous stream of benefits has 
been paid since claimant went off work and that, overall, the defendants record of timely 
payments is good. 
The record demonstrates that a number of checks were paid a few days, up to a 
few weeks late.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 118-122)  With a few of these payments it is difficult to 
ascertain exactly when the payment was due.  In addition, in early 2020, payments were 
made for a period of time at an incorrect rate which was roughly $30.00 per week 
underpaid.  Claimant’s counsel aggressively sought to correct this problem but it took 
nearly three months to correct this error.  The greater weight of evidence supports a 
finding that over $4,000.00 worth of benefits were untimely or otherwise underpaid.  I 
find that a penalty of $1,500.00 is appropriate to deter defendants from this type of 
conduct in the future. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
The defendants shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits at the 
stipulated and adjudicated rate of seven hundred eighty-seven and 68/100 ($787.68) 
commencing from the date of injury and continuing. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for weeks previously paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Defendants shall pay a penalty in the amount of $1,500.00. 
Costs are taxed to defendants as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 8. 

WILSON V. TAMA PAPERBOARD 
Page 13 
 
 
Signed and filed this _____12th ___ day of January 2022. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nate Willems (via WCES) 
James Peters (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
