Case Number: 5044236
Case Title:  BLASDELL, HEATHER (DEC) V. LINNHAVEN, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Bladsdell, Heather-5044236.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
LINNHAVEN, INC, 
 
Employer, 
 
and 
 
ACCIDENT FUND NATIONAL 
INSURANCE COMPANY/UNITED 
HEARTLAND, 
 
Petitioners 
 
v. 
 
ROGER BLASDELL, SURVING SPOUSE 
OF HEATHER BLASDELL 
 
Respondent. 
 
 
Case No.  CVCV062137 
 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR  
JUDICIAL REVIEW 
Introduction 
This is an administrative appeal from a decision, following a remand from the 
Iowa Supreme Court, by a Deputy acting with the Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner’s authorization that Respondent is entitled to survivor death benefits 
and an award of such benefits.  The Court convened a hearing by Zoom on December 
29, 2023.  Petitioners appeared by and through counsel, Laura Ostrander.  
Respondent appeared by and through counsel, Thomas Wertz.  
Background Facts and Proceedings 
 
On November 5, 2013, Heather Blasdell (“Heather”) sustained an injury while 
working at Linnhaven, Inc., and she sought workers’ compensation benefits from 
Linnhaven, Inc., and its insurer, Accident Fund National Insurance Company/United 
Heartland (collectively “Linnhaven”).  At the time of her injury, Heather was married to 
Roger Blasdell (“Roger”).  They had a nontraditional marital relationship.1   
                                                 
1 See, Blasdell v. Linnhaven, Inc., 989 N.W.2d 131, 133 (Iowa 2023). 
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 8

2 
 
On September 9, 2016, Heather died from an overdose of a mix of prescription 
medications:  quetiapine (Seroquel) and zolpidem (Ambien).  Roger filed a claim for 
death benefits, and he also sought reimbursement for Heather’s burial expenses, 
which Roger had paid.  Linnhaven resisted an award of benefits contending that Roger 
was barred from receiving death benefits because Roger had willfully deserted 
Heather. See, Iowa Code § 85.42(1)(a).  A Deputy Commissioner acting with the 
Commissioner’s authorization agreed with Linnhaven and denied benefits.  Roger 
sought judicial review and ultimately the Iowa Supreme Court agreed with Roger that 
there was not substantial evidence to support the Commissioner’s finding that Roger 
deserted Heather without fault such that he was disqualified from receiving death 
benefits under Iowa Code § 85.4(1)(a).2      
Because the Commissioner never addressed Linnhaven’s alternate claim, that 
the willful injury exception under Iowa Code § 85.16 also barred Roger’s claim for 
benefits, the Iowa Supreme Court remanded such claim to the Commissioner to make 
the factual findings necessary to decide this issue.3  After remand, a Deputy 
Commissioner acting with the Commissioner’s authorization concluded that 
Linnhaven had failed to meet its burden of proving that Heather’s death was a suicide.   
Consequently, the Deputy Commissioner concluded that Linnhaven had failed 
to prove its affirmative defense and awarded Roger death benefits.  Even though Roger 
made a request, the Deputy Commissioner did not act on Roger’s request for 
reimbursement for burial expenses.  As a result Roger’s request for burial expenses 
was deemed denied.  Roger claims such denial was an error of law and was 
unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious.   
                                                 
2 See, Blasdell v. Linnhaven, Inc., 989 N.W.2d 131, 140-41 (Iowa 2023). 
3 See, Blasdell v. Linnhaven, Inc., 989 N.W.2d 131, 141 (Iowa 2023). 
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 8

3 
 
Linnhaven initiated this judicial review action contending that the 
Commissioner’s finding that Petitioner failed to meet its burden of proving their 
affirmative defense was not supported by substantial evidence.  Roger contends that 
the Commissioner’s decision is supported by substantial evidence and must be 
affirmed; however, Roger also requests that the Court remand this matter so that the 
agency can act on his claim for burial expenses.  The Court must examine the parties’ 
claims in light of the following standard of review. 
Standard Of Review 
Chapter 17A of the Iowa Code governs judicial review of administrative agency 
action. The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the 
part of the agency. Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  The court 
“may grant relief if the agency action has prejudiced the substantial rights of the 
petitioner, and the agency action meets one of the enumerated criteria contained in 
section 17A.19(10)(a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care Cntr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 
(Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 N.W.2d 758, 762 
(Iowa 2011)). Where an agency has been “clearly vested” with a fact-finding function, 
the appropriate “standard of review [on appeal] depends on the aspect of the agency's 
decision that forms the basis of the petition for judicial review”—that is, whether it 
involves an issue of 1) findings of fact, 2) interpretation of law, or 3) application of law 
to fact. Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256.  
Review of findings of fact:  The courts use a substantial evidence standard 
when considering challenges to findings of fact in agency decisions.  A reviewing court 
can only disturb factual findings if they are “not supported by substantial evidence in 
the record before the court when that record is reviewed as a whole.”  Burton, 813 
N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 8

4 
 
outlined the court’s guidelines when reviewing substantial evidence claims under the 
17A.19 standard as follows: 
When reviewing a finding of fact for substantial evidence, we judge the 
finding in light of all the relevant evidence in the record cited by any 
party that detracts from that finding as well as all of the relevant 
evidence in the record cited by any party that supports it.  Our review of 
the record is fairly intensive, and we do not simply rubber stamp the 
agency finding of fact. 
 
Evidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may 
be drawn from the evidence. To that end, evidence may be substantial 
even though we may have drawn a different conclusion as fact finder. 
Our task, therefore, is not to determine whether the evidence supports a 
different finding; rather, our task is to determine whether substantial 
evidence, viewing the record as a whole, supports the findings actually 
made. 
 
Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (internal 
citations and quotation marks omitted). 
Application of law to fact:  When a party challenges the ultimate conclusion 
reached by the agency, then the challenge is to the agency's application of the law to 
the facts.  In that event, the question on review is whether the agency abused its 
discretion by, for example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important 
and relevant evidence.  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.  The court will only reverse the 
agency’s application of law to the facts if it is irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable. Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518 (Iowa 2012).  
Discussion 
 
Iowa Code §85.16 provides in relevant part that no compensation under chapter 
85 shall be allowed for an injury caused by “the employee’s willful intent to injure the 
employee’s self.”  See, Iowa Code § 85.16(1). This is the so-called willful injury defense.  
Under Iowa law, Linnhaven has the burden of proving this affirmative defense.  
DeLong v. Iowa State Highway Comm’n, 295 N.W.2d 91, 92 (Iowa 1940). 
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 8

5 
 
Linnhaven contends that the Commissioner’s decision, finding it had failed to prove its 
affirmative defense of willful injury, is not supported by substantial evidence.   
In considering Linnhaven’s claim, the Court has carefully reviewed the certified 
record.  There is no doubt that Heather died as a result of an overdose of prescription 
medication on September 9, 2016.  Roger claims Heather’s death was an accidental 
overdose, and Linnhaven claims Heather’s death was a suicide.  There is no doubt that 
Heather had mental health concerns, and prior to her death, Heather had been 
receiving mental health counseling.   
A little more than a year before her death, Heather was diagnosed with a major 
depressive disorder.  Her counselor reported that Heather was regularly experiencing 
suicidal ideations but had no specific plans or intent.  A few weeks prior to her death, 
Heather’s counseling records reveal that she was considered to be a “moderate” 
suicide risk.  These facts lead support to Linnhaven’s position that Heather’s death 
was a suicide. 
In contrast, Heather’s son, Austen Burridge, testified that his mother’s 
emotional state was good prior to her death which led him to believe Heather’s death 
was not a suicide but an accidental overdose.  Evidence was presented that Heather 
had a history of abusing her medications by taking excessive amounts to get “high.”  
In fact, Heather’s son testified that he thought his mother was “high” when he spoke 
to her at 4:00 a.m. on the morning of her death.  These facts support a finding that 
Heather’s death was accidental and not a suicide. 
A police investigation was opened to look into the circumstances surrounding 
Heather’s death.  As part of this investigation, an undated note was found in a stack of 
paperwork on Heather’s bed.  The note read in relevant part, “I am a fucking looser 
[sic] and waist [sic] of oxygen.”  This note was undated.  The police investigation 
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 8

6 
 
concluded without a definitive finding as to whether Heather had committed suicide.  
Instead, the police could only conclude that Heather had either died from an 
accidental drug overdose, or her death was a successful suicide attempt. 
After considering this evidence, the Deputy Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner found that Linnhaven had failed to meet its burden of proving its 
affirmative defense.  In so holding, the Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
reasoned as follows: 
I do recognize that counseling records made prior to Heather’s death referred to 
her as a “moderate” risk for suicide. I also recognize the note, referenced in the 
police report, could be construed to be a suicide note. However, the note is 
undated and there is no evidence if it was written the day before death, or 
written months or even years prior to death.  
 
No expert has opined Heather committed suicide. Records indicate the 
death was either accidental or undetermined. For these reasons, as detailed 
above, defendants have failed to carry their burden of proof that Heather’s 
death was a suicide under Iowa Code section 85.16(1).   
 
 Again, evidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may 
be drawn from the evidence.  In fact, evidence may be substantial even though this 
Court may have drawn a different conclusion from the evidence than the agency. After 
considering the evidence and record, the Court must conclude that substantial 
evidence supports the agency’s finding that Linnhaven failed to meet its burden of 
proof.   
While Linnhaven certainly can point to facts in the record that support a 
suspicion that Heather’s death was a suicide, they simply have not conclusively 
proven that to be the case.  There are likewise facts in the record that support a 
finding that Heather’s death was the result of a tragic accidental drug overdose and 
not a suicide. Because these two possibilities are equally probable, it is clear that 
Linnhaven has failed to meet its burden of proof of proving its affirmative defense.  
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 8

7 
 
Consequently, the agency’s decision is both supported by substantial evidence, and it 
is not irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. 
The final issue before the Court concerns the issue of burial expenses.  Iowa 
Code § 85.28 provides that when a “death ensues from the injury, the employer shall 
pay the reasonable expenses of burial of such employee.” Iowa Code § 85.28.  The 
record is clear that Roger timely made such a request; however, for reasons that are 
unclear in the record, the agency never acted on Roger’s request causing his request 
to be denied by operation of law.  Consequently, the Court concludes that remand is 
appropriate for the Commissioner to consider and rule on Roger’s request for burial 
expenses.        
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the Request 
for Judicial Review made by Linnhaven, Inc and Accident Fund National Insurance 
Company/United Heartland is DENIED.   
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the request 
made by Roger Blasdell, Surviving Spouse of Heather Blasdell, for remand of their 
claim for burial expenses under Iowa Code § 85.28 is GRANTED.  The Commissioner 
shall make factual findings necessary to decide this issue.  Court costs are taxed 
against Linnhaven, Inc and Accident Fund National Insurance Company/United 
Heartland. 
SO ORDERED.   
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 8

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV062137
ROGER BLASDELL VS LINNHAVEN INC ET AL
Type:
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2024-02-05 11:37:05
E-FILED                    CVCV062137 - 2024 FEB 05 11:37 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 8
