Case Number: 21002502.06
Case Title:  LILLIE, TRACI V. HY-LINE INTERNATIONAL
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Lillie Traci-21002502.06m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
TRACI LILLIE, 
 
Claimant, 
 
 
vs. 
 
HY-LINE INTERNATIONAL, 
 
 
File No.  21002502.06 
 
Employer, 
 
 
and 
 
 
UNITED STATES FIRE INS. CO., 
 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
 
 
   ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE    
DECISION 
 
 
 
                    Headnote:  2701 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE   
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A.  The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Traci Lillie.  Claimant 
appeared personally and through her attorney, Christopher Spaulding.  Defendants 
appeared through their attorney, Kent Smith.   
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on January 23, 2023.  The 
proceedings were digitally recorded.  That recording constitutes the official record of this 
proceeding.  Pursuant to the Commissioner’s February 16, 2015 Order, the undersigned 
has been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical 
care proceeding.  Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any 
appeal of the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 17A.   
The evidentiary record consists of Claimant’s Exhibit 1 and 2, and Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-D, and claimant’s testimony during the telephonic hearing.  During the course 
of the hearing defendants accepted liability for the February 10, 2021, work injury and 
for the neck condition for which claimant is seeking treatment.            
ISSUE   
The issue for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical 
care. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-23  15:11:28     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LILLIE V. HY-LINE INTERNATIONAL 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Traci Lillie, was involved in a work-related accident wherein she 
sustained injuries including her neck.  On December 19, 2022, the authorized treating 
physician, Kurt A. Smith, D.O., ordered physical therapy.  On December 21, 2022, 
claimant sent a letter to defendants via email requesting to have the physical therapy 
authorized.  On January 4, 2023, claimant sent a follow-up email requesting 
authorization of the prescribed physical therapy.  (Testimony; Cl. Ex. 1 and 2)  
Defendants responded via email on January 4, 2023 and stated, “Let me double check 
the approval has been communicated.  Due to the holidays, I’m not sure if it was 
communicated or not.  I don’t have any doubt that it will be authorized.”  (Cl. Ex. 2) 
Claimant sent another email on January 9, 2023, again requesting authorization of the 
physical therapy recommended by the authorized treating physician.  (Testimony; Cl. 
Ex. 1 and 2) The record is void of any type of response from defendants. 
Claimant filed her petition for alternate medical care on January 10, 2023.  On 
January 11, 2023, this agency sent notice to the parties that this matter would proceed 
to hearing on Monday, January 23, 2023 at 8:30 a.m.  (Agency File)  On Friday, 
January 20, 2023, at 2:50 p.m. defendants sent an email to claimant which states in 
pertinent part, “[m]y client has confirmed that they will authorize and is reaching out to 
the provider to authorize now. . . . I would assume this will resolve the necessity of the 
alternate medical care hearing.”  (Def. Ex. B)  On Friday at 3:43 p.m. Absolute 
Performance Therapy advised Kindra Hamlin that the physical therapy order from the 
doctor asked for dry needling.  However, Absolute does not have any therapists who 
perform dry needling.  (Def. Ex. A)  On Sunday, January 22, 2023, defendants sent a 
letter via email to claimant advising that Absolute had declined the referral because they 
do not provide dry needling.  The letter states, “[d]efendants have authorized the 
requested physical therapy and will make referral requests to new providers such as 
Select Physical Therapy and/or Athletico Physical Therapy for the requested physical 
therapy services.”  (Def. Ex. D) 
It should be noted that this is the third alternate care petition that claimant has 
filed.  Claimant filed an alternate care petition on April 8, 2021.  The matter was set for 
hearing on April 21, 2021.  On April 20, 2021, the petition was dismissed without 
prejudice because defendants authorized claimant to return to physical therapy.  
(Agency File No. 21002502.02) Claimant filed a second petition for alternate medical 
care on September 16, 2022.  That matter was set for hearing on September 28, 2022.  
On September 27, 2022, claimant dismissed the petition without prejudice because 
defendants authorized Dr. Schmitz.  (Agency File No. 21002502.05) 
At today’s telephone hearing Ms. Lillie testified that following the authorized 
surgery on her neck the authorized treater recommended physical therapy.  However, 
she had to wait 6 weeks for that therapy to be authorized.  Ms. Lillie testified that her 
treating surgeon was unhappy about the delay in her therapy.  (Testimony) 
In the present case, Dr. Smith ordered physical therapy on December 19, 2022.  
Ms. Lillie is scheduled to return to see Dr. Smith on Monday, January 30, 2023.  While 

LILLIE V. HY-LINE INTERNATIONAL 
Page 3 
 
defendants did authorize physical therapy on the afternoon of the business day before 
the alternate care hearing, no therapy has been scheduled or provided to the claimant.  
Defendants have stated several specific providers they are currently working to contact 
to schedule the authorized therapy for the claimant.  At this time, I find that claimant has 
not demonstrated that the care offered by defendants is unreasonable.  That being said, 
defendants need to work diligently to get Ms. Lillie into physical therapy as quickly as 
possible.                 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW   
Under Iowa law, the employer is required to provide care to an injured employee 
and is permitted to choose the care.  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 
N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 1997).   
[T]he employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to 
treat an injured employee, and has the right to choose the care. . . .  The 
treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.  If the employee has 
reason to be dissatisfied with the care offered, the employee should 
communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if 
requested, following which the employer and the employee may agree to 
alternate care reasonably suited to treat the injury.  If the employer and 
employee cannot agree on such alternate care, the commissioner may, 
upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow 
and order other care.   
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See Iowa 
R. App. P. 5.904(3)(e); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that at this time claimant has 
failed to demonstrate the authorized care is unreasonable.  However, I also conclude 
defendants are obligated to promptly provide the treatment.  Defendants are ordered to 
diligently work to get claimant into the recommended physical therapy as quickly as 
possible.  Defendants are cautioned that failing to promptly authorize and provide care 
could result in defendants losing their right to select care.           

LILLIE V. HY-LINE INTERNATIONAL 
Page 4 
 
ORDER   
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED:   
Claimant’s petition for alternate medical care is denied.  However, defendants 
are ordered to promptly provide the physical therapy recommended by the authorized 
treating physician.     
Signed and filed this ____23rd ____ day of January, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Christopher Spaulding (via WCES) 
Kent Smith (via WCES) 
 
      ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
