Case Number: 22004045.01
Case Title:  CALDARA, DANIEL V. FOODLINER, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Caldara Daniel- 22004045.01M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
DANIEL CALDARA, 
No. 22004045.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
FOODLINER, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
TRAVELERS INDEMNITY CO. OF CT, 
Headnote:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
STATEMEN T OF TH E C ASE  
On October 16, 2023, claimant Daniel Caldara filed a petition concerning 
application for alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative 
Code rule 876—4.48. Caldara served the defendants, employer Foodliner, Inc. 
(Foodliner) and insurance carrier Travelers Indemnity Co. of CT (Travelers), by certified 
mail and subsequently filed the receipts reflecting delivery of the petition to each 
defendant. The agency issued a notice of hearing on October 18, 2023, and sent it to 
the defendants via U.S. Mail that same day. On October 26, 2023, claimant’s counsel 
emailed to Maxwell Huss, a claims representative assigned to Caldara’s case, a PDF 
copy of the petition and notice of hearing. However, the defendants did not file an 
answer and no one appeared on their behalf in the case. 
The undersigned presided over an alternate care hearing held by telephone and 
recorded on October 27, 2023. That recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(12). Caldara participated 
personally and through attorney Benjamin R. Roth. The defendants did not participate. 
The record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5; and 
 Caldara’s testimony, which the undersigned found credible. 
ISSU E  
The issue under consideration is whether Caldara is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of authorization to get a second opinion from a neurosurgeon at the University 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Oct-27  15:45:40     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CALDARA V. FOODLINER, INC. 
Page 2 
 
of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics (UIHC), as recommended by authorized treating physician 
Dr. Frank Hawkins. 
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
On February 14, 2022, Caldara sustained an injury arising out of and in the 
course of his employment with Foodliner. Caldara has alleged injuries to his back and 
mental health. (Petition) At issue in the current case is care for his back injury that 
causes him pain in his low back that radiates into his right leg. The defendants have 
accepted liability and directed care for Caldara’s back injury, as is their right and 
responsibility under Iowa Code section 85.27. (Petition; Testimony; Ex. 1) 
The defendants initially arranged care with an occupational medicine specialist, 
which resulted in physical therapy. Caldara experienced minimal benefit from physical 
therapy after several weeks. He requested authorization to treat with a chiropractor, 
which the defendants refused, so he obtained such care on his own and at his own 
expense, but with little benefit. (Testimony) 
The occupational medicine clinic ultimately referred Caldara to a neurosurgeon. 
The defendants arranged care with Dr. Rosen, a neurosurgeon, who ordered magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). (Testimony) The MRI showed: 
 Diffuse disk bulge with bilateral subarticular stenosis, right worse than left, 
possibly displacing the right L5 takeoff; 
 
 Moderate-to-marked right-sided neural foraminal stenosis and moderate left; 
 Some facet hypertrophy with mild effusions; and 
 
 Facet hypertrophy with effusions at L5-S1, but no appreciable central or 
neural foraminal stenosis at this level. (Ex. 1) 
After the MRI, Caldara received two steroid injections to his back from Dr. 
Hawkins, a pain clinician, but they provided little relief from his symptoms. (Testimony; 
Ex. 1) 
Caldara underwent surgery by Dr. Buchanan on a bulging disc at L4-L5 on 
February 10, 2023. He was heavily medicated after the procedure. About 90 days post-
operation, Caldara’s pain was similar to what it was before the surgery. Dr. Buchanan 
referred Caldara to Dr. Hawkins for facet injections that provided minimal relief. 
(Testimony) 
Dr. Hawkins recommended a referral to a neurosurgeon at UIHC because of 
Caldara’s ongoing pain. (Testimony; Ex. 2) Christina Rolfes, the clinic administrator at 
the Allen Center for Pain Medicine where Dr. Hawkins practices, emailed a case worker 
on Caldara’s case about their unsuccessful efforts to get Caldara an appointment 
scheduled at UIHC. (Ex. 4) Huss, the claims representative the defendants have 

CALDARA V. FOODLINER, INC. 
Page 3 
 
assigned to Caldara’s case, refused to authorize a second opinion with a neurosurgeon 
at UIHC, stating that Caldara first had to return to receive care at the occupational 
medicine clinic. (Ex. 3) Caldara communicated his dissatisfaction with their refusal to 
authorize the referral recommended by Dr. Hawkins, an authorized treating physician, 
but the defendants maintained their refusal. (Ex. 3) This caused Caldara to file the 
petition now under consideration. (Petition) 
The evidence establishes that in refusing to authorize care with a neurosurgeon 
at UIHC in accordance with the referral by Dr. Hawkins, the defendants have attempted 
to substitute their judgment for that of an authorized treating physician. Instead of 
honoring the referral made by Dr. Hawkins, in his professional medical judgment, Huss 
refused and informed Caldara that he had to go back to the occupational medicine clinic 
instead. There is no indication in the record that an authorized treating physician 
referred Caldara back to the occupational medicine clinic that initially referred him to a 
neurosurgeon; rather, it is more likely than not that Huss decided this course of care 
was appropriate independent of any doctor’s assessment. Therefore, the defendants’ 
refusal to authorize care in accordance with Dr. Hawkins’s referral is unreasonable. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties can’t 
reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and 
reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436; Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. Because “the 
employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, 
not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, 
standing alone, is not enough to find such care unreasonable. Id. 
Longstanding agency precedent holds that under Iowa Code section 85.27, “An 
employer’s right to select the provider of medical treatment to an injured worker does 

CALDARA V. FOODLINER, INC. 
Page 4 
 
not include the right to determine how an injured worker should be diagnosed, 
evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional medical judgment.” See, e.g., Malget 
v. John Deere Waterloo Works, No. 5048441, 2017 WL 663655, *18 (Iowa Workers’ 
Comp. Comm’r, Feb. 14, 2017) (App. Decision) (citing Assman v. Blue Star Foods, No. 
866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 18, 1988)).  
Here, no treating physician exercising professional medical judgment has 
referred Caldara for additional care from an occupational medicine specialist. Dr. 
Hawkins, an authorized treating physician, referred Caldara to a neurosurgeon at UIHC 
in his professional medical judgment. Huss substituted his judgment for that of Dr. 
Hawkins when he refused to honor the referral and stated Caldara had to return to the 
occupational medicine clinic instead. Through this action, the defendants have 
unreasonably interfered with the course of care determined appropriate by an 
authorized treating physician in his professional medical judgment.  
Moreover, when evidence is presented that the employer-authorized medical 
care has not been effective and that such care is “inferior or less extensive” than other 
available care requested by the employee, the agency is justified by section 85.27 to 
order the alternate care. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 437. In this 
case, the occupational medicine clinic early in the course of Caldara’s treatment 
determined that he needed the care of a specialist in the form of a neurosurgeon and 
made that referral. Since then, Caldara has received care from neurosurgeons and Dr. 
Hawkins, a pain clinician. Going back to the occupational medicine clinic is not only 
contrary to the referral Dr. Hawkins made in his professional medical judgment, it would 
also force Caldara to take a step back in the course of treatment by receiving care from 
a provider that has already proven ineffective and is therefore inferior and less 
extensive than care with a specialist in the form of a neurosurgeon at UIHC, as 
recommended by Dr. Hawkins. 
OR D ER  
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Caldara’s application for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) The defendants shall promptly arrange for Caldara to receive care from a 
neurosurgeon at UIHC. 
On July 21, 2023, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in an appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, 
Iowa Code chapter 17A. 
 

CALDARA V. FOODLINER, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Signed and filed this _    27th           day of October, 2023. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Benjamin R. Roth, Attorney for Claimant 
 
Served via certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested: 
Foodliner, Inc. 
2099 Southpark Court 
Dubuque, IA 52003-8095 
 
Travelers Indemnity Co. of CT 
One Tower Square 
Hartford, CT 06183 
 
 
