Case Number: 20003192.01
Case Title:  MENTER, DAVID V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Menter David-20003192.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DAVID MENTER, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 20003192.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1402.20, 1402.40,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
       1803, 2208, 2502,  
 
Defendants. 
  :  
2700, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
David Menter, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Lennox Industries, 
Inc., as the employer and Indemnity Insurance Company of North America, as the 
insurance carrier. This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
February 10, 2022.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, this case was heard via videoconference using CourtCall.  
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no findings or decisions on factual or legal issues relative to the 
parties’ stipulations will be made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their 
stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 7, as well as Defendants Exhibits A through E. Claimant testified on his own 
behalf. No other witnesses testified live at the hearing. The evidentiary record closed at 
the conclusion of the arbitration hearing. 
Counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs. This 
request was granted and both parties filed briefs on March 4, 2022. The case was 
considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Aug-15  14:38:19     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 2 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment, on January 2, 2020; 
2. Whether the alleged January 2, 2020, work injury caused permanent disability 
and, if so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
3. Whether the alleged injury should be compensated as a hearing loss or with 
industrial disability; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care; and 
6. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
David Menter is a 68-year-old individual, who lives in Marshalltown, Iowa. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 7)  Mr. Menter obtained an eleventh-grade education before 
entering the workforce. (Hr. Tr., p. 8)  His first job out of high school was with Cooper 
Manufacturing. (Id.)  At Cooper Manufacturing, Mr. Menter worked full-time in the lawn 
mower division loading trucks and sweeping floors. (Hr. Tr., p. 9)  Unfortunately, Cooper 
Manufacturing did away with the lawn mower division in 1976 and, as a result, Mr. 
Menter was laid off. (Id.) 
Mr. Menter then sought and obtained employment with Lennox in June 1976, at 
the age of twenty-two years. (Hr. Tr., p. 10)  After approximately 43.5 years, Mr. Menter 
formally retired from Lennox on January 2, 2020. (Exhibit 4, page 41)  Mr. Menter 
acknowledges that his retirement did not have anything to do with the hearing loss or 
tinnitus injury claims involved in this case. (Exhibit D, Deposition page 12)  He did not 
have any work restrictions at the time of his retirement, and he did not complain of an 
inability to perform work because of hearing loss or tinnitus. (Ex. D, Depo. pp. 27-28) 
Since his retirement from Lennox, claimant has not sought out or applied for 
alternative employment. (Ex. B, p. 21)  He testified that he is still capable of completing 
every job he ever held at Lennox.  He is not motivated to return to work and is not likely 
to do so.  Claimant certainly could return to work at his age and given his physical 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 3 
abilities. However, he does not appear to have any desire or intention to return to work 
at this time.  Mr. Menter considers himself retired.   
Mr. Menter asserts that he sustained injuries that include hearing loss and 
tinnitus as a result of his work at Lennox.  Over the course of 43.5 years, Mr. Menter 
worked in a number of different positions for the defendant employer.  The majority of 
his employment was spent working on a “komatsu press.”  (See Hr. Tr., pp. 11-12)  He 
spent his last eight years running a corner post machine. (Ex. D, Depo. p. 14)   
Lennox has implemented a Hearing Conservation Program. (Exhibit 2, page 16)  
Mr. Menter estimated that the hearing conservation program was implemented in the 
late 1980s. (See Hr. Tr., p. 18) The program provided for noise level monitoring and 
mandatory hearing protection for all employees working in elevated noise areas or 
around equipment that generated elevated noise. (Ex. 2, p. 17)  Claimant testified that 
he did not consistently wear hearing protection while working for the defendant 
employer until the hearing conservation program was implemented. (See Hr. Tr., p. 19) 
Excerpts from the hearing conservation program can be found in Exhibit 2.  
According to the excerpts, noise level monitoring revealed that some employees “may 
be exposed to noise levels at or above 85 decibels for an 8-hour work day.” (Ex. 2, p. 
17)   
The hearing conservation program excerpts include a chart that lists the work 
groups at Lennox and the highest noise levels recorded for each.  Claimant testified that 
he worked in the C-9 and C-16 groups.  In 1998, Lennox recorded 90.3 and 90.5 
decibels in the C-9 group, and 89.3 and 88.7 decibels in the C-16 group.  In 2000, the 
C-9 group produced recordings of 96 and 98 decibels, while the C-16 group produced 
recordings of 92 and 88. (Ex. 2, p. 19) 
An additional noise analysis survey was conducted by Lennox in December 2000 
to evaluate and measure worker exposure levels throughout the plant. (Ex. 2, pp. 20-22)  
Mr. Menter is specifically referenced in the report as one of the individuals monitored. 
(Ex. 2, p. 21)  Peak noise levels were obtained for each of the monitored employees. 
(Id.)  All monitored employees peaked at or above 117 decibels. (See id.)  Mr. Menter 
recorded a peak level of 123. (Id.)  The report notes that caution should be given to the 
value of the peak levels as they reflect instantaneous levels of very short duration. (Id.)  
That being said, the report also provides that the press claimant operated for 
approximately 30 of his 43 years generated an 8-hour time weighted average exposure 
above the 90 decibel level established by OSHA. (Ex. 2, p. 22)   
Mr. Menter introduced documentation from noise testing performed at Lennox, 
which demonstrated significant noise exposures occurring throughout the facility.  
Additionally, Mr. Menter provided unrebutted testimony regarding the noise levels inside 
the Lennox plant.  I find that claimant was exposed to significant noise throughout his 
employment with Lennox. 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 4 
Lennox regularly performed hearing tests on Mr. Menter. (Joint Exhibit 1)  
According to Mr. Menter, the tests were administered annually starting in the late 80s. 
(Ex. D, Depo. p. 21; Hr. Tr., p. 20)  The hearing conservation program provides that all 
employees exposed to 85 decibels average noise exposure had to receive audiometric 
testing on an annual basis. (Ex. 2, p. 17)  Unfortunately, the parties only submitted the 
results from a select few audiometric hearing tests into evidence.  The earliest test is 
dated April 24, 1978 and is labeled as claimant’s baseline test. (JE1, p. 1)  According to 
the test results, claimant had normal hearing on the left between 500 and 2,000 Hz, and 
from 4,000 Hz and up. (Id.; see Ex. 1, p. 8)  On the right, claimant had normal hearing 
through 2000 Hz, and from 4,000 Hz and up. (Id.; see Ex. 1, p. 8)   
On January 7, 1980, approximately 3.5 years after his date of hire, Mr. Menter 
completed a health history form in conjunction with his hearing exam. (Ex. C, p. 31)  On 
the form, Mr. Menter had the option of characterizing his hearing ability as “Excellent,” 
“Good,” “Fair,” or “Poor.” (Id.)  Mr. Menter selected “Fair.” (Id.)  When presented with 
this form, Mr. Menter stated that his hearing loss could have started before 1980. (Ex. 
D, Depo. p. 22; see Hr. Tr., p. 46)  The form also indicates claimant had worked around 
loud machines for the past six to seven years, and he had been exposed to gunshots. 
(Id.)   
Claimant submitted to audiometric testing on August 1, 2002. (Ex. C, p. 27)  The 
test revealed a mild loss for speech sounds in the left ear, and a moderate loss for high 
pitch sounds in both ears. (Id.)  Claimant demonstrated bilateral high frequency hearing 
loss in March 2008. (Ex. C, p. 26)  Records show claimant also submitted to 
audiometric testing on December 5, 2016, November 21, 2017, June 26, 2018, and 
December 18, 2019. (JE1, pp. 2, 3; Ex. C, pp. 24-25)  On the prescreening 
questionnaires, claimant noted his belief that he had sustained hearing loss; however, 
he consistently denied experiencing ringing in his ears. (Id.) 
Mr. Menter did not seek any treatment for hearing loss or tinnitus outside of the 
employer’s annual audiometric testing. He did, at times, discuss his hearing loss with 
Maria Olberding, M.D., his personal physician. (JE2, pp. 4-9) Claimant did not mention 
any symptoms of tinnitus to Dr. Olberding between 2008 and 2019 (See JE2, pp. 4-9) 
and he specifically denied experiencing ringing in his ears on his health history forms at 
Lennox in 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. (Ex. C, pp. 22-25; Hr. Tr., pp. 34-35)  It appears 
the first time Mr. Menter described ringing in his ears to any physician was when he 
presented for his independent medical examination in April 2021, or approximately 15 
months after his date of retirement. (Ex. 1, p. 3) 
There is little evidence Mr. Menter experienced significant noise exposures 
outside of working for the defendant employer.  That being said, Mr. Menter has 
acknowledged that he was exposed to loud machinery at Cooper Manufacturing.  He 
has also indicated that he previously hunted and was exposed to gunshots. (Ex. C, pp. 
29-31)  Given the multiple exposures to loud noises over the course of claimant’s life, 
expert testimony is needed to determine whether the noise exposure he experienced at 
Lennox was a substantial factor in the development of his hearing loss and/or tinnitus.   

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 5 
Matthew Brown, M.D., was the first physician to evaluate claimant’s hearing loss 
and address causation.  At the request of defendants, Dr. Brown reviewed claimant’s 
audiograms and evaluated Mr. Menter on March 25, 2020. (JE3, pp. 10-14)  The 
earliest audiogram Dr. Brown reviewed was from 1982. (See JE3, p. 13)  Dr. Brown 
opined that claimant was already exhibiting mild hearing loss in the higher ranges of 
3,000, 4,000, and 6,000 Hz at the time of the 1982 audiogram. (JE3, p. 13)  He also 
noted that claimant had partial loss of word recognition, which he explained is normally 
associated with a genetically predetermined pattern of hearing loss as opposed to a 
noise-induced hearing loss. (Id.)  Given the fact claimant started out with some loss in 
1982, had a loss of word discrimination, and had worn hearing protection for the 
majority of his tenure at Lennox, Dr. Brown did not believe that claimant’s work 
environment was a major contributing factor to his hearing deficit. (JE3, p. 14) 
Mr. Menter introduced the expert opinions of Timothy Simplot, M.D., of Iowa Ear, 
Nose, and Throat (ENT) Center. (Exhibit 1)  Dr. Simplot reviewed claimant’s medical 
records and conducted an examination of Mr. Menter on April 26, 2021. (Ex. 1, p. 3)  
The examination included an audiogram. (Ex. 1, pp. 5-7)  Dr. Simplot explained, “In 
evaluating hearing loss problems over the course of 43 years it is necessary to take into 
account the degree to which occupational and environmental noise exposure has 
contributed to an individual’s hearing loss versus the natural progression of hearing 
decline with time.” (Ex. 1, p. 8)  After calculating claimant’s expected and actual hearing 
changes, Dr. Simplot opined that claimant’s work environment played a substantial role 
in his accelerated hearing loss. (Ex. 1, p. 9)   
Based on the April 26, 2021, audiogram, Dr. Simplot opined that claimant’s age-
corrected hearing loss is 38.1 percent in the left ear and 46.8 percent in the right ear, 
resulting in a binaural age corrected hearing loss of 39.7 percent. (Id.)  He 
recommended the use of hearing amplification devices, but did not believe that 
claimant’s condition required any permanent work restrictions. (Id.) 
Dr. Simplot also diagnosed claimant with bilateral tinnitus and causally related 
the same to the noise exposure claimant experienced while working at Lennox.  
Importantly, Dr. Simplot is the first physician to discuss and diagnose claimant with 
tinnitus.  Mr. Menter testified that he did not understand what the ringing in his ears was 
until he presented to Dr. Simplot. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  Dr. Simplot opined that claimant has 
sustained permanent impairment and permanent disability as a result of the tinnitus.  
Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. 
Simplot assigned 3 percent whole person impairment for tinnitus. (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Dr. Simplot concluded his report by critiquing the causation opinion of Dr. Brown.  
Dr. Simplot correctly points out that Dr. Brown’s opinion was, in part, based on the 1982 
audiogram, which showed more issues than claimant’s 1978 baseline audiogram. (Ex. 
1, pp. 9-10)  Dr. Simplot further opined that Dr. Brown did not adequately consider the 
substantial effect noise exposure can have on an individual’s hearing loss over the span 
of 43 years. (Ex. 1, p. 10) 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 6 
Defendants subsequently obtained an independent medical evaluation from 
Douglas Hoisington, D.O. (Exhibit A)  Dr. Hoisington reviewed the medical records and 
evaluated Mr. Menter on October 6, 2021. (Ex. A, p. 1)  Dr. Hoisington obtained an 
updated audiogram as part of his evaluation. (Ex. A, p. 12)  Dr. Hoisington found that 
claimant has moderate sloping to a profound sensorineural hearing loss with an 84 
percent speech discrimination in the right ear and 80 percent speech discrimination in 
the left ear. (Ex. A, p. 2)  He assessed 53.8 percent age-corrected binaural hearing loss; 
however, Dr. Hoisington did not feel as though claimant’s hearing loss was causally 
related to noise exposures at Lennox. (Id.)  Dr. Hoisington explained that claimant’s 
pattern of hearing loss – significant loss in the low frequencies – is not consistent with 
noise-induced hearing loss. (Id.)  Dr. Hoisington further explained that claimant 
continued to experience progressive hearing loss despite wearing hearing protection, 
which is also inconsistent with noise-induced hearing loss. (Id.)   
According to Dr. Hoisington, Mr. Menter, “did not complain about any tinnitus or 
tinnitus causing problems with his activities of daily living” during his examination. (Ex. 
A, p. 13)  Claimant confirmed the same at hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 33)  However, claimant 
did report intermittent bilateral tinnitus to the audiologist that conducted the audiogram 
for Dr. Hoisington. (Ex. A, p. 12; Hr. Tr., p. 47)   
In a supplemental report, dated November 23, 2021, Dr. Simplot addressed Dr. 
Hoisington’s findings. (Ex. 1, p. 13)  Dr. Simplot disagreed with the assertion that noise 
induced hearing loss only involves high frequencies.  Dr. Simplot noted that the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation guidelines, the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, and Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) all utilize both high and low frequencies when 
calculating degree of hearing loss. (Ex. 1, pp. 13-14)  
Dr. Simplot also addressed Dr. Hoisington’s comments regarding the progression 
of Mr. Menter’s hearing loss despite wearing hearing protection. (Ex. 1, p. 14)  
Essentially, Dr. Simplot noted that claimant did not wear hearing protection for several 
years, there is no way of measuring the effectiveness of the hearing protection claimant 
wore between 1980 and 2020, and there is no way of knowing whether the hearing 
protection fit properly or offered enough protection against hearing loss. (See id.)  Dr. 
Simplot concluded his supplemental report by reiterating his prior causation opinion with 
respect to claimant’s hearing loss. (Ex. 1, p. 15)  
When comparing the expert opinions in this matter, I note that all three 
physicians agree that claimant has mild sloping to profound sensorineural hearing loss 
in both ears; however, only Dr. Simplot causally relates claimant’s hearing loss to the 
work environment. (JE3, p. 11; Ex. 1, p. 8; Ex. A, p. 15)   
With respect to claimant’s bilateral hearing loss, I find the causation opinion of 
Dr. Simplot to be more convincing than the opinions of Dr. Brown and Dr. Hoisington.  
Dr. Simplot had a more complete understanding of claimant’s medical records when 
compared to Dr. Brown.  Dr. Simplot’s evidence-based approach and ultimate 
conclusion are reasonable and logical.  Comparatively, Dr. Hoisington’s opinion that 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 7 
noise induced hearing loss should only involve higher frequencies is inconsistent with 
several authoritative sources.  I accept Dr. Simplot’s causation opinion and find 
claimant’s bilateral hearing loss is causally related to his consistent exposure to loud 
noises within his work environment.   
While I found Dr. Simplot’s opinions regarding claimant’s bilateral hearing loss to 
be thorough and persuasive, I did not reach the same conclusion with respect to his 
opinions relating to tinnitus.  
Dr. Simplot was the first and only physician to diagnose claimant with tinnitus.  
(Ex. 1, p. 9)  According to his report, Mr. Menter complained of experiencing noticeable, 
nonpulsatile tinnitus for the past 15 years.  Dr. Simplot’s understanding of when 
claimant’s tinnitus symptoms began is not supported by the evidentiary record.  At 
hearing, claimant did not recall providing this information to Dr. Simplot. (Hr. Tr., p. 38)  
Moreover, he did not know why he would have told Dr. Simplot that he had ringing in his 
ears for at least 15 years. (Hr. Tr., pp. 38-39)    
Mr. Menter could not pinpoint when his symptoms began, only that the ringing in 
his ears became more noticeable after he retired from Lennox. (Hr. Tr., p. 47; see Ex. 
D, Depo. p. 16; Hr. Tr., pp. 38-39)  Such testimony implies claimant noticed ringing in 
his ears prior to his date of retirement; however, there is little evidence in the record to 
support the same.   
While claimant discussed bilateral hearing loss with his primary care physician, 
there is no evidence claimant described ringing in his ears between 2008 and 2019. 
(See JE2, pp. 4-9)  At hearing, claimant confirmed that he never reported ringing in his 
ears to the defendant employer prior to retiring in January 2020. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  Indeed, 
claimant specifically denied ringing in his ears on his health history forms at Lennox in 
2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. (Ex. C, pp. 22-25; Hr. Tr., pp. 34-35)  Additionally, there is 
no evidence claimant reported ringing in his ears when he presented for his evaluation 
with Dr. Brown in March of 2020.  Despite testifying that he became concerned when he 
continued to experience the ringing in his ears after removing himself from the work 
environment, Mr. Menter did not seek treatment or describe the ringing in his ears to 
any physician between January 2, 2020, and April 26, 2021.  While possible, it seems 
unlikely that Mr. Menter would not understand or appreciate what the ringing in his ears 
was until after speaking with Dr. Simplot. (Hr. Tr., p. 27) 
Generally speaking, claimant presented as a credible witness, and his hearing 
testimony is largely consistent with the medical records in evidence and his deposition 
testimony.  That being said, based on the above inconsistencies, I find it difficult to 
accept claimant’s testimony regarding his claim of tinnitus.  With these credibility 
concerns in mind, and the fact Dr. Simplot’s understanding of claimant’s medical history 
is not corroborated by other contemporaneous evidence, I find claimant provided 
insufficient evidence to support his claim that he developed tinnitus as a result of his 
employment.   

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 8 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute in this case is whether claimant sustained an injury that arose 
out of and in the course of his employment. Mr. Menter asserts that he sustained 
occupational hearing loss, as well as tinnitus, from repeated exposures to excessive 
noise during his employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between 
the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a 
rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Under Iowa Code section 85B.4(3), “occupational hearing loss” is defined as that 
portion of permanent sensorineural loss that exceeds an average hearing level of 25 
decibels at the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 Hz when “arising out of and in 
the course of employment caused by excessive noise exposure.” “Excessive noise 
exposure” is defined as exposure to sound capable of producing occupational hearing 
loss. Iowa Code section 85B.4(1).  
Iowa Code section 85B.5 provides a table establishing presumptive “excessive 
noise exposure” at various decibel levels tied to duration of exposure; for example, 8 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 9 
hours per day at 90 dBA. There is no presumptive excessive noise exposure at levels 
below 90 dBA. The longest duration identified in the table is 8 hours. The table in 
section 85B.5, is not the minimum standard defining an excessive noise level in section 
85B.4(2). The table in section 85B.5 lists noise level times and intensities which, if met, 
will be presumptively excessive noise levels of which the employer must inform the 
employee. See Muscatine County v. Morrison, 409 N.W.2d 685 (Iowa 1987). 
Claimant provided evidence that his noise exposure exceeded the levels 
identified by the table in section 85B.5.   
Claimant also introduced an opinion from a well-qualified audiologist, Dr. Simplot, 
which established a causal connection between claimant’s work exposures to excessive 
noise levels and the development of his hearing loss. Having accepted the causation 
opinion of Dr. Simplot, I found that claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence 
that his hearing loss arose out of and in the course of his employment with Lennox.  
Accordingly, I conclude that claimant has established a compensable work injury. 
With respect to the tinnitus claim, claimant relied upon the expert medical 
opinions of Dr. Simplot.  I found that Dr. Simplot did not have a complete understanding 
of claimant’s medical history with respect to tinnitus.  As such, I did not accept his 
causation opinion regarding tinnitus.  Additionally, I found claimant’s testimony 
regarding when his symptoms of tinnitus began lacked credibility.  Therefore, I found 
claimant failed to carry his burden of proving the alleged tinnitus condition arose out of 
and in the course of his employment.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
In this case, the parties introduced hearing tests that clearly demonstrated 
hearing loss. Claimant introduced the opinions of Dr. Simplot, who opined claimant 
sustained a permanent injury and permanent functional impairment. Again, Dr. Simplot’s 
opinion was accepted as credible and accurate in this regard.  
With respect to the extent of permanent impairment due to hearing loss, Dr. 
Hoisington and Dr. Simplot were the only two experts to calculate an impairment rating.  
Both experts factored in claimant’s age, and both experts provided an impairment rating 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85B; however, Dr. Hoisington is the only expert 
physician to show exactly how he calculated claimant’s age corrected hearing loss 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85B.  Therefore, it is Dr. Hoisington’s rating that is 
adopted for the purposes of assessing permanency.   

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 10 
Occupational hearing loss is compensated as a percentage of 175 weeks by use 
of a formula set forth in Iowa Code section 85B.9.  Having accepted Dr. Hoisington’s 
assessment showing claimant has 53.8 percent age-corrected binaural hearing loss, I 
find claimant is entitled to 94.15 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Benefits 
shall commence on the stipulated commencement date of January 2, 2020. (Hearing 
Report) 
In addition to permanent disability, claimant asserts a claim for alternate medical 
care moving forward. Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
In this case, Mr. Menter’s hearing loss was caused by his employment with the 
defendant employer. All three expert opinions in this case establish that claimant could 
benefit from bilateral hearing aids.  The hearing aids and maintenance of the same are 
related to the work injury.  
Mr. Menter has established by a preponderance of the evidence that there is 
reasonable and necessary treatment that can and should be offered to claimant. 
Claimant has proven he is entitled to alternate care, including bilateral hearing aids.  
Defendants retain the right to select the authorized provider for this treatment provided 
they authorize a provider promptly. Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  Defendants shall 
designate an appropriate provider to evaluate claimant for hearing aids, and defendants 
shall be responsible for payment of devices recommended by the provider. 
Mr. Menter also seeks reimbursement of the independent medical evaluation 
charges from Dr. Simplot. Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s choice where an employer-
retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee 
believes that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination. Claimant has the burden of proving the 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 11 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  
Defendants assert that Dr. Simplot’s evaluation was not in response to an 
evaluation of permanent disability made by a physician retained by defendants.   
The Court of Appeals recently addressed a similar issue in Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck. P.L.C., No. 20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021).  
In Kern, defendants' expert found there was no causation.  Kern disagreed with the 
opinion and sought an IME at defendants' expense.  The commissioner found Kern was 
not entitled to recover the cost of the IME.  The Iowa Court of Appeals reversed, finding 
the “opinion on lack of causation was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating,” 
which is reimbursable under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
In the matter at hand, Dr. Brown offered a no causation opinion on June 3, 2020.  
Claimant disagreed with Dr. Brown’s opinion and sought an IME with Dr. Simplot, which 
was conducted on April 26, 2021.  The report was issued after Dr. Brown’s June 3, 
2020, opinion.  Under Kern, claimant is entitled to recover the cost of Dr. Simplot’s IME 
by way of Iowa Code section 85.39. 
The final issue is costs. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa 
Code section 86.40. In this case, claimant recovered permanent partial disability 
benefits and future medical care. Exercising the agency’s discretion, I conclude it is 
appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some amount. 
Claimant identifies his requested costs in Exhibit 7. The first cost is a request for 
reimbursement of claimant’s filing fee. This is a permitted cost pursuant to 876 IAC 
4.33(7) and is assessed against defendants. 
The second cost request asserted by claimant is for reimbursement of the 
service fees associated with the Original Notice and Petition.  This is a permitted cost 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(3) and is assessed against defendants. 
Next, claimant requests reimbursement of the costs associated with Dr. Simplot’s 
April 26, 2021, report.  This cost was already assessed pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39. 
Claimant also requests reimbursement of the fees associated with Dr. Simplot’s 
November 23, 2021, report ($750.00).  This is a permitted cost pursuant to 876 IAC 
4.33(6) and is assessed against defendants. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant ninety-four and 3/20 (94.15) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on January 2, 2020.  Weekly benefits are payable 

MENTER V. LENNOX INTERNATIONAL, INC. 
Page 12 
at the stipulated weekly rate of seven hundred seventy-six and 30/100 dollars 
($776.30). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall promptly select and authorize a medical provider to provide 
claimant additional treatment for his occupational hearing loss, including bilateral 
hearing aids.  Defendants shall retain the right to select and authorize a medical 
provider of their choosing to provide the above ordered medical care provided 
defendants authorize this care promptly. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, defendants shall reimburse claimant in the 
amount of one thousand six hundred and 00/100 dollars ($1,600.00) for the cost of Dr. 
Simplot's IME. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of eight hundred fifty-
nine and 96/100 dollars ($859.96). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __15th __ day of August, 2022. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
James Ballard (via WCES) 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
