Case Number: 5053571.01
Case Title:  POPE, ROBERT A V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Pope Robert-5053571.01r.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
ROBERT A. POPE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 5053571.01 
 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT, 
  : 
REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EMPLOYERS MUTUAL CASUALTY 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :       Head Notes: 1402.40; 1804; 2905 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Robert Pope filed a petition for review-reopening seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the City of Strawberry Point, the employer, and 
Employers Mutual Casualty Company, the insurance carrier, for a stipulated work injury 
date of December 31, 2011. The case came before the undersigned for the review-
reopening hearing on June 19, 2025. The case proceeded to a live video hearing via 
Zoom, with all participants appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without 
significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. His wife, Lisa Pope, also testified. The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on June 19, 2025. 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on August 8, 2025, and the case was 
considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Dec-29  12:21:15     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained a substantial change in condition since the 
November 29, 2016, arbitration hearing that would justify a change in the 
underlying arbitration award; 
2. If so, the extent of additional permanent disability to which claimant is entitled, 
including permanent total disability/odd lot; 
3. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if awarded; 
4. Reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical evaluation under Iowa 
Code section 85.39; and, 
5. Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
This is a claim for review-reopening of a prior award. Claimant sustained a 
compensable work injury on December 31, 2011, while working for the City of 
Strawberry Point. (Claimant’s Exhibit 6, p. 59) The original arbitration decision regarding 
that injury was filed on May 17, 2017, and awarded claimant 65 percent industrial 
disability. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 63) The arbitration decision was appealed by both parties to the 
Commissioner, who affirmed the decision in its entirety on November 26, 2018, making 
it final agency action. (Defendants’ Exhibit F, pp. 80-81) These decisions are the law of 
the case, and not subject to review. The arbitration decision contains findings of fact 
that are now established fact, which are considered and relied upon in this review-
reopening decision. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 60-62) 
 
The relevant facts as found in the original arbitration decision and affirmed on 
appeal by the Commissioner are as follows: 
 
Claimant is a high school graduate. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 60) His previous work history 
includes construction laborer, truck driver, milk cow herdsman, salesman, and crane 
operator. He attended the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy and graduated in April of 
2003. A few weeks later he accepted a position as the Chief of Police for the City of 
Strawberry Point. He continuously held that position until his termination on September 
25, 2013. 
 
Prior to the work-related injury, claimant had a history of low back problems. In 
2001, claimant underwent a discectomy at L5-S1 for a disc protrusion. On June 23, 
2007, the claimant had a low back and left knee injury from an incident of apprehending 
a suspect. A recurrent L5-S1 disc extrusion resulted and a microdiscectomy was 
performed on October 11, 2007. A left knee meniscectomy was performed on March 27, 
2008. Chad Abernathey, M.D., issued a nine percent body as a whole (BAW) rating for 
the low back injury. 
 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 3 
 
 
On or about December 31, 2011, the claimant suffered a stipulated injury arising 
out of and in the course of his employment when he slipped in mud putting a suspect in 
the back of his police car. He had physical therapy and injections over the course of 
2012 and early 2013. In March of 2013 he was referred for a neurosurgical evaluation. 
He saw David Segal, M.D. Dr. Segal’s impression was L5 radiculopathy. He 
recommended exhausting all conservative measures before considering surgery. 
Claimant saw Craig Thompson, M.D., who provided additional injections.  A 
radiofrequency ablation to address pain issues was performed on September 5, 2013. 
 
Claimant resigned from his second job as a school bus driver on September 11, 
2013, noting it was interfering with his duties as a police officer. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 61) He 
was terminated from his position as a police officer on September 25, 2013, for using a 
public cooperative buying system to purchase tires for his personal vehicle, thus 
avoiding payment of federal and state sales and excise taxes.  
 
On November 18, 2013, claimant had surgery on his low back. Dr Segal 
performed the surgery, which included decompression and laminectomy from L3 to S1. 
Claimant was released to return to work with no restrictions on December 26, 2013.  
 
Claimant was hired as the police chief for the City of Monona, Iowa on January 
20, 2014. However, in March of 2014, Dr. Segal took him off work, and in April, he 
recommended a spinal cord stimulator. Claimant resigned his position with the City of 
Monona on April 24, 2014. Claimant also resigned his position as a high school baseball 
coach in May 2014, citing his health. He applied for Social Security Disability, which was 
approved effective November 18, 2013. 
 
Claimant had a spinal cord stimulator trial on July 14, 2014. He was referred to 
Chandan Reddy, M.D., for ongoing pain management. Claimant had a spinal cord 
stimulator implanted on January 7, 2015. In March, Dr. Reddy issued an impairment 
rating that seemed to address all three surgeries, which was 13 percent of the body as 
a whole. Claimant had a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) on April 23, 2015. The 
results were found to be equivocal due to claimant’s actions. However, he was noted to 
be capable of work at the medium demand level. Dr. Reddy added a 3 percent 
impairment rating for pain on May 5, 2015, and recommended lifting no more than 25 
pounds.  
 
Claimant had an unrelated cervical fusion at C5-7 on November 13, 2015. On 
November 20, 2015, John Kuhnlein, D.O., provided an independent medical evaluation 
(IME) report. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 62) Dr. Kuhnlein provided a 29 percent whole body 
impairment rating, and recommended a 10-pound lifting restriction. He also opined that 
claimant would not be able to work in the field as a law enforcement officer, but could 
perhaps perform administrative duties. The arbitration deputy accepted the opinions of 
Dr. Reddy and Dr. Kuhnlein related to claimant’s injury.  
 
Barbara Laughlin, M.A., issued a vocational employability report on January 26, 
2016. She opined that claimant was precluded from competitive employment. Lana 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 4 
 
 
Sellner, M.S., issued a vocational market survey on June 15, 2016, and opined there 
were employment opportunities still available to claimant. 
 
The deputy found claimant is unable to return to most, if any, relevant past 
employment. But the loss of industrial capacity is not yet total, but is very substantial. 
Considering the claimant’s medical impairments, training, permanent restrictions, as 
well as all other factors of industrial disability, the claimant has suffered a 65 percent 
loss of earning capacity. 
 
 
Claimant appealed the arbitration decision, asserting that the deputy erred in 
failing to find him permanently and totally disabled. (Def. Ex. F, p. 80) Defendants cross-
appealed and asserted that the deputy erred in finding claimant sustained anything 
more than a temporary work injury on December 31, 2011. The arbitration decision was 
affirmed in its entirety on November 26, 2018. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 81-82) 
 
 
 
Pursuant to the appeal decision, the arbitration hearing took place on November 
29, 2016. (Def. Ex. F, p. 80) The relevant timeframe for consideration in this review-
reopening is for any changes occurring since the arbitration hearing on November 29, 
2016. 
 
Claimant’s testimony at the review-reopening hearing was consistent as 
compared to the evidentiary record, and his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the 
undersigned no reason to doubt his veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of the review-reopening hearing, claimant was a 60-year-old person. 
(Hearing Transcript, p. 10) He testified that after his surgeries with Dr. Segal, he 
continued to have symptoms in his low back and left leg. (Tr., p. 12) He further testified 
that after he got the spinal cord stimulator, he had some improvement, but continued to 
have pain in his low back and left leg. (Tr., p. 13) He testified that at the time he 
received the spinal cord stimulator, he had constant pain and symptoms in his low back 
and left leg, and sporadic symptoms in his right leg. (Tr., pp. 13-14)  
 
After the arbitration hearing in 2016, claimant continued to have pain and 
symptoms. (Tr., p. 14) His care was transferred to Regional Medical Center in 
Manchester, Iowa, in January 2017. (Joint Exhibit 5, p. 85) On January 19, 2017, he 
completed a pain diagram, which indicated he had pain across his lower back and down 
his left buttock and leg. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 86) There is no indication of pain in the right leg. 
While it appears that visit was primarily related to unrelated symptoms in his neck, 
claimant did mention that his spinal cord stimulator had not been working as well. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 87)  
 
Claimant saw William Barnhill, CRNA, at Regional Medical Center, on several 
occasions over 2017, related to both his neck and his low back/leg symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 4, 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 5 
 
 
pp. 58-59) 1 On March 21, 2017, Mr. Barnhill recommended that claimant’s spinal cord 
stimulator be adjusted, due to increased pain radiating down the leg. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58) 
On June 26, 2017, he noted that claimant was starting to develop right-sided symptoms, 
which he hoped to capture with adjustments to the spinal cord stimulator. By July 24, 
2017, he had adjusted the stimulator and his pain had decreased somewhat. 
 
Claimant had some chiropractic treatment after a flare-up in his pain that was not 
relieved by the spinal cord stimulator. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 58-59) The chiropractor noted 
tenderness in his right lower back on September 18, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58) On October 
16, 2017, claimant saw Mr. Barnhill, and the pain diagram he completed indicated pain 
across the low back and pain and numbness down both the right and left leg. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 59)  
 
Claimant testified that in 2018, he began to experience more pain into his right 
leg. (Tr., p. 16) On February 5, 2018, he complained of aching and stabbing pain 
radiating to the gluteal region and down to his feet, with pins-and-needles sensations in 
the soles of both feet. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 59) He started physical therapy, and notes indicate 
he had been experiencing more problems on the right side over the previous month, 
with no specific incident to explain it. He said he felt like someone had hit him in the 
back of the legs with a baseball bat, and like his toes were being suffocated by a hole in 
a sock. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 60) 
 
On April 24, 2018, he saw Saul Wilson, M.D., for his right leg pain. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
23) Dr. Wilson noted that claimant had a spinal cord stimulator implanted in January 
2015 to control his back and left lower extremity pain. However, for the past couple 
months, he had been experiencing right lower extremity pain. He had some 
reprogramming done to the stimulator, which provided some coverage but not complete 
relief. He noted claimant’s pain began in the right buttock and radiated down the 
posterior thigh and calf to the foot. He reported throbbing around the knee. He said the 
pain was typically constant, and mainly a dull ache but when he overdid it, he would 
experience a sharp jab. He felt the onset of pain was gradual, with no particular 
traumatic event. Dr. Wilson ordered an MRI to rule out compression of the S1 nerve 
root. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 24)  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Wilson on May 22, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25) At that time, 
he reported physical therapy had helped the right side somewhat, but the left side was 
still bothersome. Dr. Wilson reviewed the MRI and noted postsurgical changes at L5-S1 
on the left, with some mild foraminal stenosis. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 27) He also noted a disc 
herniation versus scar with no bone changes at L4-5, which he thought could represent 
scarring from the previous surgery. Dr. Wilson recommended an EMG, and requested 
records related to claimant’s previous surgery. 
 
 
1 Some of the medical records were not included as exhibits; however, Dr. Kuhnlein provided a summary 
of the records in his IME report.  

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 6 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Wilson on June 6, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 28) Dr. Wilson 
noted that the EMG showed no evidence of lumbar radiculopathy. In his IME report, Dr. 
Kuhnlein stated that the bilateral lower extremity EMG/NCV showed evidence of a mild 
axonal sensory-predominant polyneuropathy. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 61) Dr. Wilson gave claimant 
the option of a left L4-5 discectomy, but advised that there was a significant risk that he 
may not improve. Claimant wished to consider it carefully. On June 15, 2018, he saw 
CRNA Barnhill. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 88) He reported an increase in pain and radiculopathy, and 
noted the pain was no longer only on the left side but had also started down the right leg 
into his mid-calf. Barnhill noted the L4-5 left paracentral disc herniation on the MRI, and 
recommended bilateral L4-5 transforaminal epidural steroid injections. A left L4-L5 
transforaminal epidural steroid injection was performed on July 23, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
61) Claimant reported it helped for about a week, with increased pain on the opposite 
side.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 62)  
 
The remaining records in evidence from 2018 relate to claimant’s cervical spine 
symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 89-91) After several adjustments to his medications, it seems 
his neck and low back/leg pain were mainly stable at an average pain level of 5 out of 
10. (Jt. Ex. 4, p.  63) Claimant reported on June 4, 2019, that he had returned to 
coaching middle school baseball and driving a bus. Claimant clarified with Dr. Kuhnlein 
that the bus had an air ride seat that helped, and he only drove the bus to baseball 
games, which were usually about 20 minute-long trips. This is consistent with claimant’s 
testimony at hearing. (Tr., pp. 32-33) 
 
On August 27, 2019, claimant saw CRNA Barnhill for his low back and leg pain. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 92) He advised that he had been manipulating the settings on his spinal 
cord stimulator to attempt to change the coverage in order to decrease his lower 
extremity pain. Mr. Barnhill recommended he contact the manufacturer for modifications 
and notifications regarding changes. On November 18, 2019, claimant advised that he 
had changed some of the settings on the stimulator with a representative from the 
company, and the changes helped reduce his pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 64) 
 
Claimant continued to see Mr. Barnhill about every three months for medication 
management. His symptoms waxed and waned with activities. In August of 2020, 
claimant reported an increase in his symptom severity. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 93) He also 
reported weakness in his lower extremity. By August 24, 2020, his symptoms had not 
improved, and he reported difficulty getting in and out of bed and the car. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
94) Mr. Barnhill recommended a lumbar MRI.  
 
The MRI took place on September 10, 2020, and showed a broad-based disc 
bulge at L4-L5, with right and left paracentral protrusions producing moderate to severe 
canal stenosis. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 64) There was also an L3-L4 left paracentral disc 
protrusion, and an L5-S1 broad-based disc bulge. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 65) It was noted that the 
findings of the 2020 MRI were worse when compared to the 2013 MRI. Mr. Barnhill 
noted that claimant’s spinal cord stimulator no longer captured his left lower extremity 
pain, and recommended a neurosurgical evaluation. 
 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 7 
 
 
Claimant saw Patrick Hitchon, M.D., on October 12, 2020, at University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics in the Neurosurgery Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 29) At that time, he 
complained of back and predominantly left leg pain. He said over the past six months, 
he had begun to experience some discomfort on the right side as well. Dr. Hitchon 
reviewed the EMG and multiple MRI studies, including the most recent from 2020. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 30) Dr. Hitchon suggested a trial of epidural steroid injections with intensive 
physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 31) If that failed to work, he said claimant may opt to 
pursue surgical intervention with discectomy and fusion, but he cautioned that the 
results of such an operation could not be predicted, due to claimant’s need for narcotic 
analgesics as well as the failure of his previous surgical interventions. He also noted 
that the chronicity of claimant’s condition was a concern, and that an extensive fusion 
with pedicle screws may be unsuccessful in alleviating his discomfort in the absence of 
radiculopathy on the EMG. 
 
Claimant returned to regular visits with Mr. Barnhill, and received epidural steroid 
injections in November 2020 and January 2021. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 65) He reported short-term 
benefits from the injections. He continued to see Mr. Barnhill over 2021, noting a few 
flares in his symptoms with activity related to his job as a baseball coach and related to 
periods of going without his medications. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 65-66) In October of 2021, he 
started another round of physical therapy after a flare of symptoms that included pain in 
the left hamstring area. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 66) He reported that he was coaching middle 
school volleyball and high school basketball, as Mr. Barnhill had told him to be more 
active. He was discharged from physical therapy after about a month, with his hamstring 
feeling good, but his back still bothering him.  
 
On January 31, 2022, Mr. Barnhill noted that claimant was performing the 
activities he needed to do, and was working as a bus driver. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 67) On 
February 28, 2022, claimant reported a new complaint of numbness in his right foot. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 96) He said he had been working doing coaching activity and spending 
prolonged periods on his feet. Mr. Barnhill noted this new symptom would be monitored.  
 
On April 18, 2022, claimant saw Mr. Barnhill with a recent increase in right sided 
pain, and progressive pain along the right L5-S1 dermatome, which was different from 
before. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 97) Mr. Barnhill recommended modifying his spinal cord stimulator 
to see if it could capture that area of pain, followed by an epidural steroid injection to the 
right L5-S1 if he did not get sufficient relief.  
 
Claimant returned to Mr. Barnhill on May 16, 2022, at which time he reported 
ongoing bilateral lower extremity pain, right greater than left. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 98) Mr. 
Barnhill noted positive radiculopathy of the right lower extremity along the L4-L5 
dermatome, with associated weakness with toe extension in the right foot. He reported 
worse pain with prolonged walking and standing. Mr. Barnhill recommended an injection 
at L4-L5, possibly L5-S1. He also noted that claimant was having trouble with his 
insurance, since the 2013 injury was documented on the left side, although he did have 
right-sided symptoms as well, and had right-sided symptoms again since 2020. (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 99)  

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 8 
 
 
 
Claimant next saw Mr. Barnhill on August 22, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 100) He 
reported pain at a level 7 out of 10, and advised his request for the right sided injections 
were not approved. He described his left-sided pain as a continuous dull ache with a 
throbbing sensation along the L5-S1 dermatome. On the right side he described a 
burning sensation and numbness. He said he could walk about one block, and that he 
continued to do his home exercise program. Mr. Barnhill recommended a caudal 
epidural, and indicated he would contact the workers’ compensation carrier for approval.  
 
Mr. Barnhill appears to have left Regional Medical Center, so claimant 
transitioned to care with Bradley Zeithamel, CRNA, who he saw on February 17, 2023. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 68) Mr. Zeithamel noted that claimant’s spinal cord stimulator needed a 
new battery, and that claimant reported increasing right-sided pain, especially in the 
posterior leg, radiating to his foot. Claimant had the battery replaced in his spinal cord 
stimulator, which made no difference in his right leg symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 69)  
 
On May 22, 2023, claimant saw Mr. Zeithamel, again reporting bilateral radicular 
symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 101) He reported increased pain and discomfort in his right leg 
and right low back, and said he had the constant sensation of having a sock bunched 
up under the ball of his right foot, along with some burning sensations in his toes. He 
reported that he had experienced the same pain in the past, but at this time, it had 
become more consistent and was progressing. Mr. Zeithamel ordered an MRI due to 
the progression of his symptoms. The MRI took place on August 25, 2023, and showed 
a left L5-S1 foraminal disc protrusion abutting the exiting left L4 nerve root, producing 
moderate neuroforaminal narrowing. There was also a right L5-L5 subarticular disc 
protrusion abutting the descending right L5 nerve root at the lateral recess, with 
moderate stenosis and neuroforaminal narrowing. Finally, there was a left L3-L4 disc 
protrusion, with mild stenosis, moderate left-sided neuroforaminal narrowing, and mild 
right-sided neuroforaminal narrowing. 
 
Claimant returned to Mr. Zeithamel on September 25, 2023, and received an L4-
L5 caudal epidural steroid injection. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 102) He returned on November 16, 
2023, and reported the caudal injection did not provide him with relief from his radicular 
symptoms and low back pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 105) Mr. Zeithamel noted claimant had 
multiple trigger point areas, as well as some very tight bands of muscle, and 
recommended additional physical therapy with muscle stripping. A note dated 
November 21, 2023 indicates that the physical therapy was denied by workers’ 
compensation. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 70) Claimant’s mother had recently passed away, however, 
so he decided to hold off on physical therapy at that time.  
 
Claimant continued with regular visits for medication refills over the course of 
2024. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 70-71) On August 12, 2024, claimant noted increased left leg 
symptoms, and reported a feeling of heaviness in his leg, which had caused him to trip 
more often than before due to difficulty lifting his legs. Claimant had a left L5 
transforaminal epidural steroid injection on September 25, 2024, which he felt helped 
his right side more than previous injections, but did not last long. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 71) On 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 9 
 
 
November 18, 2024, claimant reported about 50 percent relief for a few weeks from the 
injection, with ongoing relief at about 20 percent. He felt he was doing about the same 
overall, and was being as functional as he could, given his limitations.  
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation, at defendants’ request, with 
Joseph Chen, M.D., on December 23, 2024. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 112) Dr. Chen noted that the 
evaluation started at 11:00 a.m. and concluded at 12:00 p.m. He reviewed medical 
records and prepared a summary of claimant’s medical treatment. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 112-
117) Dr. Chen noted claimant’s clinical findings at the time of his examination included 
persistent low back pain, involving both his left leg and more recently his right leg. (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 117) He reported left-sided buttock and hamstring pain, as well as cramping at 
night. He continued to use the spinal cord stimulator, which he found helpful. He 
reported the last steroid injection at L5 had been helpful but lasted less than one month. 
 
With respect to activity, claimant reported doing very little exercise or chores. He 
reported difficulty walking on uneven surfaces and back pain with repetitive bending. He 
reported enjoying his coaching activities, and at the time said he was coaching middle 
school girls’ track, volleyball, and basketball. He also drove the bus for the teams. 
 
Dr. Chen noted on physical examination that claimant had a normal gait, and 
normal findings related to his cervical spine/neck and right and left shoulders. (Jt. Ex. 6, 
pp. 117-118) His thoracic spine was normal except for mild postural issues, including 
rolled shoulders and forward head position. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 118) He was diffusely tender 
throughout his lower back and buttock, with very limited range of motion in his lumbar 
spine. Testing was positive for left-sided back pain, and he was very tender to palpation 
over the gluteal and sacral muscle, as well as the greater trochanteric bursa. In 
summary, Dr. Chen concluded that claimant had little spinal range of motion along with 
diffuse tenderness to even light palpation and easy reproduction of his bilateral buttock 
pain with gluteal muscle palpation, stretch, and activation. He also noted nerve tension 
signs were equivocal, producing back pain but not radiating leg pain.  
 
Claimant completed health status measures, including a symptom diagram and 
some questionnaires regarding pain and disability. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 118-119) Dr. Chen 
interpreted claimant’s results as indicating an individual with high self-reports of pain 
interference and extremely high fear avoidance beliefs. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 119)  
 
Dr. Chen responded to several questions posed by defense counsel. First, he 
opined that there are no objective changes in claimant’s diagnoses since the arbitration 
hearing on November 29, 2016. He noted claimant’s report of new radiating right leg 
symptoms in May of 2022, and the repeat MRI in August 2023 that showed an increase 
in the progressive degeneration of his lumbar spine. However, Dr. Chen noted that the 
increase in degeneration is not uncommon after L3-S1 fusion, and noted claimant had 
not had any electrodiagnostic studies that indicate the presence of an active right-sided 
lumbar or lumbosacral radiculopathy. He noted that claimant was given an injection for 
his right-sided symptoms, and on follow-up complained of ongoing left-sided symptoms, 
which he has had for over a decade. He noted that the pattern of bilateral and 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 10 
 
 
intermittent symptoms is consistent with arachnoiditis or epidural fibrosis of the lumbar 
nerve roots, as suspected by claimant’s prior treating physicians. 
 
Dr. Chen opined that claimant reached MMI in March 2015, and has required 
ongoing maintenance treatment in terms of pain management medication and 
intermittent injections. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 119-120) Dr. Chen further opined that claimant had 
not sustained any additional impairment beyond Dr. Kuhnlein’s 2015 rating of 29 
percent of the body as a whole. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 120) Dr. Chen did not believe claimant had 
any additional physical functional limitations, despite his increase in subjective right-
sided back and leg pain. Dr. Chen opined that claimant should continue with the 
permanent restrictions of no lifting over 10 pounds, as assigned by Dr. Kuhnlein in 
2015.  
 
With respect to additional treatment, Dr. Chen opined that claimant may benefit 
from additional electrodiagnostic testing to evaluate whether there are any findings of 
ongoing denervation in his right sided lumbar spinal nerve roots. In the alternative, he 
suggested a trial course of neuropathic pain medications. Finally, he suggested that 
claimant may benefit from an additional pain management training and education 
program, which encourages physical activities along with pain psychology and 
education. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 120-121) However, he noted that claimant appeared to be 
satisfied with his current treatment through the Regional Medical Center Pain Clinic, so 
he did not believe claimant would require any additional supervised medical treatment. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 121) 
 
Claimant saw Mr. Zeithamel on March 3, 2025, who noted he was doing about 
the same, with pain travelling down both legs, and that he was as functional as he could 
be, given his limitations. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 109) He was interested in a caudal epidural given 
the increase in his bilateral leg pain. The caudal epidural injection took place on March 
31, 2025. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 110-111)  
 
Claimant had an IME with Dr. Kuhnlein on February 28, 2025. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 56) 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s report is dated May 9, 2025. Dr. Kuhnlein provided a detailed summary of 
claimant’s medical treatment after the 2016 arbitration hearing. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 57-71) He 
noted that claimant continued to see Mr. Zeithamel for medication management, and Dr. 
Radloff for other medical needs. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 71) Claimant reported needing to increase 
his spinal cord stimulator use due to the changes in his symptoms. Dr. Kuhnlein also 
noted the stimulator had been reprogrammed at least three times since the hearing, in 
order to try to provide more coverage for the right leg.  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein noted that claimant’s medication dosages had not changed 
significantly since the time of the arbitration hearing. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 71-72) Claimant 
stated that he was exercising as much as possible, and taking short walks, but that his 
functional abilities had been decreasing, even with his coaching activities. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
72)  
Claimant reported symptoms of constant waxing and waning, activity-dependent, 
aching and burning low back pain extending across the waistline and radiating to both 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 11 
 
 
buttocks. He said the pain pattern had not changed, and he had pain without numbness 
or tingling in both posterior legs extending to the great toe area. He complained of 
numbness and tingling in both feet, and said he had a constricted feeling in his big toe, 
as though it were sticking through a hole in his sock. He described low back stiffness 
and less strength in his legs. He said coughing and sneezing increases his back pain 
more so than when he last saw Dr. Kuhnlein.  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein noted that when he saw claimant in 2015, he complained of 
occasional pain radiating down the right leg to his heel. At the 2025 visit, claimant said 
his right leg symptoms had become more constant and more severe over the prior four 
years, and his right leg symptoms now mirrored his left leg. He noted that the waxing 
and waning pattern had not changed, but the symptoms affected the right leg more 
constantly than before, and with increased frequency and severity with activities than 
before. Additionally, the right foot numbness and tingling developed after the arbitration 
hearing, although claimant noted he was unsure whether it was related to his low back 
or his diabetes. 
  
At the time of Dr. Kuhnlein’s examination, claimant was coaching volleyball and 
basketball, and driving the bus for the teams during the season, which was from 
September to February. He estimated spending about 15 hours per week coaching. He 
described increased problems with endurance, but said he tried to do as much as he 
could, as he had been told to do. He reported that bending and prolonged sitting or 
standing produced longer-lasting pain than before, and that he had more problems with 
stairs. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 73) He reported that driving the bus was easier than riding on the 
bus because of the air-ride seat, and because he only drives for about 20 minutes at a 
time, 10 times per year depending on the schedule. Overall, claimant said that the 
waxing and waning pattern had remained about the same, but his symptoms were more 
severe during flares, and his right leg symptoms had increased since he last saw Dr. 
Kuhnlein. 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein performed a physical examination. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 74-74) His 
diagnoses included failed laminectomy syndrome and chronic lower back pain with 
radiculopathy and spinal cord stimulator placement and later battery replacement. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 75) He opined that when he last saw claimant in November of 2015, his right 
lower extremity symptoms were intermittent. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 76) Since that time, his right 
leg symptoms had become more constant, and now mirrored his left leg symptoms. Dr. 
Kuhnlein opined that this represented a material change and progression of the 
radiculopathic symptoms since the arbitration hearing, as his leg symptoms had 
become more constant and had progressed. He provided comparisons of pain diagrams 
claimant completed for Mr. Barnhill in 2017 and 2018, showing no pain in the right leg in 
2017 versus pain in both legs in 2018. He also noted the pain diagram claimant 
provided to Dr. Chen, which showed bilateral leg pain in 2024. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 76-77)  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein also noted that claimant had changed the way he used the spinal 
cord stimulator, and had it reprogrammed on different occasions in order to address his 
right leg complaints. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 77) He also noted that claimant said he had to charge 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 12 
 
 
the stimulator more frequently due to the changed usage, although it did not appear to 
affect the overall life of the battery. He noted that claimant had increased the use of the 
stimulator in different patterns than when he was last seen in 2015.  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein compared the lumbar MRI from 2013 to the one dated May 22, 
2018, after the arbitration hearing. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 77-78) He noted the 2018 MRI showed 
a progression of disease in the L3-L4 and L4-L5 findings. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 78) He then 
discussed the 2020 and 2023 MRI results, and concluded that the scans showed 
progression of claimant’s degenerative lumbar disease after the hearing date. He 
opined that there had been changes in claimant’s pain patterns and the MRI scans 
since the arbitration hearing, and no intervening injuries other than the ongoing 
degeneration after the injury. He opined this was not due to the natural aging process, 
after all of the surgeries claimant had, and that he never fully recovered from the original 
condition. He stated that while some of claimant’s treatment had not changed 
significantly, his symptom patterns had, as had his functional abilities. Overall, he 
opined that there have been substantial changes in claimant’s condition, related to the 
original December 31, 2011 injury, after the arbitration hearing. 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein provided an impairment rating using the fifth edition of the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 79) Overall, he 
provided a 30 percent functional impairment rating to the body as a whole. This is a 1 
percent increase in impairment since Dr. Kuhnlein’s 2015 report. With respect to 
restrictions, Dr. Kuhnlein noted that claimant would not be able to return to work in law 
enforcement in the field, as he would be unsafe for operational duties. He 
recommended a 10-pound lifting restriction, and sitting, standing, or walking on an as-
tolerated basis with the ability to change positions for comfort. He recommended 
occasional squatting, bending, crawling, or kneeling, and work on ladders or at height if 
he can maintain a three-point safety stance. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 79-80) He recommended 
occasionally climbing stairs with a guardrail, and occasional work at or above shoulder 
height. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 80) Finally, he recommended claimant not operate fixed industrial 
machinery with his legs. 
 
I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s report and opinions to be more credible than Dr. Chen’s. Dr. 
Kuhnlein saw claimant for an IME prior to the arbitration hearing, making him more 
familiar with claimant’s past condition. Additionally, he provided a detailed analysis of 
the objective changes present on claimant’s MRI studies since the first arbitration 
hearing. He also outlined the changes in claimant’s subjective complaints, which are 
supported by the medical records and pain diagrams claimant completed over the 
years. Dr. Chen acknowledged the change in claimant’s MRI studies, and noted that an 
increase in degeneration is not uncommon after L3-S1 fusion. However, Dr. Kuhnlein 
explained that the changes could not be attributed to the natural aging process, due to 
claimant’s surgeries. Dr. Kuhnlein’s analysis of the changes in claimant’s condition 
since the time of the arbitration hearing are supported by the medical records and 
claimant’s credible testimony. As such, I find claimant has proven he sustained a 
substantial change in his physical condition since the arbitration hearing, which was 
proximately caused by the original injury. 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 13 
 
 
 
Claimant had an employability assessment with Barbara Laughlin, M.A., which is 
dated May 12, 2025. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 9) She reviewed updated medical records and 
interviewed the claimant. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 9-14) She reviewed claimant’s education, 
computer skills, age, and past work history. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 15-20) She noted that 
claimant no longer coaches baseball, as he is not physically able to do so. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
20) At the time of her report, claimant was coaching varsity girls’ basketball, and middle 
school girls’ track and volleyball.  
 
Ms. Laughlin reviewed with claimant his own perception of his capabilities and 
limitations, noting he reported good days and bad days. The statements in her report 
are consistent with claimant’s testimony at hearing, discussed below. Ms. Laughlin 
noted that claimant’s perceptions are not included in her assessment of loss. Ms. 
Laughlin then provided a vocational analysis, using a transferable skills analysis utilizing 
the OASYS computerized transferable analysis program. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 20-24) She also 
provided labor market research. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 24-25) Using the restrictions provided by 
Dr. Kuhnlein at the sedentary exertional level, Ms. Laughlin determined that claimant 
cannot perform the full and wide range of light exertional level work, due to both 
postural limitations and lifting restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 24) He is unable to lift over 10 
pounds, only on an occasional basis, and he cannot perform sustained walking and 
standing required in light exertional level work. As such, Ms. Laughlin opined that he 
does not meet the criteria for light work, and it is reasonable to consider his loss at the 
sedentary exertional level.  
 
Ms. Laughlin noted factors impeding claimant’s return to work included his 
medical restrictions, his age, which is “a fact not appreciated by all employers,” his 
receipt of Social Security Disability Benefits, his lack of competitive computer skills, and 
his need to sit, which he can self-accommodate while coaching. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) She 
opined that without accommodation, claimant would not continue employment, and 
without a decrease in his restrictions, he would not be able to locate unaccommodated 
work in any quality, quantity, or dependability in his labor market. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 26) 
 
At defendants’ request, Jessica Miller, M.A., conducted an updated employability 
analysis. (Def. Ex. C, p. 55) Her report is dated May 19, 2025. She notes that a meeting 
did not take place to render the employability opinion, so her opinion is based on “a 
nationally certified professional perspective and is qualified to render a vocational 
opinion based on objective data.” 
 
Ms. Miller reviewed prior employability analyses performed by Ms. Sellner2 and 
Ms. Laughlin; claimant’s deposition transcript and answers to interrogatories; and the 
 
2 Ms. Miller indicates she reviewed an employability analysis of Lana Sellner dated October 31, 2024, but 
there is no such report in evidence. It is unclear whether this is a typographical error or if the parties 
obtained a more recent report from Ms. Sellner and chose not to offer it as evidence. The reports from 
Ms. Sellner in evidence are dated June 15, 2016 (Def. Ex. C, p. 33) and November 18, 2016 (Def. Ex. C, 
p. 52). 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 14 
 
 
IME reports of Dr. Chen and Dr. Kuhnlein. She summarized his educational background 
and work history. (Def. Ex. C, pp. 55-59) Based on his work history, Ms. Miller 
determined that claimant’s past work has been in the light to medium physical demand 
categories, as well as unskilled and skilled jobs. (Def. Ex. C, p. 60) She noted that 
claimant had acquired additional skills and knowledge that are transferable to other 
positions, and utilized the O*NET (Occupational Information Network) program to come 
up with transferable skills and knowledge considered in reviewing his employability.  
 
Ms. Miller next completed labor research in the Strawberry Point area and 
surrounding areas. She provided a list of “viable employment opportunities” that she felt 
aligned with claimant’s physical capabilities and transferable skills. (Def. Ex. C, pp. 60-
62) She listed 7 jobs, which included customer service, primarily over the phone, driving 
for Uber, and dispatcher for law enforcement or a transportation company.  
 
Ms. Miller reviewed Ms. Laughlin’s vocational opinion, and while she agreed that 
claimant cannot perform the full range of light exertional level work, she opined that he 
is not medically restricted solely to sedentary work. (Def. Ex. C, p. 63) She opined that 
because the computer program Ms. Laughlin used does not allow for isolating jobs that 
alternate sitting and standing, it is more appropriate to use a light work standard and 
then manually review the results to eliminate inapplicable results prior to calculating 
occupational loss. She also criticized Ms. Laughlin for neglecting to consider Dr. Chen’s 
less restrictive opinion regarding restrictions. (Def. Ex. C, p. 64) She also took issue 
with Ms. Laughlin’s characterization of claimant’s computer skills, or lack thereof, as she 
opined that there is no reason to believe he cannot develop new computer skills. 
 
Ms. Miller also noted that the purpose of labor market research is to show that 
there are jobs that exist, at the time the labor market research was conducted, for which 
claimant would be qualified to apply, and be able to complete, within his outlined 
physical demands and capabilities. (Def. Ex. C, p. 65) She highlighted that claimant has 
been able to maintain employment as a van driver and a coach, which demonstrates he 
is “capable of maintaining employment with or without reasonable accommodation.”  
 
Overall, Ms. Miller concluded that based on the labor market research 
completed, there are several vocational opportunities for claimant to return to work 
within his geographical areas and/or remotely. (Def. Ex. C, p. 66) She noted that some 
positions may require additional computer skills, but often on-the-job training is 
provided. She also noted that if claimant were to relocate, his job opportunities would 
increase. (Def. Ex. C, p. 67) 
 
Claimant testified that since the arbitration hearing, the pain levels in his low back 
and left leg have increased in intensity and frequency. (Tr., pp. 50-52) He also testified 
that at the time of the arbitration hearing, the symptoms in his right leg were occasional, 
but not particularly concerning. (Tr., pp. 51-52) However, at the time of hearing, he 
testified that his right leg now mirrors his left leg, with constant symptoms. (Tr., pp. 53-
54) He further testified that the problems with his right leg are more problematic than 
with his left leg, as it can affect his driving with pushing the pedals in a vehicle. (Tr., p. 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 15 
 
 
55) He testified that since the arbitration hearing, he has also developed issues with 
walking on uneven surfaces, and has stumbled and fallen a few times. (Tr., p. 59)  He 
noted that having two problematic legs is more difficult than just one, and he feels less 
stable when walking since the right leg symptoms became more constant. (Tr., pp. 59-
60)  
 
With respect to work, claimant testified that he is no longer physically able to 
coach baseball, as it is the most demanding sport to coach. (Tr., p. 48) He is also no 
longer driving the van, as he turned down the offer to drive a new route to Decorah due 
to his physical state. (Tr., p. 111) For the 2025-2026 school year, the only jobs he has 
contracted to perform are coaching varsity girls’ basketball, and middle school girls’ 
track and volleyball. (Tr., p. 66) He will earn around $10,000 for those three positions 
combined. He testified that he would love to be physically able to do more, and if he 
could return to his job as a police officer, driving a bus, or coaching baseball, he would 
do so. (Tr., p. 67)  
 
With respect to the jobs Ms. Miller suggested, claimant testified that he would not 
be able to do any type of job that required standing for long periods of time, or sitting for 
long periods of time. (Tr., pp. 65-66) He further testified that if he was physically able to 
work, he would be doing more than his current coaching jobs. (Tr., pp. 66-67) 
 
Claimant’s wife, Lisa Pope, also testified at hearing. (Tr., p. 114) I found her to be 
a credible witness. She confirmed that claimant is more likely to fall currently than he 
was at the time of the arbitration hearing. (Tr., pp. 115-116) She testified that since the 
arbitration hearing, he has gotten much more limited in his abilities. (Tr., p. 116) She 
testified that his balance is worse, and they have to be sure he is on level ground. She 
testified that while he had some limitations with walking and other activities at the time 
of the arbitration hearing, since that time it has gotten worse. (Tr., pp. 117-118) For 
example, she testified that she did not used to worry about him losing his balance 
because he was not able to pick up his foot. (Tr., p. 118) She testified that she is very 
cautious about everything claimant does now, as she worries that he will fall, and that 
they removed all the rugs from their home so that claimant does not trip and fall. (Tr., p. 
119) 
 
In addition to proving his physical changes since the arbitration hearing, claimant 
has also proven that his earning capacity has diminished. He is no longer able to work 
as a baseball coach, or drive the school van route. His earnings have diminished as a 
result. While the claimant was found to be significantly disabled at the time of the 
arbitration hearing, he was capable of some stable employment. This is supported by 
the jobs claimant has held since 2016. Since that time, due to his deteriorating physical 
condition, he has had to resign from all positions other than the three less physical 
coaching jobs he has contracted for the 2025-2026 school year. He is clearly motivated 
to continue working in whatever capacity he is able, as demonstrated by the jobs he has 
done since the arbitration hearing. However, given his limited ability to sit or stand for 
long periods of time, his lifting restrictions, and his lack of computer skills, claimant has 
proven that he is now permanently and totally disabled due to the original work injury. 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 16 
 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to determine is whether claimant has carried his burden to prove 
he has sustained a substantial change in condition since the November 29, 2016, 
arbitration hearing that would entitle him to additional permanent partial disability 
benefits under a review-reopening proceeding. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e).  
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 10A.315, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon. Iowa Code section 10A.317(2) (2023). In order to 
demonstrate eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 10A.317(2), the 
claimant must demonstrate what his physical or economic condition was at the time of 
the original award or settlement. At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant 
has the burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which 
warrants an increase in compensation. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 
(Iowa 2009). The difference can be economic or physical. Blacksmith v. All-American 
Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 
(1959). Essentially, snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each hearing 
or settlement. The claimant must prove that there is something substantially different 
between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits. Gosek v. 
Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at 392. Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to relitigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.” Defendants argue that the change in condition needs to have been “unforeseen 
or unexpected” at the time of the arbitration hearing. (Def. Brief, pp. 10-11) However, 
Kohlhaas does not impose that requirement. In fact, Kohlhaas specifically states that 
the agency is forbidden from speculating as to what was contemplated at the time of the 
original snapshot.  Id. The Kohlhaas court noted that in an unscheduled whole-body 
case, the claimant's loss of earning capacity is determined by the commissioner as of 
the time of the hearing based on the factors bearing on industrial disability then 
prevailing; not based on what the claimant's physical condition and economic realities 
might be at some future time. Id., (citing Iowa Code § 85.34(3); Quaker Oats Co. v. 
Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 157 (Iowa 1996); Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 
258, 266 (Iowa 1995)). The court stated: 
The workers' compensation statutory scheme contemplates that future 
developments (post-award and post-settlement developments), including 
the worsening of a physical condition or a reduction in earning capacity, 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 17 
 
 
should be addressed in review-reopening proceedings. See Iowa Code § 
86.14(2). The review-reopening claimant need not prove, as an element of 
his claim, that the current extent of disability was not contemplated by the 
commissioner (in the arbitration award) or the parties (in their agreement 
for settlement). 
Id. 
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that claimant has proven his 
condition has substantially worsened since the original arbitration hearing. He credibly 
testified that his pain levels in his low back and left leg have increased in intensity and 
frequency. He further testified that the symptoms in his right leg have gone from 
occasional to constant, mirroring his left leg. The symptoms in his right leg are more 
problematic, as it affects driving. Additionally, he has problems with walking and has 
stumbled and fallen now that both legs have symptoms. Claimant’s testimony is 
supported by the medical records and Dr. Kuhnlein’s second IME report.  
Economically, he is no longer able to maintain all of his coaching positions, 
having given up coaching baseball. He has given up all of his other jobs, and is only 
contracted to coach three sports for the 2025-2026 school year. This will substantially 
decrease his earnings. When viewing the evidence as a whole, claimant has proven his 
condition has deteriorated such that he is entitled to an increase in industrial disability.  
The parties stipulated that if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent 
disability, the disability is an industrial disability. (See Hearing Report, p. 2) Industrial 
disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 
899 (1935) as follows: “It is therefore plain that the Legislature intended the term 
‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning capacity and not a mere 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 18 
 
 
‘functional disability’ to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and 
mental ability of a normal [person].” 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee’s age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer’s offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). The commissioner may also 
consider claimant’s medical condition prior to the injury, immediately after the injury, and 
presently in rendering an evaluation of industrial disability. IPB, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 
N.W.2d 621, 632-633 (Iowa 2000) (citing McSpadden, 288 N.W.2d at 192). 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness. Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee’s experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935). 
The focus for evaluating total disability is on the person’s ability to earn a living.  
Diederich, 258 N.W. at 902. The question is whether the person is capable of 
performing a sufficient quantity and quality of work that an employer in a well-
established branch of the labor market would employ the person on a continuing basis 
and pay the person sufficient wages to permit the person to be self-supporting.  Tobin-
Nichols v. Stacyville Community Nursing Home, File No. 1222209 (Appeal December 
2003). A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however. See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). Industrial disability is determined by the effect the injury has on the 
employee’s earning capacity. Bearce v. FMC Corp., 465 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1991); 
Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 123 (Iowa Ct. App. 2003). 
Another important factor in the consideration of permanent and total disability 
cases is the employer’s ability to retain the injured worker with an offer of suitable work.  
The refusal or inability of the employer to return a claimant to work in any capacity is, by 
itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability. Clinton v. All-American Homes, File 
No. 5032603 (App. April 17, 2013); Western v. Putco Inc., File Nos. 5005190,5005191 
(App. July 29, 2005); Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, File No. 951206 (App. January 20, 
1995); Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 876894 (App. January 22, 1993); 
see also Larson, Workers’ Compensation Law, Section 57.61, pp. 10-164.90-95; 
Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark 385, 609 S.W.2d 102 (1980); Army & Air Force 
Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F.Supp. 865 (W.D. La 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas 
Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950). An employer knows the demands 
that are placed on its workforce. Its determination that the worker is too disabled for it to 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 19 
 
 
employ is entitled to considerable weight. If the employer in whose employ the disability 
occurred is unwilling or unable to accommodate the disability, there is no reason to 
expect some other employer to have more incentive to do so. 
I have considered claimant’s age, education, employment history, inability to 
return to the prior jobs he has held, his ability to retrain, his motivation, the situs and 
severity of his injuries, his impairment and restrictions, and all other industrial disability 
factors identified by the Iowa Supreme Court. I have reviewed the vocational 
evaluations submitted as evidence, and claimant’s testimony regarding his abilities and 
limitations. Having considered all of the evidence in the record, the greater weight of 
evidence in this case supports a finding that claimant is permanently and totally 
disabled as a result of his December 31, 2011 injury. Realistically, there are no jobs 
within the community that claimant can perform and for which he can realistically 
compete in his current condition. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 
808, 815 (Iowa 1994). Accordingly, I conclude that claimant proved he is permanently 
and totally disabled.  
 
 
Generally, permanent total disability benefits commence on the date of injury. 
However, in this case, claimant was found not to be permanently and totally disabled in 
the original arbitration hearing. Under agency precedent, additional benefits in a review-
reopening commence when the prior benefits terminated, in the absence of a new 
healing period. Kenneth Caven v. John Deere Dubuque Works, File No. 5023051 (App. 
Dec., May 23, 2013). However, interest on accrued benefits does not commence until 
the date the review-reopening petition was filed. As such, in this case, permanent total 
disability benefits will commence when the original 65 percent award was paid in full. 
Interest will commence upon accrued benefits beginning May 14, 2024, the date the 
petition for review-reopening was filed. 
 
 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of 
his IME with Dr. Kuhnlein. Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-
retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee 
believes that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. The Iowa Supreme 
Court provided a literal interpretation of the plain language of Iowa Code section 85.39, 
stating that section 85.39 only allows the employee to obtain an independent medical 
evaluation at the employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the 
employer. Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015). 
 
 
Under the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the 
employer’s expense if an evaluation of permanent disability has first been made by an 
employer-retained physician. In this case, Dr. Chen, the defendants’ retained expert, 
gave his opinion regarding permanent impairment on December 23, 2024. Dr. Kuhnlein, 
claimant’s retained expert, gave his opinion regarding permanent impairment on May 9, 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 20 
 
 
2025. Given the chronology of these reports, claimant has carried his burden to prove 
he is entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME in the amount of $6,460.00. (Cl. 
Ex. 4, pp. 51-52). 
 
 
The final issue to determine is taxation of costs. Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case. See 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33; Iowa Code § 10A.328. Claimant seeks $128.75 for the filing fee; $145.60 for 
the deposition transcript; and $1,382.50 for Ms. Laughlin’s vocational report. (Cl. Ex. 5, 
pp. 53-58) Each item is allowable as a cost under 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) 
(See Rose v. Menards, File No. 5024837 (App. Dec., Oct. 29, 2009) (holding 
practitioner reports, including vocational rehabilitation reports, are taxable as costs). As 
claimant was successful in his claim, I use my discretion and award claimant $1,656.85 
in total costs. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits at the stipulated 
rate of five hundred fifty-six and 67/100 dollars ($556.67). 
 
 
Benefits shall commence on the date that claimant’s prior 65 percent award 
terminated. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. Interest shall 
accrue from May 14, 2024. 
 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the cost of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME in the 
amount of six thousand four hundred sixty and 00/100 dollars ($6,460.00). 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of one thousand 
six hundred fifty-six and 85/100 dollars ($1,656.85). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this 29th day of December, 2025. 
 
      _____________________________ 
 
 
 
                       JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 

POPE V. CITY OF STRAWBERRY POINT 
Page 21 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
 
Paul Salabert (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
