Case Number: 20015443.01
Case Title:  NEVERMAN, LESLIE V. MIHM BROTHERS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Neverman Leslie-20015443.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LESLIE NEVERMAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 20015443.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
MIHM BROTHERS, INC., 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GREAT WEST CASUALTY CO., 
  : 
       Head Note Nos: 1804, 1108 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :             
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Leslie “Les” Neverman, filed a petition for arbitration on May 17, 
2022, against Mihm Brothers, Inc., employer, and Great West Casualty Company, 
insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Ben Roth.  The defendants were 
represented by Steve Spencer. 
The matter came on for hearing on June 5, 2023, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh originating in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconferencing.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 12; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 10; and Defense Exhibits A through N.  Defense Exhibit K 
is a video surveillance electronic clip.  The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to his 
daughter, Amy Boardman, and employer representative, Scott Mihm.  Maria Taylor 
served as the court reporter for the proceedings.  The matter was fully submitted on 
August 25, 2023, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The primary dispute in the case is the nature and extent of the claimant’s 
disability.  The claimant alleges permanent total disability and has asserted 
“odd-lot” burden shifting analysis.  The defendants contend that claimant’s 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jan-26  09:19:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
disability must be calculated functionally under the provisions of subsection 
(v). 
2. The claimant’s gross wages at the time of hearing are in dispute as well.  The 
dispute is over whether certain weeks should be excluded or included in the 
calculation. 
3. The claimant is seeking payment for IME expenses under Section 85.39.  
Furthermore, claimant seeks a specific taxation of costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on December 16, 2020. 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
4. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is September 
10, 2021.  As set forth above, claimant alleges permanent total disability 
which began as of the date of injury. 
5. Although the gross wages are disputed, the parties agree that claimant was 
single and entitled to one (1) exemption at the time of his injury. 
6. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit for payment of weekly 
benefits from the date of injury through the date of hearing. 
7. Affirmative defenses have not been asserted. 
8. Medical expenses under Section 85.27 are not in dispute other than some 
mileage. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Leslie “Les” Neverman was 76 years old as of the date of hearing.  He testified 
live and under oath at hearing.  I find his testimony to be highly credible.  His answers 
were straightforward and forthright.  He was a good historian.  His testimony matched 
closely with other records in evidence.  There was certainly nothing about his demeanor 
which caused me any concern about his truthfulness.  In fact, the opposite is true. 
Mr. Neverman graduated from high school in 1965 and joined the United States 
Navy. He served as a communications officer and was honorably discharged in 1968.  
Thereafter, he worked in a factory and a feed mill until he was hired by the Waukon 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Police Department as a law enforcement officer in 1972.  He then secured employment 
with the Allamakee County Sheriff’s office in 1976, as a deputy.  He served as a deputy 
sheriff until 1983, when he sustained a serious neck injury which resulted in a significant 
neck surgery and disability. 
Mr. Neverman testified that he did not have any permanent restrictions related to 
his neck condition.  He testified he did have some decreased range of motion and 
occasional soreness.  Following the injury and resulting surgery, Mr. Neverman began 
working as an over-the-road truck driver.  He was initially self-employed and then began 
working for various companies as an employee.  He began working for Mihm Brothers 
in July 2018.  Mr. Neverman testified that prior to his work injury he was in good health.  
He did have type II diabetes and high blood pressure.  He regulated these conditions 
with medications.  He is also hard of hearing. 
At Mihm Brothers, Mr. Neverman hauled refrigerated trailers as well as dry loads.  
He occasionally was required to unload freight and lower and raise the landing gear on 
the trailer.  He was paid 22.5 percent of each load he hauled.  His average wage prior to 
his injury is disputed. 
I have compared the parties competing wage calculations and reviewed the 
arguments.  I find that the greater weight of evidence supports a finding that claimant 
earned an average of $1,301.00 per week.  (See Def. Ex. H, p. 52) 
The parties have stipulated that Mr. Neverman was in a serious automobile 
accident which arose out of and in the course of his employment on December 16, 
2020.  On that date, he was driving in the state of Pennsylvania in treacherous road 
conditions from a snowstorm.  There was a pileup of vehicles from an accident just over 
a hill, which obstructed his vision.  He was unable to stop, and he crashed into the back 
of a trailer.  Mr. Neverman testified that his head struck the windshield, and he lost 
consciousness.  (Transcript, page 26)  Medical documentation in the record verifies that 
he lost consciousness.  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1; Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 163-164; Jt. Ex. 8, p. 
123)1  His vehicle was badly damaged, and he had to be extricated by cutting out the 
side of his truck and removing his seat.  (Tr., p. 27; Jt. Ex. 8, p. 123) 
Mr. Neverman was transported initially to the University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center (UPMC) in Lockhaven, where he was diagnosed with several orthopedic injuries, 
including a tibial fracture and a neck fracture.  Various x-rays and CT scans were taken 
of his left leg, cervical spine, and head.  Due to the severity of his injury, he was 
transported to a larger UPMC facility in Williamsport where he had consultations with 
orthopedics, neurology, speech therapy and social work.  Mr. Neverman’s memory 
regarding this time period is foggy. 
                                                                 
1 Joint Exhibit 8 is an EMS report.  While it responds “No” to the section listed “Loss of Consciousness” the History 
actually suggests otherwise.  “Patient states he was wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident but isn’t able to 
give details of what happened exactly.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 123)  When this record is read in conjunction with the other 
emergency records documenting his symptoms, it is more likely that he did in fact suffer a loss of consciousness. 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Regarding his left leg injury, the initial diagnosis was “left severely comminuted 
closed bicondylar fracture.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23)  Surgery was recommended which 
included a “knee spanning external fixation device.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23)  He also was 
diagnosed with an open “ulceration to his left fourth toe” which was described as a 
serious infection risk.  This condition was chronic.  Initially, the neurosurgeon 
recommended neck surgery as well.  It was later decided that this would be 
unnecessary.  The left leg surgery was performed on December 18, 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
25)  On December 19, 2020, a podiatrist recommended amputation of the left fourth toe, 
which was performed on December 20, 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 30-31) 
Mr. Neverman began therapy at the hospital thereafter.  Two therapists 
documented that his safety awareness, judgement, focus, attention, and problem 
solving were significantly impaired.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 33-35)  Mr. Neverman remained in 
the hospital for a month and was discharged on January 15, 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 47)  He 
had another surgery on his left leg as well as substantial amounts of physical and 
occupational therapy.  During this time, it is evident from the records that he continued 
to have decreased mental cognition.  Speech therapy was recommended for short-term 
memory loss.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 49)  Upon his release from the hospital, Mr. Neverman went 
to his daughter’s home to recover in Wisconsin.  His daughter, Amy Boardman, testified 
live and under oath at hearing.  (Tr., p. 74)  I find her testimony to be highly credible and 
compelling. 
Upon his discharge from the hospital, Mr. Neverman established medical care 
with Gunderson Health System.  He underwent home physical therapy while he 
recuperated.  The therapy notes significantly document Mr. Neverman’s ongoing 
cognitive challenges.  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 101-103)  He began seeing Joseph Binegar, M.D.  
He was diagnosed with a left foot drop as well as weakness of the left arm and atrophy 
of the left hand consistent with C7-C8 pathology.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 61)  An ankle-foot 
orthosis (AFO) was recommended, and he was instructed to limit weightbearing.  (Jt. 
Ex. 5, pp. 65-68)  Over the next few months, his drop foot worsened and he had been 
unable to secure the AFO or cane recommended.  His arm weakness improved during 
that time, with the exception of left biceps weakness.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 71)  Ms. Boardman 
attended his April 2021, appointment and expressed her concern about cognitive 
issues.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 71)  Ms. Boardman testified that her father was downplaying these 
issues.  (Tr., pp. 76-77)  Neuropsychological testing was recommended.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
72) 
The following day, Mr. Neverman was observed by his authorized medical 
provider nearly tripping due to his drop foot.  While x-rays showed he had continued to 
heal quite well, the following is documented: 
The patient is still struggling with his gait somewhat.  I did see him in the 
waiting room prior to this appointment and as he was walking back from x-
ray, he did catch his toe on his left foot and almost tripped.  
     Due to his footdrop and lack of having an AFO at this time, he is a 
tripping hazard and this would limit his ability to return to things.  

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Additionally, he has a future neuropsych appointment coming up and with 
the potential history of a traumatic brain injury and his appointment with 
Audiology, which is going to look for any equilibrium issues, he could 
potentially be a liability if he returns to driving a semi too soon.  With all 
that has happened, he would definitely need to use an automatic 
transmission if he returned to tracking [sic] as I do feel, due to his footdrop 
on his left, having him try to shift while wearing an AFO would be very 
difficult to push in a clutch and he would likely need an automatic semi if 
he returned to driving.  For the time being, we will leave him off until his 
next ortho point [sic].  My plan is to see him back in 2 weeks.  Hopefully 
we will have settled the issue with getting him an AFO dispensed.  I feel 
that he can continue to work on his strengthening and his patellar 
tendinitis with his home health physical therapy.  Again, we will work on 
getting him an ankle-foot orthotic to help him with his foot drop.  Again, he 
is having some issues with catching his toe, and I fear that he will 
potentially trip and re-injure himself in some way.  As stated, we will see 
him back in 2 weeks.  We will either work on having Vernon Memorial 
Healthcare dispense him an AFO or his home health physical therapy.  
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 74)  Mr. Neverman received the AFO sometime shortly thereafter. 
In June 2021, Mr. Neverman returned to the clinic and informed his provider of 
his decision to retire because of his conditions.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 76)  Ms. Boardman 
testified that she attended this appointment as well and that it was actually the provider 
who raised the prospect of retirement citing a number of reasons he should not return to 
commercial driving.  (Tr., p. 78)  The following is documented: 
I did advise the patient that, since he is retiring, really the work restrictions 
are more of a formality at this point and that this, of course, would not 
affect him returning to work as he has planned on retiring.  I did write him 
new work restrictions at today’s visit stating that his left tibial plateau 
fracture is drastically improved and now that he has his ankle-foot orthotic, 
from an orthopedic standpoint, he is doing quite well and would be able to 
return to work, but he also does have a subsequent evaluation with 
neuro/psych for possible traumatic brain injury.  So, as a result of this, he 
will likely need clearance from them and from Dr. Binegar as well down 
the line. 
      But again, I did stress to the patient that since he is planning on 
retiring due to his limitations, I do feel that this will be more of a formality.  
As stated, he is cleared by Orthopaedics, but he is not cleared by all of the 
specialties he is currently seeing.   
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 77) 
On June 11, 2021, Mr. Neverman underwent neuropsychological evaluation with 
Raymond List, PhD.  He obtained history from both Mr. Neverman and Ms. Boardman.  

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Testing demonstrated that Mr. Neverman scored in the 19th percentile or lower on 4 of 
his 6 areas, noting particular weakness in attention to visuospatial detail, organizing 
new information into memory, and processing, tracking and recalling details.  (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 82-83)  Dr. List opined it would be very risky to return to commercial driving.  He 
actually even expressed concerns regarding personal driving.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 82)  He 
diagnosed minor neurocognitive disorder.  Dr. List further opined that this condition was 
“work-related.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 84) 
Mr. Neverman returned to Dr. List in August 2021, for further testing after 
reducing his caffeine usage and sleeping better.  Additional tests were administered, 
however, Mr. Neverman continued to demonstrate a “slowed learning process, 
particularly for unstructured information, weakness in recall of details and variable 
attention and awareness of visuospatial information.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 86-87)  Dr. List 
maintained the same diagnosis and recommended that Mr. Neverman “not return to 
commercial driving” given his condition and limitations.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 87)  In a separate 
report on September 10, 2021, Dr. List provided a full expert medical opinion setting 
forth the basis for his conclusion that this condition was work-connected.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
90)  I find this report is compelling and convincing. 
Mr. Neverman returned to Dr. Binegar as well in September 2021.  Dr. Binegar’s 
examination continued to document weakness of the left ankle muscle groups.  (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 89)  Dr. Binegar listed out all of Mr. Neverman’s conditions as follows: 
IMPRESSION: 
1. Closed fracture of the 11th thoracic vertebrae. [sic] 
2. Closed fracture of the 5th cervical vertebrae. [sic] 
3. Closed fracture of the 4th cervical vertebrae. [sic] 
4. Closed fracture of the 11th thoracic vertebrae. [sic] 
5. Closed fracture of the medial portion of the left tibial plateau. 
6. Left arm weakness, currently nicely improved and actually, I felt was 
symmetric with his right arm today with just some mild proximal 
weakness bilaterally. 
7. Left foot drop likely due to a peroneal neuropathy directly related to his 
motor vehicle accident. 
8. History of amputation of the 4th toe of the left foot.  This was due to 
underlying osteomyelitis and was not related to his motor vehicle 
accident. 
9. Cognitive changes, possibly related to a traumatic brain injury from his 
motor vehicle accident.  I will defer to Dr. Raymond List in 
neuropsychology about whether the cognitive changes are related to 
the motor vehicle accident or not. 
10. Tinnitus in both ears.  I will defer to the Department of Audiology about 
whether this is related to the work incident or not. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 89)  He opined that Mr. Neverman should not return to commercial driving.  
“At this point, I am recommending no commercial truck driving unless he re-passes his 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
CDL.  The patient is not planning on returning to commercial truck driving.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
89) 
 
Mr. Neverman formally resigned from Mihm Brothers on September 24, 2021.  
(Defense Exhibit C)  He testified that he was asked by another employee to sign this 
document to take him off the active drivers’ list.  He testified that he did not understand 
he was resigning and did not read the document before signing it.  (Tr., p. 46)  The 
employer has not offered Mr. Neverman any work of any kind since his accident.  In any 
event, Mr. Neverman was never released to commercial truck driving.  Based upon the 
total record before the agency, it is clear that he should not be released to commercial 
truck driving. 
 
At a visit with his primary care provider in November 2021, Mr. Neverman 
reported that he was having issues with depression.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 54) 
In November 2021, Robert Broghammer, M.D., performed an independent 
medical examination (IME) of Mr. Neverman.  He reviewed appropriate medical records 
and examined him.  He assigned a 25 percent whole body rating for the following 
(whole body) impairments: 
5 percent for the T11 fracture; 
4 percent for each of the cervical fractures; 
9 percent for decreased cervical spine motion; 
2 percent for the tibial plateau fracture; 
4 percent for the peroneal nerve damage. 
(Def. Ex. A, pp. 14-16)  Dr. Broghammer opined that the toe amputation was unrelated 
to the work injury.  While he acknowledged that Mr. Neverman has some cognitive 
difficulties, he concluded that these problems were “personal and preexisting.”  (Def. Ex. 
A, p. 17)  He further opined that Mr. Neverman did not require any medical restrictions 
for any of his conditions.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 17) 
Mr. Neverman underwent an IME with Arnold Delbridge, M.D., in June 2022.  Dr. 
Delbridge examined Mr. Neverman and reviewed appropriate records.  After his review, 
he assigned a 26 percent whole body rating, using slightly different methodology to 
arrive at the final rating: 
1 percent for the amputation of the left 4th toe; 
2 percent for the T11 fracture; 
4 percent for each cervical fracture; 
13 percent for the peroneal nerve injury; 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
5 percent for the tibial plateau fractures. 
(Claimant Exhibit 1, pp. 12-13)  Dr. Delbridge deferred to neuropsychology on the extent 
of impairment caused by the closed head injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13)  Dr. Delbridge opined 
that Mr. Neverman should not return to truck driving.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 13-14)  He 
recommended restrictions of no sitting or standing more than 4 to 6 hours; no lifting 
more than 25 pounds occasionally or carrying the same more than a few steps, and no 
work involving “jolting” such as operation of a forklift.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) 
Mr. Neverman underwent repeat psychological testing in August 2022, which 
was consistent with his earlier testing.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 93-95)  Dr. List added the 
diagnosis of adjustment disorder with depressed mood.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 95)  In September 
2022, Mr. Neverman returned to Dr. Binegar who reaffirmed his opinion that he should 
not return to commercial truck driving.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 98)  Dr. Binegar assigned a 28 
percent whole body rating, using the following combined impairments: 
5 percent for each of the spinal fractures;  
5 percent for the left leg fractures; 
4 percent for the peroneal neuropathy; 
8 percent for the traumatic brain injury. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 98-99) 
Farid Manshadi, M.D., performed an IME in April 2023.  He examined Mr. 
Neverman and reviewed appropriate medical documents.  He assigned a 35 percent 
whole body rating, broken down as follows: 
10 percent for the neurocognitive disorder; 
4 percent for each cervical fracture; 
8 percent for reduced neck motion; 
5 percent for the T11 vertebra fracture; 
11 percent for the peroneal neuropathy. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 26-27)  Dr. Manshadi opined the following permanent medical restrictions 
were appropriate: 
In regard to permanent restrictions that I would assign for Mr. Neverman’s 
work-related conditions mentioned above, it is my recommendation that 
Mr. Neverman should avoid returning to commercial driving.  Further, Mr. 
Neverman will require an AFO for his left foot drop indefinitely.  He also is 
to avoid uneven or slippery surfaces, as well as avoiding heights and 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
ladders.  He is also to avoid overcrowded environments.  He also needs to 
be allowed to sit and stand and walk on an as needed basis, and no lifting 
more than 20 pounds. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 27) 
Defendants then secured a record review report from Joseph Burgarino, M.D., in 
May 2023.  Dr. Burgarino disagreed with Dr. List that Mr. Neverman’s neurocognitive 
condition is causally connected to the work injury.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 31)  I do not find his 
opinions convincing.  It is unclear to me how Dr. Burgarino came to these conclusions 
without ever examining or even speaking with Mr. Neverman. 
At hearing, Mr. Neverman testified in detail that he continues to have symptoms 
in his neck and back, as well as his left leg.  He also testified regarding his cognitive 
difficulties.  (Tr., pp. 33-40)  Ms. Boardman corroborated this testimony.  (Tr., pp. 75-77)  
Now that he is no longer working, Mr. Neverman lives independently.  He enjoys 
gambling at the casino. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether Mr. Neverman is permanently and totally 
disabled. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1961). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995).  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894, (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark. 609 S.W.2d 102 
(1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. La. 
1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
 
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court 
formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an 
odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment 
in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled 
if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  Even under the 
odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Mr. Neverman has proven the 
following conditions are connected to his work injury: 
1. Closed fracture of the 11th thoracic vertebra. 
2. Closed fracture of the 5th cervical vertebra. 
3. Closed fracture of the 4th cervical vertebra. 
4. Closed fracture of the medial portion of the left tibial plateau. 
5. Left foot drop due to a peroneal neuropathy. 
6. Amputation of the 4th toe of the left foot.  
7. Mild neurocognitive disorder with depression. 
This finding is based upon the expert opinions of Dr. List, Dr. Binegar, Dr. Delbridge and 
Dr. Manshadi.  The defendants argue strenuously that Mr. Neverman failed to prove 
that he sustained mild neurocognitive disorder.  Instead, they argue that he was not 
very bright to begin with.  (Def. Brief, p. 4)  The defendants’ own physicians however 
disagreed with this assessment. 
I find that the combined impact of all of the foregoing conditions render Mr. 
Neverman permanently and totally disabled.  I find it is unnecessary to utilize the odd-lot 
analysis to reach this conclusion.  The reality is Mr. Neverman is 76 years old and has 
been a truck driver since the 1980’s.  The authorized treating physicians recommended 
he not return to commercial driving.  I find that this medical conclusion is not only 
persuasive, it is obvious.  Dr. List set forth Mr. Neverman’s visuospatial challenges in 
some detail.  (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 86-87)  The employer, of course, never offered Mr. 
Neverman any work following his work injury and the reason why is quite obvious.  No 
trucking company would want a person with these deficits driving a commercial truck.  It 
would be preposterous. 
I further find that the restrictions recommended by Dr. Manshadi are the best 
indication of Mr. Neverman’s actual work restrictions and limitations.   
In regard to permanent restrictions that I would assign for Mr. Neverman’s 
work-related conditions mentioned above, it is my recommendation that 
Mr. Neverman should avoid returning to commercial driving.  Further, Mr. 
Neverman will require an AFO for his left foot drop indefinitely.  He also is 
to avoid uneven or slippery surfaces, as well as avoiding heights and 
ladders.  He is also to avoid overcrowded environments.  He also needs to 
be allowed to sit and stand and walk on an as needed basis, and no lifting 
more than 20 pounds. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 27)  I find Mr. Neverman is not a good candidate for retraining.  These 
restrictions would prevent him from returning to any of his past employment, and, at his 
age, any well-known branch of the labor market. 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
The next issue is the correct rate of compensation.  Section 85.36 states the 
basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the time of the injury.  
The section defines weekly earnings as the gross salary, wages, or earnings to which 
an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the customary hours 
for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the employer regularly 
required for the work or employment.  The various subsections of section 85.36 set forth 
methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the type of earnings and 
employment.  If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly 
earnings are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period 
immediately preceding the injury.  Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s 
customary earnings is excluded, however.  Section 85.36(6). 
 
Thus far, benefits have been paid at the rate of $776.10 per week based upon a 
calculation of a wage of $1,301.00 per week.  (Def. Ex. H, p. 52)  The defendants argue 
for a lower wage.  (Def. Ex. H, p. 54)  The claimant argues for a higher wage.  (Cl. Ex. 
4)  Having reviewed all of the evidence of his wages, I find that best evidence of his 
actual customary wages in the time period prior to his work injury is $1,301.00. 
 
The next issue is IME expenses and costs. 
 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). 
Iowa Code section 10A.328 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
I find that claimant is entitled to IME expenses in the amount of $3,350.00 for Dr. 
Delbridge. 
I find that claimant is entitled to the following costs: 
Filing Fee 
 
 
 
$103.00 
Deposition Transcript 
 
$110.25 
Manshadi Report 
 
 
$3,000.00 
Total Costs  
 
 
$3,213.25 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
All benefits shall be paid at the rate of seven hundred seventy-six and 10/100 
($776.10) per week. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant permanent total disability from December 16, 
2020, forward through the date of hearing and continuing until he is no longer 

NEVERMAN V. MIHM BROTHERS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
permanently and totally disabled. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendants are responsible for reimbursement of IME expenses in the amount of 
three thousand three hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($3,350.00) for Dr. Delbridge. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of three thousand two hundred 
thirteen and 25/100 dollars ($3,213.25). 
Signed and filed this ____26th ___ day of January 2024. 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
