Case Number: 23010315.01
Case Title:  CORNWELL, BOBBY V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Cornwell Bobby-23010315.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BOBBY CORNWELL, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 23010315.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC., 
  : 
           ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
           Head Note Nos.: 1108, 1802 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Bobby Cornwell, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from ADP Totalsource Group, Inc., employer, and New 
Hampshire Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by 
James Ballard.  The defendants were represented by Aaron Oliver. 
The matter came on for hearing on December 16, 2024, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The record in 
the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 12; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 11; and 
Defense Exhibits A through P.   
The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to Steve Deaton and Blake 
Anderson.  Jane Weingart served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted 
on February 14, 2025. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on September 6, 2023.  Defendants contend that the 
manifestation date of the alleged injury is also disputed. 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of any temporary disability during a 
period of recovery. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Aug-15  15:03:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to a running award of healing period benefits 
from the date of injury through the date of hearing and continuing. 
4. The defendants have asserted the affirmative defense of notice under Section 
85.23 depending “on the date of injury chosen if found compensable.” 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 10. 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to IME expense under Section 85.39. 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to future medical treatment or alternate 
medical care. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship at least as of September 
6, 2023. 
2. The weekly rate of compensation is $525.20. 
3. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit for group disability benefits 
paid. 
4. Affirmative defenses, other than notice, have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Bobby Cornwell was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  He was 
born and raised in Tennessee.  He graduated from high school in 1994 and worked a 
variety of manual labor positions (construction and assembly) between 1994 and 2019.    
(Defendants’ Exhibit A)  He and his family moved to Iowa in 2021.  He began working 
for Library Binding Service (hereafter, LBS) on January 10, 2022.1 
Mr. Cornwell testified live and under oath at the video hearing.  I find his 
testimony to be generally credible. 
Mr. Cornwell started working for LBS on or about January 10, 2022.  He was 
hired as a machine operator.  (Defendants’ Exhibits C and D)  This job required Mr. 
Cornwell to move large rolls of paper to cut them into smaller sizes.  The rolls of paper 
ranged in size up to 2,500 pounds.  He testified he would place these into the machine 
and cut them into smaller sizes, weighing anywhere between 5 and 75 pounds.  Mr. 
Cornwell testified credibly that the physical demands of the job varied depending upon 
the order of the customer.  (Transcript, pages 17-20)  He has alleged that this job is a 
                                                 
1 Mr. Cornw ell technically became an employee of ADP in August 2022, as a result of a contractual partnership betw een ADP and 
Library Binding Service. 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 3 
 
cause of an injury to his low back which manifested on or about September 6, 2023.   
Mr. Cornwell conceded in his testimony that he had some low back pain prior to 
September 6, 2023.  This is reflected in the medical records in evidence as well.  The 
first reference to any back pain was in February 2022.  While treating for a work-related 
finger injury, he acknowledged back pain to his doctor.  (Joint Exhibit 2, page 7)  There 
is no other description of this problem other than “Confirms: Back Pain, Muscle 
Cramps/Aches, Stiffness.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 7)  There was no treatment for this condition or 
any further mention of it. 
In January 2023, he treated with his primary care clinic where he reported 
muscle pain in his right thigh, greater than one year.  He was provided a muscle relaxer.  
(Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 10-12)  He followed up with his primary care clinic in February and May 
2023, continuing his complaint of right thigh pain.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 13-19)  There is no real 
discussion of the cause of this condition in these records.  Mr. Cornwell acknowledged 
these appointments in his sworn testimony.  He generally testified that he did not 
associate his symptoms with a low back problem or his work activities.  (Tr., pp. 22-26)  
In May 2023, though, he was referred to an orthopedic specialist.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 18-19)  
Ian Lin, M.D., evaluated Mr. Cornwell on June 19, 2023.   
Bobby Cornwell is a 48 year-old male who presents complaining of right 
leg pain.  He has 2 different distributions of pain going on.  He has one 
pain that starts in his buttock, goes down the posterior leg past the knee 
into the calf with tingling and sort of burning sensations.  The other thing 
he has going on is numbness and tingling in the anterolateral thigh.  He 
gets tingling sensations in this distribution.  He is status-post right knee 
arthroscopy.  He wears a belt.  He kind of has a right belt at the level of his 
waist to keep his pants up.  They seem to be separate issues for him.  He 
has tried anti-inflammatories in the past with no relief.   
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 32, emphasis added)  Dr. Lin performed x-rays and examined Mr. 
Cornwell.  He diagnosed Meralgia paresthetica, which he attributed to bending and the 
use of a tight belt.  He also diagnosed degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine 
with mild radiculopathy.  “He says it is a busy time for work and everything right now.  
There is not much he can do in the meantime.  We will send diclofenac to the pharmacy 
for him, …. Hopefully this helps with the radicular pain he is having.  If it gets worse he 
will call us, and we can always order an MRI scan of his lumbar spine down the road.”  
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 33)  There was no discussion of the genesis of his low back condition.  
Again, Mr. Cornwell acknowledged this evaluation.  He testified that Dr. Lin told him he 
was wearing his belt too tight which was pinching a nerve in his back and recommended 
suspenders.  (Tr., p. 28)  He testified he followed this advice and his symptoms did 
improve some.  (Tr., p. 30)  He never returned to DMOS before his alleged injury. 
On August 7, 2023, Mr. Cornwell returned to his family clinic and was instructed 
that he would need an MRI eventually.  The working diagnosis was muscle spasm, 
degenerative disc disease and mild radiculopathy.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 21-22)  During this 
entire time, Mr. Cornwell continued to perform all of his regular duties at LBS without 
any accommodations or medical restrictions. 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Mr. Cornwell testified that during the last week of August 2023, he was assigned 
to work a Berryville job.  There was a great deal of testimony and evidence presented at 
hearing regarding the “Berryville” jobs.  This reference is simply to a particular customer 
whose order required harder, more physical labor.  The Berryville job required Mr. 
Cornwell to stack five finished rolls of paper weighing 50 to 75 pounds on a pallet, and 
then add a second layer of five additional rolls on top of the first layer.  (Tr., pp. 20-22)  
He testified credibly that this work was significantly more physical than his regular job 
duties.   
Testimony from the employer’s witness confirms that Mr. Cornwell was assigned 
a Berryville job during the last week of August 2023.  (Tr., pp. 93-99)  Mr. Cornwell 
testified credibly that he usually had help for his work, but during this week he did not.  
(Tr., p. 33)  He testified the work was very hard and by the end of the week he was quite 
sore.  In fact, he testified that his symptoms worsened.  The numbness and tingling 
were replaced with pain which went into his buttock and down his right leg into his foot.  
(Tr., p. 34)  Mr. Cornwell testified that by the end of the week he was having difficulty 
performing his job duties and even walking.  (Tr., p. 35)  Mr. Cornwell testified that he 
did not report this as a work injury.  He simply thought he had some muscle spasms due 
to overuse and did not view this as a “work injury.”  (Tr., p. 35) 
The credible evidence in the record demonstrates that Mr. Cornwell was 
performing this heavier “Berryville job” by himself from approximately August 23, 2023, 
through the following week, September 1, 2023.  From September 2 through September 
4, 2023, Mr. Cornwell was off work for Labor Day weekend.  He testified that he took it 
easy on Saturday, September 2, 2023.  He further testified that his symptoms started 
increasing on Sunday September 3, 2023, for no apparent reason.  Then on Monday 
September 4, 2023, he and his wife attempted to paint the living room.  (Tr., p. 37)  He 
testified that after attempting to go up and down the step stool 2 or 3 times, he could not 
stand the pain any longer and had to stop.  (Tr., pp. 37-38)  He then testified that he 
tried to go back to work on September 5, 2023, to complete the Berryville job.  After 
working a full day on September 5, 2023, he was unable to do “much of anything.”  (Tr., 
p. 39)  On September 6, 2023, he reported for work and began working but was unable 
to complete his shift.  Once his doctor’s office opened, he called and made an 
appointment.  He told his supervisor, Blake Anderson, that he was having leg problems 
and needed the day off to see his doctor.  This was Mr. Cornwell’s first day of lost work. 
On September 6, 2023, Mr. Cornwell was evaluated at his primary care clinic. 
Bobby is here for evaluation of right leg pain.  He follows with DMOS for 
right leg pain, last visit 6/19/23, diagnosed with meralgia paraesthetica 
and was encouraged to wear his belt a little bit looser, otherwise not much 
to do.  He was also diagnosed with degenerative disc disease lumbar 
spine with mild radiculopathy.  He was given diclofenac but did not want to 
do an MRI.  Wondering if massage or chiropractor would help his 
symptoms. 
He reports right leg muscle spasms started Sunday, Monday was worse 
after painting and climbing up and down latter [sic].  … 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 5 
 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 25)  Interestingly, his primary clinic did note both diagnoses and observed 
that he “continues to report right leg pain, more musculoskeletal today.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
26)  She ordered a lumbar MRI, and advised follow up with DMOS. 
On September 7, 2023, his pain worsened and he went to the emergency room 
at Mercy Hospital.  His chief complaint was right leg pain and right numb foot.  (Jt. Ex. 6, 
p. 34)  He denied any specific injury but noted the pain had been ongoing for about 
three months.  The diagnosis was right sided sciatica.  He was given a Toradol injection 
for the pain and released.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 37) 
On September 9, 2023, he returned to a different emergency room at Methodist 
Hospital.  He told the providers at Methodist that his pain started “around 8/19/23.”  (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 40) 
He reports he has pain from his right hip to his right knee and numbness 
from his right knee to his right foot.  He states he has trouble ambulating 
and sitting on the toilet due to his back pain.  … He reports he had an MRI 
approved by his PCP on 9/6/23 that hasn’t been scheduled yet, he is to 
see the pain management clinic on 9/12/32 [sic]. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 40)   
On September 12, 2023, Mr. Cornwell was seen by Ryan Birkland, D.O., at 
Central States Pain Clinic.  Dr. Birkland documented a history of leg pain for six months 
estimating an onset date of “2/1/23”.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 50)  Dr. Birkland diagnosed “chronic 
progressive low back and right leg pain.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 51)  Dr. Birkland ordered an MRI 
and told him to follow up thereafter.   
By this point, Mr. Cornwell had been off work since September 6, 2023.  He 
testified he contacted the human resources department at LBS to ask about short term 
disability benefits.  (Tr., p. 47)  He testified he spoke with Lori Baldwin.  He testified as 
follows: 
Q.  And tell me about the conversation.  Why did you call her? 
 
A.  To try to get short-term disability. 
 
Q.  Did you believe your condition was due to your work at the time you 
made the call? 
 
A.  Yes. 
 
Q.  Why did you ask for short-term disability if you believed it was due to 
work? 
 
A.  I didn’t want to lose my job. 
 
Q.  Why did you think you’d lose your job if you reported a work injury? 
 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 6 
 
A.  Because they was, they informed us that they were shutting down 
some of the company, and that they were going to get rid of some 
people. 
 
Q.  So in your mind, you thought if you reported it as work injury you might 
be a target for being let go? 
 
A.  Yes. 
 
Q.  Okay.  Whether you were or not, that’s what you thought? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  All right.  So tell us, tell more about the conversation you had with Ms. 
Baldwin.  What was discussed? 
A.  So when I called, I asked for the short-term disability, and then she 
asked me where I got injured at, and I told her at work.   
Q.  Okay. 
A.  And she told me I could not file for the short-term disability, it had to be 
workmen’s comp [sic].   
(Tr., pp. 47-49)  Mr. Cornwell then testified that after he told Ms. Baldwin it was work-
connected, the employer turned the claim into the insurance carrier who began 
processing it as such. 
On September 19, 2023, Mr. Cornwell underwent an MRI.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 90)  
The MRI demonstrated multi-level mild spondylosis, most pronounced at L5-S1.  Mr. 
Cornwell then followed up with Dr. Birkland on September 28, 2023, who reviewed the 
MRI and interpreted it to show a disc protrusion at L5-S1.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 56) 
He had an MRI of his lumbar spine on 9/19 that revealed a disc protrusion 
at L5-S1 that in combination with bilateral endplate osteophytes, is 
contributing to bilateral foraminal narrowing and mass effect on the 
bilateral exiting L5 nerve roots (R>L). 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 56)  The diagnosis at this visit was radiculopathy due to lumbar 
intervertebral disc disorder.  Dr. Birkland recommended an epidural steroid injection 
(ESI) which was performed on October 27, 2023.  On October 12, 2023, counsel for the 
employer formally denied the workers’ compensation claim, providing a detailed 
explanation for the denial.  Primarily, the denial discussed the fact that Mr. Cornwell had 
not mentioned his work activities to any of his medical providers seen to date.  (Def. Ex. 
L, p. 36)  On October 31, 2023, LBS laid off Mr. Cornwell and had him sign a Separation 
Agreement and General Release in order to receive $1,471.20.  (Def. Ex. E, p. 5) 
With his workers’ compensation claim denied and having been laid off, Mr. 
Cornwell continued to seek treatment with Dr. Birkland as well as his primary clinic.  He 
underwent another ESI in January 2024, which also produced no significant relief.  He 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 7 
 
underwent some physical therapy.  After a third injection provided no relief, Dr. Birkland 
recommended a surgical consultation.  Mr. Cornwell asked for referral to the University 
of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.  After undergoing additional diagnostic testing, Mr. 
Cornwell was finally examined by Andrew Pugely, M.D. on July 9, 2024.  Dr. Pugely 
opined that based upon Mr. Cornwell’s clinical symptoms and diagnostic testing, he 
would benefit from an L5-S1 spinal fusion.  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 116)  This surgery occurred on 
September 10, 2024.  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 116) 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Cornwell was still off work recuperating from his spinal 
fusion surgery.  After some delay, he had secured payments from the employer’s group 
short-term disability plan.  The claimant has stipulated that the defendants are entitled 
to a credit for these payments.  Mr. Cornwell, however, had not worked in any position 
while he has been off work recuperating from his surgery. 
Prior to hearing, both parties secured expert medical opinions from physicians.  
The claimant secured expert opinions from Dr. Pugely, the treating surgeon, and John 
Kuhnlein, D.O., a certified independent medical examiner in the Des Moines, area.  The 
defendants secured an opinion from Joseph Chen, M.D. 
Dr. Kuhnelin examined Mr. Cornwell on August 13, 2024.  He reviewed 
appropriate records, medical and otherwise before thoroughly examining him.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein diagnosed lumbar radiculopathy and opined the following on September 17, 
2024:   
With the lack of avocational risk factors and exposure to work related 
lumbar risk factors, it is more likely than not that Mr. Cornwell’s workplace 
exposures to lumbar stressors were substantial more than minor factors in 
“lighting up” and making his previously asymptomatic lumbar degenerative 
disc disease and disc osteophyte induced radiculopathy clinically 
apparent. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10)  Dr. Kuhnlein went on to provide opinions regarding impairment and 
restrictions which are essentially irrelevant since Mr. Cornwell underwent surgery and 
was in a period of recuperation at the time of hearing. 
Dr. Pugely signed a check box opinion report written by claimant’s counsel on 
counsel letterhead.  He agreed that claimant’s “work activities at ADP Totalsource 
Group were a substantial contributing factor in materially aggravating and lighting up  
his lumbar degenerative disc disease.”  He further agreed that the surgery he performed 
on claimant was necessitated “by the material aggravation he sustained” due to his 
work activities for the employer.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 16-18) 
Dr. Chen disagreed.  He prepared a report dated December 6, 2024, after 
reviewing appropriate information and examining Mr. Cornwell.  He concluded that 
claimant’s medical condition was a personal condition that progressed over time.  (Def. 
Ex. O, p. 55)  When asked whether the work activities materially aggravated this 
condition, he answered: 
It is my medical opinion that these details do not indicate any specific work 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 8 
 
injury or activity were recorded by any of his treating specialists in primary 
care, emergency care, and specialty care.  The progressive escalation of 
symptoms of neurogenic claudication and fragmentation of medical care 
for desired treatments including opioid medications, spinal injections, and 
lumbar surgery may be indicators of a poor long-term outcome even 
despite a successful surgery to date. 
It is my medical opinion that Mr. Cornwell’s pre-existing degenerative 
lumbar spinal stenosis progressed to include right L5 radiculopathy after 
Labor Day in September 2023 was not caused or materially aggravated by 
his work activities at LBS. 
Despite Mr. Cornwell’s description of needing to move large rolls of paper 
may have required a temporary increase in physical effort, I do not believe 
that this specific work activity appeared to be out of the range of expected 
activities that he had performed in the past to cause a substantial 
aggravation or led to an acceleration of his pre-existing degenerative 
lumbar spinal stenosis condition.  The natural progression of degenerative 
lumbar spinal stenosis typically does occur over months with episodes of 
waxing and waning symptoms of indeterminate etiology as were clearly 
documented in medical notes from February 2022 to April 2023 even 
before his neurogenic claudication evolved into a predictable pattern. 
(Def. Ex. O, p. 56)   
The fighting issue in this case is whether Mr. Cornwell sustained a cumulative 
work injury to his low back and right leg which manifested on or about September 6, 
2023.  The burden lies squarely with Mr. Cornwell to prove this by a preponderance of 
evidence.  I find that he met his burden.  Mr. Cornwell was clearly performing medium to 
heavy labor for the employer.  Moreover, it was clearly the type of medium to heavy 
work which could aggravate and light up the condition of degenerative disc disease.  All 
of this is well-documented. 
The primary weakness in claimant’s case has been highlighted extensively by the 
defendants.  Mr. Cornwell did not complain at his contemporaneous medical visits in 
2023, that his work activities were aggravating his low back condition.  When he first 
sought treatment from his primary clinic in February and May 2023, he made no 
mention of the heavy work he performed at LBS.  Mr. Cornwell testified that his problem 
was primarily in his right leg, not his low back, and he did not believe at this time, that 
he had an actual “work injury.”  Even after he saw Dr. Lin, who provided two distinct 
diagnoses in June 2023, it is evident that Mr. Cornwell was still uncertain about the 
exact nature of his condition, based upon his testimony.  I am unconcerned that Mr. 
Cornwell did not report about his job duties to his medical providers during this time 
period. 
By late August 2023, however, his condition had progressed and worsened.  It is 
evident that Mr. Cornwell knew his job was contributing to the symptoms in his right leg.  
Specifically, he testified that after he started the “Berryville job” toward the end of 
August 2023, his symptoms worsened substantially.  Not only did he not report an injury 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 9 
 
to his employer, he continued to not report this potential cause to his medical providers 
throughout September 2023.  Mr. Cornwell testified that he feared that if he complained 
of a work injury, he would lose his job.  I believe him.  I find him credible.  After he had 
been off work for approximately a week and having two visits to the emergency room 
with significant symptoms, he called his employer’s human resources office to seek 
short term disability benefits.  He was then asked by the human resources 
representative what the cause of his injury was.  He told her he believed it was from his 
work activities.  This testimony is unrebutted. 
Moreover, I find that Dr. Kuhnlein’s expert medical opinion is more convincing 
and believable.  It is bolstered by the opinion of the treating surgeon, as well as Mr. 
Cornwell’s credible testimony. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is whether Mr. Cornwell sustained an injury 
which arose out of and in the course of his employment which manifested on or about 
September 6, 2023. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 10 
 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287-88 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-30 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985). 
In cumulative trauma injury cases, the issue of whether an injury arose out of and 
in the course of employment is significantly intertwined with the issue of medical 
causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 11 
 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that a greater weight of 
evidence supports the finding that the claimant sustained a cumulative trauma injury 
which arose out of and in the course of his employment and manifested on September 
6, 2023.  Mr. Cornwell was definitely performing the type of work, lifting, pushing, pulling 
and bending, often in awkward positions, which over time would be likely to light up or 
materially aggravate an underlying degenerative condition such as degenerative disc 
disease.  The fact that he was performing the heavier Berryville job at the end of August 
2023, provides further support for this proposition. 
I find that the most convincing opinion regarding injury and medical causation is 
the opinion of Dr. Kuhnlein.  His opinion is more straightforward, understandable and 
consistent with the underlying facts.  While Dr. Pugely’s expert opinion is merely a 
check box report rather than narrative, it definitely bolsters Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein was aware of all of the relevant underlying medical information.  Dr. Chen’s 
opinion is confusing.  I am not entirely certain he used the correct legal standard to form 
his opinion.  For example, part of his explanation included the following analysis:  
“Despite Mr. Cornwell’s description of needing to move large rolls of paper may have 
required a temporary increase in physical effort, I do not believe that this specific work 
activity appeared to be out of the range of expected activities that he had performed in 
the past to cause a substantial aggravation …”  (Def. Ex. O, p. 56)  He appears to be 
offering the opinion that since Mr. Cornwell’s work activities on the “Berryville job” at the 
end of August 2023, was comparable to the work he was always doing, it could not 
have been a substantial aggravating factor.  There is no real analysis, however, of 
whether lifting, pushing, pulling and awkwardly moving heavy rolls of paper could 
aggravate, accelerate or light up an underlying degenerative condition.  Based upon the 
record before me, it is evident that this is exactly the type of activities which would likely 
aggravate such a condition. 
Since I have found that the manifestation date is the claimant’s first day of lost 
work, September 6, 2023, I reject the defendants’ notice defense under Section 85.23. 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to a running award of healing 
period benefits. 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are:  (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 12 
 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
I find that Mr. Cornwell is entitled to healing period benefits since he has gone off 
work.  Moreover, none of the elements of section 85.34(1) have been met.  Mr. Cornwell 
has not returned to work.  He is not capable of substantially similar employment.  He is 
not at maximum medical improvement.  He just had surgery in September 2024, and 
maximum medical improvement is projected for approximately one year from then.  
Therefore, I conclude that Mr. Cornwell is entitled to healing period benefits from the 
date of injury through the date of hearing and continuing until such time as the 
requirements of Iowa Code Section 85.34(1) have been met.  Defendants are entitled to 
a credit for the benefits paid both under workers’ compensation and under the group 
disability plan as stipulated by the parties. 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
I have reviewed claimant’s medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 10, 
and I find that defendants are responsible for these expenses. 
The next issue is whether the claimant is entitled to the IME expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 11, page 45. 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee 
is being examined is determined to be compensable.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2017).  
“An employer is not liable for the cost of such examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to have a compensable injury. A 
determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform 
an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.”  Iowa Code 
§ 85.39(2); Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023).   
Having found that Mr. Cornwell’s claim resulted in a compensable injury, I find 
that the defendants are responsible for the IME expense in the amount of $5,560.00. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay a running award of healing period benefits from September 
6, 2023, through the date of hearing and continuing until such time that an element of 

CORNWELL V. ADP TOTALSOURCE GROUP, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Iowa Code Section 85.34(1) has been met at the rate stipulated by the parties. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 10. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for group disability payments made. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for all weekly benefits paid. 
Defendants are responsible for the IME expense and other costs set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 11. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Signed and filed this _15th _ day of August, 2025. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
 James Ballard  
(via WCES) 
 
Aaron Oliver   
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
