Case Number: 20701203.01
Case Title:  GRAPER, ASHLEY V. DS ENTERPRISES, LC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Graper Ashley-20701203.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ASHLEY GRAPER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 20701203.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
UNINSURED, 
  :          Head Note Nos.:  1402.20, 2902 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Ashley Graper, filed a petition for arbitration against DS Enterprises, 
L.C. d/b/a Yellow Cab of Iowa City, an uninsured employer.  This case came before the 
undersigned for an evidentiary hearing on March 10, 2022, via CourtCall. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through I.  Claimant testified on her own behalf. 
Defendant called Rod Blair and David Stoddard to testify. The evidentiary record closed 
at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on March 10, 2022. 
The undersigned requested post-hearing briefs in this matter.  Both parties filed 
briefs on or before May 6, 2021. The case was considered fully submitted to the 
undersigned on May 6, 2021. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether an employer-employee relationship existed at the time of the alleged 
injury;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Sep-30  11:26:38     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 2 
 
2.  Whether claimant sustained a back injury that arose out of and in the course 
of her employment on April 23, 2019; 
  
2. Whether claimant gave timely notice of the alleged back injury pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.23; 
 
3.  Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits; 
  
4.  Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39;  
 
5.  Whether claimant is entitled to an award of penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.13; and  
 
6. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Ashley Graper alleges she sustained a low back injury on April 23, 2019.  More 
specifically, she asserts that she injured her low back while attempting to change a tire 
on a vehicle she was driving for Yellow Cab of Iowa City (“Yellow Cab”). 
One of the main issues in this case is whether an employer/employee 
relationship existed between claimant and the defendant.  Ms. Graper completed a 
“Driver Contract Application” with Yellow Cab on August 11, 2013. (Exhibit 3, page 27)  
Ms. Graper later entered into an independent contractor agreement with Yellow Cab on 
August 28, 2013. (Ex. 3, p. 25)  The independent contractor agreement indicated that 
Ms. Graper “shall at all times act as an independent contractor with respect to the 
Company, and not as an employee or agent of the Company, except that the Company 
shall determine the driving dates and times for the Independent Contractor.” (Ex. 3, p. 
22)  The agreement further provided that Ms. Graper was not entitled to receive various 
benefits traditionally associated with an employee/employer relationship, including 
workers’ compensation benefits. (Id.) 
Ms. Graper largely controlled her own work schedule. (Hearing Transcript, page 
71)  That being said, there is evidence that Ms. Graper was contracted to work 5:00 
a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. (Ex. 3, p. 28)  Ms. 
Graper did not drive her own personal vehicle or pay for the gas she used while driving 
for Yellow Cab. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19)  However, she did have to pay a fuel surcharge for 
each fare. (Hr. Tr., p. 67)     

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 3 
At hearing, Ms. Graper agreed that she signed the agreement and understood 
she was agreeing to work for Yellow Cab as an independent contractor.  Ms. Graper 
was aware she would not receive any benefits from Yellow Cab, and she would be 
responsible for paying her own expenses. (Hr. Tr., pp. 66-67)   
At the beginning of each shift, Ms. Graper would present to Yellow Cab and 
select a vehicle for the day. (Hr. Tr., p. 17) She would then follow a checklist and 
inspect said vehicle. (Id.; Ex. 3, p. 26)  Next, Ms. Graper would sign in to her account on 
a tablet to notify dispatch she was available to receive fares.  Notifications regarding 
available fares were sent to Ms. Graper’s tablet throughout her shift.  (Id.; see also Hr. 
Tr., p. 21)  Pick-up and drop-off points are entered by dispatch and displayed on Ms. 
Graper’s tablet. (Hr. Tr., pp. 105-106)  Each ride is then tracked by two GPS systems 
and saved to Yellow Cab’s reporting system. (Hr. Tr., pp. 103-105)  Ms. Graper also 
documented her rides on a worksheet she kept in her taxicab. (See Hr. Tr., p. 17)  At 
the end of her shift, Ms. Graper would cross reference the accuracy of her sheet with 
Yellow Cab’s printouts. (Id.)  
On April 23, 2019, Ms. Graper started her workday around 5:00 a.m.  She 
recalled making three “school runs.” (Id.)  Claimant testified that she was dropping off a 
passenger at Southeast Junior High School in Iowa City when she noticed that the back 
tire of her vehicle was flat. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  After noticing the flat tire, Ms. Graper pulled 
into the parking lot of the Mercer Park Recreation Center and parked her vehicle. (Id.)  
After closing out her passenger’s trip, Ms. Graper alleges that she called dispatch to 
notify them of the issue. (Hr. Tr., pp. 26-27)  According to Ms. Graper, Denise Fountain 
answered her call.  Ms. Fountain told Ms. Graper that the Yellow Cab office was busy 
and suggested that she attempt to change the tire on her own. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)   
Ms. Graper exited her taxi and located a tire iron and jack in the trunk of the 
taxicab. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  Once she had the tire jack in place, Ms. Graper placed the tire 
iron on the lug nuts and began the process of removing the deflated tire.  Ms. Graper 
testified that she had to push down on the tire iron with her leg to loosen the lug nuts. 
(Id.)  While pushing down on the second lug nut, Ms. Graper felt as though a disc 
“slipped out of” her spine. (Hr. Tr., p. 28)  She testified that the pain she experienced 
was so severe that she fell to her knees. (Id.)  When she was eventually able to stand, 
Ms. Graper reentered her vehicle and called dispatch for assistance.  Ms. Fountain 
agreed to request assistance and, at some point, told Ms. Graper that help was on the 
way. (Id.)   
While waiting for assistance, Ms. Graper contacted Robert Hatcher, D.C., a local 
chiropractor. (Id.)  Ms. Graper asserts that she reported her work injury to Dr. Hatcher 
during this phone call. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)   
Ten to fifteen minutes later, two mechanics met Ms. Graper in the Mercer Park 
parking lot and replaced her tire. (Id.)  Ms. Graper testified that after the mechanics 
changed her tire, she drove directly to Dr. Hatcher’s office for an adjustment. (Hr. Tr., p. 
30; see Joint Exhibit 2, page 18)   

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 4 
After the adjustment, Ms. Graper returned to work and completed two additional 
runs. (See Hr. Tr., p. 30)  She testified that she had originally planned on taking the rest 
of the day off due to her pain; however, she decided to continue working because the 
employer had “good runs” available and she wanted the extra money. (Id.)  Indeed, it 
appears claimant’s last ride of the day spanned 180 miles. (Ex. A, p. 2) 
At this juncture, it is important to note that claimant’s testimony regarding the 
events that transpired on the alleged date of injury is not corroborated by other 
documentary evidence or credible testimony.   
As previously discussed, Ms. Graper testified that she was dropping off a 
passenger at Southeast Junior High School when she noticed that the back tire of her 
vehicle was flat. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  After noticing the flat tire, Ms. Graper pulled into the 
parking lot of the Mercer Park Recreation Center and parked her vehicle. (Id.)   
The evidentiary record provides a different version of events.  At hearing, 
defendant introduced “Driver Audit” forms, “Check Out Sheets,” and Trip Reports for 
School Passengers into evidence.  While the reports confirm that claimant made three 
school runs on April 23, 2019, none of the reports reflect that Ms. Graper dropped off a 
passenger at Southeast Junior High School on the morning of April 23, 2019.  (See Ex. 
A, pp. 2-3; Ex. F, pp. 23-24) 
According to the log sheets, Ms. Graper had six fares on April 23, 2019, and 
three of them were considered “school runs.” (Ex. A, pp. 2-3; Ex. F, pp. 23-24)  The first 
school run ended at Alexander Elementary School at 6:40 a.m.  The next two runs went 
to City High at 8:24 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. (Ex. A, p. 2; Ex. F, pp. 23-24)  The “Driver Audit 
Sheet” for April 23, 2019, which includes Ms. Graper’s handwritten notes, also indicates 
that Ms. Graper drove a passenger to Alexander Elementary before making two trips to 
City High. (Ex. A, pp. 2-3)  The records do not indicate that claimant dropped off or 
picked up any fares at Southeast Junior High, on South First Avenue, on Bradford 
Drive, or at a location adjacent to Mercer Park. 
At hearing, Ms. Graper explained that she might have accidentally written down 
“City High” instead of “Southeast Junior High”; however, such an explanation seems 
unlikely given the GPS technology and verification process implemented by Yellow Cab.   
Each ride is tracked by both the driver and GPS technology.  At the beginning of 
each shift, Yellow Cab drivers log in on a tablet located inside their taxicab to notify 
dispatch that they are available to accept fares.  Thereafter, drivers receive notifications 
regarding available fares, including pick-up and drop-off locations, on their tablet. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 21)  After accepting an assignment, drivers “start” and “end” each ride by hitting 
the corresponding button on their tablet. (Hr. Tr., p. 104)  Once the driver starts the ride, 
the pick-up time and GPS location are transmitted to Yellow Cab and logged in the 
dispatch system. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 104-105)  Similarly, once the driver “ends” the ride, 
the drop-off time and GPS location are transmitted to Yellow Cab and logged in the 
dispatch system. (Hr. Tr., p. 106)  The pick-up and drop-off locations initially entered by 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 5 
the passenger/dispatch are automatically updated in the system to reflect the actual 
pick-up and drop-off locations via GPS. (Hr. Tr., p. 109) 
To ensure the records are accurate, drivers keep a daily log of their fares.  Ms. 
Graper testified that at the end of her shifts, she double checked the accuracy of her log 
sheet with Yellow Cab’s printouts. (Hr. Tr., p. 17)  Ms. Graper’s April 23, 2019, log sheet 
matches Yellow Cab’s April 23, 2019, audit report. (Ex. A, pp. 2-3; Ex. F, pp. 23-24)  
Neither report reflects that Ms. Graper dropped off a passenger at Southeast Junior 
High School on the morning of April 23, 2019.  Neither report reflects that Ms. Graper 
dropped off a passenger at Mercer Park.   
Even if the undersigned accepted Ms. Graper’s testimony that she accidentally 
wrote down “City High” instead of “Southeast Junior High,” she provided no explanation 
as to why the audit report and the trip report for school passengers would reflect City 
High as the GPS-based drop-off location.  While technology is far from infallible, it is 
highly unlikely that the GPS system provided an inaccurate location, and that said 
inaccurate location happened to be the exact same location Ms. Graper independently 
and accidentally wrote down.   
School runs have one additional method of authentication as each run is verified 
by the various school districts in the area. Yellow Cab sends trip reports, along with an 
invoice, to local school districts on a monthly basis. (Hr. Tr., p. 82)  The school districts 
then verify the student information provided on the trip reports and pay Yellow Cab for 
its services. (Hr. Tr., pp. 82-83)  While it was not specifically addressed by either party, 
there is no testimony or documentary evidence in the record to suggest that City High 
disputed the two trips listed in the April 23, 2019, report. 
Along the same lines, it is difficult to accept Ms. Graper’s testimony regarding 
when she presented to Dr. Hatcher.  Initially, Ms. Graper testified that she presented to 
Dr. Hatcher right after the mechanics were done changing her tire. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  
However, on cross examination, Ms. Graper testified that she presented to Dr. Hatcher 
around 9:00 a.m., “immediately after” she dropped her last student off at school. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 44)  Obviously, Ms. Graper would not have been able to present to Dr. Hatcher 
immediately after she dropped her last student off at school as this is when she testified 
that she noticed the flat tire. 
It is also difficult to accept Ms. Graper’s testimony that she presented to Dr. 
Hatcher as soon as the mechanics were done changing her tire.  According to the driver 
audit and check-out sheets, claimant made her last school run to City High at 8:25 a.m. 
(See Ex. A, p. 2)  The reports note that claimant did not start her next ride until 9:36 
a.m. (See Ex. A, p. 2)   Given this information, claimant would have only had a one-hour 
window to pull into Mercer Park, call dispatch to request assistance, attempt to change 
a flat tire, sustain the alleged injury, collect herself, call dispatch for a second time, wait 
approximately 10 to 15 minutes for the mechanics to arrive (Hr. Tr., p. 29), wait an 
additional amount of time while the mechanics changed out the flat tire, drive to Dr. 
Hatcher’s office, receive at least a 15-minute adjustment per Dr. Hatcher’s notes (JE2, 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 6 
p. 15), and then drive to the address provided on the driver audit report (Ex. A, p. 2).  
The reported timeline is highly improbable. 
Further undermining claimant’s testimony is the fact Dr. Hatcher’s medical notes 
are void of any reference to the alleged work injury. The notes provide, “She claims that 
her back has been hurting her for the past couple of weeks and is getting worse.  The 
pain does radiate into her legs at times.  The symptoms are causing her trouble 
sleeping with and getting into a comfortable position.” (JE2, p. 18) 
There is evidence that claimant presented to Dr. Hatcher on April 23, 2019.  It is 
reasonable to accept that claimant presented to Dr. Hatcher between 8:25 a.m. and 
9:36 a.m., as Dr. Hatcher’s medical record notes that claimant returned to work 
following her adjustment.  However, if claimant presented to Dr. Hatcher’s office 
between 8:25 a.m. and 9:36 a.m. on April 23, 2019, it is highly unlikely claimant’s injury, 
and the events preceding the appointment, occurred as alleged by claimant. 
Next, claimant’s testimony regarding who witnessed or had knowledge of the 
alleged injury is not corroborated by credible testimony.   
BB’s Dispatching, L.C. provides mechanical servicing for the taxicabs owned by 
Yellow Cab and driven by Yellow Cab drivers.  At the time of the alleged injury, BB’s 
Dispatching only employed two mechanics.  Those mechanics were Jeff Stoddard and 
Kevin Flynn.1  Both individuals provided sworn affidavits in this case. (Exhibit C, page 
17; Exhibit D, page 19)   
Neither individual recalled assisting Ms. Graper with a flat tire on or about April 
23, 2019. (Ex. C, p. 18; Ex. D, p. 20)  That being said, neither individual chose overly 
confident wording in their affidavits.  Mr. Stoddard’s affidavit provides, “I am almost 
certain that Kevin and I did not leave the shop to assist Ashley Graper with a changing 
out a flat tire on April 23, 2019.” (Ex. C, p. 18)  Mr. Flynn’s affidavit provides, “I have no 
recollection of leaving the shop with Jeff to assist Ashley Graper with a changing out a 
flat tire on April 23, 2019.” (Ex. D, p. 20)  Both affidavits also provide, “I do not recall 
ever assisting a female driver with changing a tire.  I do not recall ever assisting a driver 
at or near Mercer Park in Iowa City.” (Ex. C, p. 18; Ex. D, p. 20)  Aside from the 
language used in the affidavits, I have no reason to doubt the credibility of Mr. Stoddard 
and Mr. Flynn. 
The affidavits also discuss Yellow Cab’s roadside assistance policy. According to 
Mr. Stoddard and Mr. Flynn, Yellow Cab has a policy providing that when drivers 
experience mechanical difficulties away from the office and shop, they need to arrange 
for their own roadside assistance.  They further explained that, “Generally, [we] do not 
provide any type of roadside assistance to Yellow Cab’s drivers.” (Ex. C, p. 17; Ex. D, p. 
19)  Additionally, the driver guidelines attached to Ms. Graper’s independent contractor 
agreement further provides, “Drivers shall replace any flat tire that occurs during the 
                                                 
1 Jeff Stoddard is part-owner of DS Enterprises, L.C. and BB’s Dispatching, L.C. (Ex. C, p. 17) 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 7 
shift with the spare tire that is equipped with each car.  Failure to do so will result in a 
fine of $25 during the daytime or $35 at night.” (Ex. 3, p. 26) 
Ms. Graper asserts that she informed Ms. Fountain and “everybody that [she] 
saw in the office that day[.]” (Hr. Tr., p. 62)  When asked to clarify who “everybody” was, 
claimant testified that she told Roger, Shellie, and Keith. (Hr. Tr., p. 64)  She did not 
provide last names. (See id.)  Claimant did not obtain witness statements or call any of 
these individuals to testify live at the evidentiary hearing.   
Ms. Fountain testified via deposition in this case.  As such, I did not have the 
opportunity to observe Ms. Fountain or her demeanor.  In general, Ms. Fountain 
confirmed that Ms. Graper called dispatch and asked for assistance with changing a tire 
on the date of the alleged injury. (Exhibit 4, page 47, Deposition Transcript pages 9-10)  
According to Ms. Fountain, Ms. Graper called approximately 30 to 40 minutes later and 
reported that she had injured her back attempting to change the tire. (Ex. 4, p. 52, 
Depo. p. 22)   
Aside from these general facts, Ms. Fountain’s testimony largely conflicts with 
claimant’s testimony.  For instance, Ms. Fountain testified that she was unsure of when 
Ms. Graper requested assistance.  She estimated that the initial phone call occurred 
around 1:00 p.m. or 2:00 p.m. (Ex. 4, p. 49, Depo. p. 11)  Next, Ms. Fountain testified to 
her belief that she sent a different driver, as opposed to a mechanic, to assist Ms. 
Graper with the flat tire. (Ex. 4, Depo. p. 49)  Ms. Fountain was reasonably sure she 
sent a driver and not a company mechanic because sending a mechanic to assist a 
driver with a mechanical issue was considered a “last resort.” (Ex. 4, pp. 50-53, Depo. 
pp. 13, 25)  She further stated that it was not uncommon for Yellow Cab to send a 
nearby driver to assist with a flat tire. (Ex. 4, pp. 49-50, Depo. pp. 12-13)  Ms. Fountain 
also testified to her belief that the mechanics had already left for the day by the time Ms. 
Graper called in and requested assistance. (Ex. 4, p. 53, Depo. p. 25)  Lastly, Ms. 
Fountain was certain that Ms. Graper took the rest of the day off after sustaining the 
alleged injury. (Ex. 4, pp. 49, 54, Depo. pp. 11, 31) 
Ms. Fountain no longer works for Yellow Cab.  At her deposition, Ms. Fountain 
testified that she was fired. (Ex. 4, p. 53, Depo. p. 26)  Defendant asserts that Ms. 
Fountain voluntarily terminated the employment relationship following a change in her 
work hours.  According to defendant, Ms. Fountain’s hours were changed during the 
COVID-19 pandemic to adjust for a decrease in staff. (Hr. Tr., p. 93)  Upon learning of 
the schedule changes, Ms. Fountain became upset and allegedly threw a set of keys at 
a co-worker in frustration.  She then walked off the job. (Id.)  Defendant asserts that Ms. 
Fountain has since made derogatory comments about Yellow Cab on social media. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 100) 
Defendant challenges Ms. Fountain’s credibility.  Defendant’s challenge stems 
from Ms. Fountain’s criminal record, the timing of her reporting, and the circumstances 
surrounding her separation from Yellow Cab.  Most notably, defendant asserts that Ms. 
Fountain has been convicted of theft 11 times as an adult.  Ms. Fountain did not deny 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 8 
the allegation when confronted with the same at her deposition; however, she testified 
that all her convictions were at least seven years old. (Ex. 4, p. 50, Depo. pp. 15-16)  
Defendant further asserts that prior to her separation, Ms. Fountain considered Ms. 
Graper a “scammer” and she did not believe that Ms. Graper was entitled to workers’ 
compensation benefits. (Hr. Tr., p. 91) 
I do not find Ms. Fountain to be a credible witness.  While Ms. Fountain had a 
general understanding of what occurred on the alleged date of injury, her recollection of 
events was markedly different from Ms. Graper’s testimony.  Her testimony is not 
supported by the evidentiary record as a whole. As such, I assign no weight to Ms. 
Fountain’s testimony. 
In addition to her co-workers, Ms. Graper asserts that she reported her alleged 
work injury to the various medical providers in this case.  Her testimony is not 
corroborated by the contemporaneous medical records, which are void of any reference 
to a work-related injury until September 3, 2019. 
At hearing, Ms. Graper was adamant that she told Dr. Hatcher she had just 
injured her low back changing a tire at work. (Hr. Tr., pp. 51-52)  However, there is no 
evidence to support a finding that Ms. Graper described the alleged work injury to Dr. 
Hatcher at the April 23, 2019, appointment. (JE2, p. 18)  Instead, Dr. Hatcher’s notes 
provide that Ms. Graper described “having some lower back pain that is very intense at 
times.  She claims that her back has been hurting her for the past couple of weeks and 
is getting worse.” (Id.)  I find it highly unlikely Dr. Hatcher would fail to document a 
reported mechanism of injury.  Moreover, Dr. Hatcher’s notes are consistent with the 
pre-existing medical records in evidence describing flare-ups in September and October 
2018 that were affecting her daily life, work, and ability to take care of two kids. (See 
JE1, pp. 1-4)   
Two days later, Ms. Graper presented to her primary care physician, Scott 
Larson, M.D. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 5)  Notably, Ms. Graper reported an acute onset of 
pain while trying to change a tire two days prior. (Id.)  The record notes that Ms. Graper 
presented to a chiropractor on the date of injury, but the treatment was not helpful. (Id.)  
While this medical record supports the description of injury, there is no mention of the 
injury occurring at work. (See JE1, pp. 5-6)  To this end, no medical record collected 
between April 23, 2019, and September 3, 2019, documents claimant’s condition as 
work-related.  Claimant’s failure to reference the injury as work-related is relevant in this 
case as there is evidence that claimant has worked on cars outside of her employment 
with Yellow Cab, and, at a later medical appointment, claimant detailed how she was 
injured changing a tire on her van. (See Hr. Tr., p. 38; JE4, p. 27)   
As previously stated, the first medical record to describe claimant’s injury as 
work-related is dated September 3, 2019. (JE7, p. 88)  On September 3, 2019, claimant 
presented to Brent Overton, M.D. for a surgical consultation and reported that she 
sustained an injury to her low back earlier in the summer while working for Yellow Cab. 
(Id.)  Unlike other instances in which claimant has described the alleged injury, claimant 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 9 
told Dr. Overton that the injury occurred after she kicked a tire iron to loosen the lug nut. 
(Id.) 
Defendant asserts this is around the time it first learned of claimant’s alleged 
injury. (See Hr. Tr., p. 86)  According to Rod Blair, the current manager of Yellow Cab, 
Ms. Graper contacted him in early September 2019, reported the work injury, and 
inquired about workers’ compensation benefits. (Hr. Tr., p. 86; see Hr. Tr., pp. 80-81)  
Mr. Blair notified Ms. Graper of her status as an independent contractor and relayed that 
she would not be able to receive workers’ compensation for the alleged injury because 
of said status. (Id.) 
Mr. Blair further testified that Ms. Graper texted him in September 2019 to let him 
know that she would not be available for work because she had a surgery scheduled. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 97-88)  The alleged text exchange was entered into evidence. (Exhibit I)  
Unfortunately, I cannot assign any weight to the text messages in evidence with respect 
to defendant’s notice defense.  This is because the text messages in evidence are 
dated September 18, 2019. (Ex. I, p. 46)  Ms. Graper underwent surgery on September 
4, 2019. (JE6, pp. 86-87)  The text exchange in evidence references a surgery 
scheduled for November 18, 2019. (Ex. I, p. 46)  A review of the medical records in 
evidence suggests that this surgery was to remove claimant’s tonsils. (See JE1, p. 15) 
While I acknowledge that Ms. Graper described the alleged mechanism of injury 
to her medical providers, there is no indication claimant specifically described her 
condition as work-related until at least September 3, 2019, when she presented for a 
surgical consultation with Dr. Overton.  I find Ms. Graper did not describe her condition 
as work-related when describing her condition to her medical providers between April 
23, 2019, and September 2, 2019.  I could potentially accept the assertion that a single 
physician failed to adequately document the oral history he or she obtained from Ms. 
Graper; however, it becomes significantly more difficult to accept that multiple medical 
providers failed to document Ms. Graper’s allegations of a work injury.  
Ultimately, this case comes down to the credibility of claimant’s testimony and 
how the injury allegedly occurred.  It is difficult to reconcile claimant’s rendition of events 
with the sworn affidavits of Mr. Stoddard and Mr. Flynn, the Driver Audit forms, Ms. 
Graper’s own handwritten notes, the Check Out Sheets, and the trip reports for school 
passengers from April 23, 2019.  Considering the numerous inconsistencies within Ms. 
Graper’s testimony, I do not accept her version of events for April 23, 2019, as credible.  
I find that Ms. Graper’s evidence is not sufficiently credible and cannot be relied upon in 
this case.  Given the lack of credible evidence regarding the events of April 23, 2019, I 
find that Ms. Graper failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that she 
sustained an injury while changing a tire at work on April 23, 2019.   
I recognize that the evidentiary record contains an expert medical opinion 
addressing causation and impairment.  Mark Taylor, M.D. conducted an independent 
medical evaluation of Ms. Graper on August 17, 2020. (Exhibit 1, pp. 1-10)  Having 
found Ms. Graper failed to prove a work injury occurred on April 23, 2019, I find the 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 10 
expert medical opinions offered by Dr. Taylor are not entitled to any weight as his 
opinions are reliant upon the accuracy of the history and information he was provided. 
All other factual disputes are moot. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issue is whether claimant carried her burden of proving she 
sustained a low back injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with 
defendant on April 23, 2019. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical  
 
 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 11 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In the matter at hand, I found claimant’s rendition of events was not credible.  
Having found claimant failed to carry her burden of proof, I conclude that Ms. Graper’s 
claim for benefits must also fail.   
Claimant sought reimbursement for an independent medical evaluation with Dr. 
Taylor pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 permits an employee to be 
reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s choice where 
an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the 
employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits 
reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any 
wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants denied liability for this claim and did not obtain a corresponding 
medical causation opinion or impairment rating prior to Dr. Taylor’s August 17, 2020, 
evaluation.  Claimant has not established the prerequisites for reimbursement of Dr. 
Taylor’s evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Claimant also asserts a claim for costs.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of 
the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40.  Given that claimant failed to prove a 
compensable claim, I conclude that none of her costs should be assessed. I conclude 
that each party should bear its own costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
The parties shall bear their own costs related to this contested case proceeding. 
Signed and filed this _30th _ day of September, 2022. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 

GRAPER V. DS ENTERPRISES, L.C., d/b/a YELLOW CAB OF IOWA CITY 
Page 12 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Eric Bigley (via WCES) 
Adam Tarr (via WCES) 
Siobhan Briley (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
