Case Number: 22011350.01
Case Title:  KERN, ZACHARY V. RICK'S TOWING COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Kern Zachary-22011350.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ZACHARY KERN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
         File No. 22011350.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
RICK’S TOWING COMPANY,   
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
PIONEER SPECIALTY INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
    Head Notes:  1402.40, 1803.1 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Zachary Kern filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Rick’s Towing Company, employer, and Pioneer 
Specialty Insurance Company, insurance carrier, for a stipulated work injury date of 
September 1, 2022. The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on January 31, 2025. The case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all 
participants appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through C.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on January 31, 2025. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on March 14, 2025, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. The nature and extent of claimant’s permanent partial disability; and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Aug-28  10:01:18     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 2 
2. Payment of claimant’s independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code 
section 85.39. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 42-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, 
page 8) He is married and has one child. He is a high school graduate, and has a Class 
A Commercial Drivers’ License. (Tr., p. 9)  
 
 Claimant was injured on September 1, 2022, while working at Rick’s Towing. 
(See Hearing Report) At the time of injury, claimant was swapping semi-trucks with 
another employee, and noticed the other worker did not have any equipment chains. 
(Tr., p. 12) Claimant went to get his extra set of chains, and feeling frustrated with his 
co-worker, jerked up on the chains, causing his right shoulder to pop. He reported the 
injury to the company owner, but continued working that day.  
 
Claimant testified that a few days later, he sought treatment on his own at an 
urgent care clinic. (Tr., pp. 12-13) Records indicate he was seen at Unity Point Urgent 
Care on September 12, 2022, with complaints of right shoulder pain. (Joint Exhibit 4, p. 
97) After examination and x-rays, he was referred to sports medicine. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 97) 
 
Claimant saw Marc Molis, M.D., at Unity Point Sports Clinic on September 16, 
2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 91) Dr. Molis suspected a rotator cuff tear, likely supraspinatus, and 
recommended an MRI. He also gave claimant a sling, but allowed him to return to work 
as claimant said most of his work was around waist level, not overhead.  
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right shoulder on September 29, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
18) The MRI showed a partial-thickness bursal surface tear about the anterior and 
middle third of the supraspinatus tendon, and a suggestion of a pinpoint full-thickness 
tear at the anterior footprint. There were also mild AC degenerative changes. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 19) Defendants directed claimant to Capital Orthopaedics for further treatment. (Tr., 
p. 13) 
 
Claimant saw William Jacobson, M.D., on October 7, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22) After 
examination and review of the MRI, Dr. Jacobson recommended surgery consisting of 
rotator cuff repair, subacromial decompression, and distal claviculectomy. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
24)  
 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 3 
Dr. Jacobson performed right shoulder arthroscopic surgery consisting of rotator 
cuff repair, subacromial decompression, and PRP (platelet rich plasma) injection, on 
October 31, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 36) His arthroscopic findings included excellent 
condition of the glenohumeral joint; minimal fraying of the superior labrum; minimal 
biceps tenosynovitis; intact subscapularis; type 2 acromion; thickened bursal tissue; and 
full-thickness tear of the supraspinatus tendon.  
 
Claimant had a post-operative visit with Dr. Jacobson on November 8, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 39) He was wearing his sling as directed and complained of discomfort and 
pain in the shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 40) At his next appointment on January 24, 2023, it 
was noted that he had been working with physical therapy and was making good 
progress. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 45-47) He was still limited with respect to range of motion, so 
his physical therapy was continued. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 47) He was also released to return to 
work with restrictions of lifting no more than two to three pounds overhead; five pounds 
below the shoulder; and riding in the truck cab on the passenger side only with a spotter 
or assistant to help as needed. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 49) 
 
Claimant was discharged from physical therapy on March 31, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
12) At that time, his right shoulder range of motion measurements were as follows: 
 
Flexion: 
 
170 degrees 
Abduction: 
 
165 degrees 
Internal Rotation: 
70 degrees 
External Rotation: 
80 degrees 
 
(Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 12-13) He also had 5 of 5 strength. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13) It was determined 
that he met all of the functional goals and demonstrated correct lifting mechanics. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 14) 
 
Claimant next saw Dr. Jacobson on April 4, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 54) He reported 
making good progress with physical therapy, but stated he started having some pain the 
day prior with no new injury or cause. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 55) Dr. Jacobson noted his 
symptoms appeared isolated to the biceps, so he recommended a biceps sheath 
injection. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 56) He was able to get the injection that same day, and was told 
to follow up as recommended. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 60) He was also sent back to physical 
therapy for one last visit to be sure he had a home exercise program and resistance 
bands. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
 
Claimant again returned to Dr. Jacobson on May 9, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 72) He 
reported the biceps injection provided 85 percent improvement. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 73) Dr. 
Jacobson encouraged him to continue his home exercise program to work on strength 
and range of motion, and placed him at maximum medical improvement (MMI). (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 74) He was released to return to work with no restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 74; 76) 
 
On May 18, 2023, Dr. Jacobson provided an impairment rating. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 89) 
Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 4 
Jacobson assigned a five percent upper extremity impairment. He used Figures 16-40, 
16-43, and 16-46 in reaching his conclusion. 
 
Claimant testified that at his final appointment with Dr. Jacobson, he was in the 
office for five to ten minutes. (Tr., p. 15) He testified that Dr. Jacobson did not take any 
measurements with respect to his range of motion, just approximated how far his arm 
could move. He also said that when he was placed at MMI, his arm had not returned to 
normal, and he continued to have a dull, nagging pain that never goes away. (Tr., p. 16) 
He also cannot lift his arm above his head, and has decreased strength in his right arm. 
He testified that his arm has remained that way up to the date of hearing. (Tr., pp. 16-
17) 
 
On August 10, 2023, claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with 
Robert Rondinelli, M.D. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 6) At the time of his evaluation, 
claimant complained of continued pain and “soreness” in his right arm, worse upon 
awakening. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9) He said the pain usually decreased as it loosened up 
throughout the day. He complained of fatiguing easily, and said he was unable to hold 
his right arm up for a long period of time. He reported having to switch hands or change 
positions while working due to fatigue and weakness. With respect to driving, he noted 
turning the wheel occasionally causing him a temporary exacerbation of pain when his 
shoulder “catches.” He also reported exiting a vehicle on the passenger side was 
difficult, as he needed to position his right arm above shoulder level in order to grasp 
the edge of the roof of the car. 
 
Dr. Rondinelli administered an Upper Extremity Functional Scale (UEFS) survey 
in order to help determine the percentage of claimant’s functional disability. Based on 
his score, claimant perceives he is 41 percent disabled from his maximum functional 
baseline as a result of his right shoulder injury. He reported that he is no longer able to 
throw a baseball, and can no longer play catch with his daughter, which he did regularly 
prior to the injury.  
 
Dr. Rondinelli provided detailed findings of his physical examination, including 
specific measurements of claimant’s range of motion for both upper extremities. (Cl. Ex. 
1, pp. 10-12) His range of motion measurements for the right shoulder were as follows: 
 
Flexion: 
 
130 degrees 
Extension: 
 
50 degrees 
Abduction: 
 
100 degrees 
Adduction: 
 
15 degrees 
External Rotation: 
55 degrees 
Internal Rotation: 
50 degrees 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
 
He also tested claimant’s upper extremity strength. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 11-12) He also 
noted that Waddel’s signs were “uniformly negative for submaximal effort, examination 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 5 
inconsistencies, and superficial tenderness, and overreaction to the examiner.” (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 12) 
  
He then provided answers to specific questions posed by claimant’s attorney. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, pp. 12-18) Dr. Rondinelli’s diagnoses related to the work injury included right 
rotator cuff tear, with intraoperative confirmation of a complete supraspinatus full-
thickness tear; status post arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, which included subacromial 
decompression, PRP injection, and acromioplasty, but no apparent distal clavicular 
excision; right bicipital tendinitis, status post ultrasound-guided long head of biceps 
Kenalog injection; and functional residuals including right upper limb demonstrable 
weakness, rapid fatigue, and functional loss of motion. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12) He opined each 
diagnosis was causally related to the work injury, either directly or as an aggravation of 
a preexisting underlying condition. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 12-13) 
 
Dr. Rondinelli opined that all of claimant’s medical treatment, including his 
extended physical therapy sessions, was medically necessary and appropriate. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 13) He did not believe any additional medical treatment would be helpful as 
claimant was medically and functionally stable. He agreed with Dr. Jacobson that 
claimant reached MMI on May 9, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14)  
 
Dr. Rondinelli provided a detailed impairment rating using the AMA Guides, fifth 
edition. He calculated 9 percent impairment of the right upper extremity based on 
decreased range of motion. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 14-15) He calculated an additional 10 percent 
of the right upper extremity based on decreased strength; specifically, demonstrable 
grip weakness, which he attributed to loss of biceps efficiency and resulting loss of 
dynamic stability of the right elbow and right upper extremity kinetic chain. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 
15-16) He also noted unexplained residual weakness in claimant’s right arm at or below 
the elbow, which he felt was due to residual biceps tendinitis, which was permanently 
aggravated by the work injury.  
 
Dr. Rondinelli also provided an additional 6 percent of the upper extremity using 
a diagnosis-based analysis, for "symptomatic shoulder instability pattern." (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
14) With respect to the diagnosis-based portion of the rating, Dr. Rondinelli explained 
that claimant shows evidence of symptomatic shoulder (glenohumeral), as well as 
separate scapulothoracic (“torso-joint”) instability patterns. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) He 
explained this was due to claimant’s range of motion loss and joint weakness and 
fatigue. He explained that his clinical symptoms were reproducible on shoulder stability 
testing, has had no expected change in his glenohumeral translation, which was stable, 
and has an anatomical lesion, which was the demonstrable supraspinatus tear. As 
such, he provided the additional 6 percent impairment for loss of dynamic shoulder 
stability.  
 
He went on to note that claimant demonstrated a significant loss in efficiency of 
his scapulothoracic joint, which is anatomically considered proximal to the glenohumeral 
joint, and should be considered a “torso” joint as it functionally connects the scapula to 
the thorax. He noted the joint is mechanically important to upper limb functioning as it 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 6 
positions the glenohumeral joint in an elevated and forward flexed position with respect 
to the torso, to enable forceful and sustained activity at or above shoulder level. He 
noted that the AMA Guides do not separately account for loss of scapulothoracic 
motion, but it can be estimated by measuring the relative excursion of the scapular 
spine in the coronal plane. He provided a figure to illustrate the anatomy and explained 
how scapulothoracic mobility works. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) Based on his range of motion and 
strength data, he opined that claimant’s loss of mechanical efficiency in the right upper 
limb could be shown in terms of scapulothoracic mobility when performing activities at 
or above shoulder level on the right side. As such, he opined that this functional 
impairment extended to the torso, and therefore to the body as a whole. 
 
In conclusion, Dr. Rondinelli combined his diagnosis-based, range of motion, and 
strength-based ratings, and provided a total rating of 23 percent of the right upper 
extremity, which converts to 14 percent of the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 17-18) Due 
to the functional impairment to the torso, he indicated the whole person rating was his 
recommendation. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18) 
 
Finally, with respect to permanent restrictions, Dr. Rondinelli noted that claimant 
was released to return to full duty per Dr. Jacobson. However, he noted claimant’s 
perceived disability, due to his subjective difficulty using his right arm at or above 
shoulder level. He noted claimant’s subjective difficulties were entirely consistent with 
his objective findings, and as such, recommended restrictions to “ensure safety, reduce 
possible risk for future injury, and avoid symptom provocation” as claimant continued to 
work. He recommended claimant avoid sustained or repetitive activity at or above 
shoulder level with his right upper limb, and not exceed ten-pounds lifting with his right 
arm, at or above shoulder level, on an occasional basis.   
 
Claimant testified that his appointment with Dr. Rondinelli lasted about an hour-
and-a-half. (Tr., p. 17) Of that, about 45-minutes was spent on physical testing. (Tr., pp. 
17-18) He also noted that Dr. Rondinelli used weights to measure strength and tools to 
measure range of motion. 
 
Claimant’s employment with Rick’s Towing ended in February of 2024. (Def. Ex. 
B, p. 15, Deposition Transcript, p. 16) At that time, he was fired for breaking the rules. 
He testified that he had asked permission to look for speakers that were in cars going to 
auction, and the owner said he could do so. (Tr., p. 22) However, after removing some 
speakers from a car, the owner later returned for the vehicle and he was subsequently 
fired. A few months later he got a job through a temp agency working at Ryco, which 
manufactures automatic car washes. (Tr., p. 23) He worked on an assembly line, and 
was mostly able to stay within the restrictions Dr. Rondinelli recommended. (Tr., pp. 23-
24) He left that job after about six months. (Tr., p. 24) 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was working for Stine Seed Company. His job 
duties involve hauling corn and beans to various locations, such as ADM or ethanol 
plants. His job duties fall within the restrictions recommended by Dr. Rondinelli, as he 
physically only has to drive his semi-truck. (Tr., p. 25) He pushes a button to open and 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 7 
close the tarp on his truck, and the farmhands fill the truck with product. When he 
dumps the product, it is also just a push of a button. (Tr., pp. 25-26) He was earning 
$27.50 per hour at the time of hearing, which is more than he was earning when he left 
Rick’s Towing. (Tr., pp. 25; 35) 
 
Defendants sent claimant for an IME with Charles Mooney, M.D., which took 
place on July 28, 2024. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, p. 1) Dr. Mooney provided a detailed 
summary of claimant’s medical records. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 1-6) At the time of Dr. 
Mooney’s examination, claimant complained of pain at a level 1 at rest and up to an 8 
with activity, particularly overhead motion, lateral lifting, lifting with palms down, and 
throwing a ball. (Def. Ex. A, p. 6) He also complained of decreased strength on the right 
side, and noted he had continued to do his home exercise program.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Mooney took range of motion measurements and 
performed several tests. (Def. Ex. A, p. 8) He took three sets of range of motion 
measurements for the right shoulder, as suggested by the AMA Guides. The range of 
motion values he used in his impairment rating were as follows: 
 
Flexion: 
 
120 degrees 
Abduction: 
 
110 degrees 
Adduction: 
 
35 degrees 
Extension: 
 
50 degrees 
Internal Rotation: 
35 degrees 
External Rotation: 
65 degrees 
 
(Def. Ex. A, pp. 8-9) 
 
With respect to strength, he found “excellent” pronation and supination strength, 
and no evidence of significant increase in pain or loss of strength in internal or external 
rotation, which was 5 of 5 comparatively. (Def. Ex. A, p. 9) His grip strength was 85 
pounds on the right and 90 pounds on the left, and his flexion/extension strength of his 
wrists and elbows were both 5 of 5.  
 
Dr. Mooney provided answers to questions posed by defense counsel. With 
respect to impairment, Dr. Mooney noted that the range of motion measurements he 
took were “significantly different” than the measurements taken at claimant’s discharge 
from physical therapy, as well as those taken by Dr. Rondinelli. Due to the wide 
variance, he opined that the range of motion measurements he took on July 28, 2024 
were not valid. That aside, for administrative purposes he provided an impairment rating 
based on the measurements he took, which came to 13 percent of the upper extremity. 
However, Dr. Mooney went on to explain that due to the differences in range of motion 
measurements, he believed Dr. Jacobson’s findings would likely be the most accurate, 
based on his examination at the time of reaching MMI. (Def. Ex. A, p. 10) As such, he 
would “not disagree” with Dr. Jacobson’s 5 percent upper extremity rating as “minor 
motion loss in flexion, abduction, or internal rotation is common after rotator surgery.”  
 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 8 
Dr. Mooney also opined that it was inappropriate to provide an impairment for 
shoulder joint laxity. He opined that a repaired supraspinatus tendon does not induce 
reproducible laxity in the shoulder and/or a “symptomatic shoulder instability pattern,” 
and the 6 percent impairment Dr. Rondinelli provided in that regard was not applicable.  
 
With respect to Dr. Rondinelli’s findings regarding the scapulothoracic joint, Dr. 
Mooney opined that there is direct correlation between claimant’s shoulder surgery and 
his notable “weakness” of the scapulothoracic joint. He noted that scapulothoracic joint 
motion is significantly dependent on motion of the upper extremity and shoulder, and 
that measuring scapulothoracic joint motion can be greatly affected by individual effort 
and should not be rated separately from the glenohumeral joint. He did note a possible 
exception if there was a direct injury to the scapula and chest wall, but that was not the 
case with this claimant. He went on to opine that there was no evidence on his 
examination that the scapulothoracic joint motion was abnormal, and the AMA Guides 
do not provide impairment for scapulothoracic motion loss associated with 
glenohumeral conditions. 
 
Dr. Mooney also noted that the AMA Guides require that the impairment should 
be as closely as possible directly related to the affected joint or issue. He opined that in 
this case, the glenohumeral joint is the affected joint, and claimant’s outcome after 
surgery based on Dr. Jacobson’s findings and physical therapy findings was overall 
quite good. He did not believe additional impairments should be provided for non-
reproducible laxity, loss of motion of the scapulothoracic joint, or weakness, as strength 
loss should not be measured in the face of loss of motion. He pointed out that the 
Guides dictate that decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased 
motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence of parts that prevent effective 
application of maximal force in the region being evaluated. 
 
Finally, he disagreed with Dr. Rondinelli’s strength-based rating due to “loss of 
biceps efficiency,” as the surgical note did not indicate any damage to the biceps tendon 
or the biceps anchor. He opined that treatment for biceps tendonitis by guided injection 
did not result in a permanent injury or strength loss. He also opined that an impairment 
for strength loss in the hand was not applicable, as there was no neurologic injury that 
would cause grip weakness, and in his assessment, claimant’s grip strengths were 
nearly identical. (Def. Ex. A, p. 11) 
 
In conclusion, Dr. Mooney opined that the only reasonable impairment would be 
for loss of range of motion in the shoulder, and that Dr. Jacobson’s measurements were 
probably the most accurate at the time of reaching MMI and completing physical 
therapy. He did not provide any opinions with respect to permanent restrictions. 
 
Claimant testified that his appointment with Dr. Mooney lasted about 45 minutes, 
and of that about 15 minutes were spent on testing. (Tr., pp. 18-19) He testified that Dr. 
Mooney did similar tests to Dr. Rondinelli, using similar instruments and taking 
measurements. (Tr., p. 19) He also said both doctors discussed giving maximum effort 
with him, and he did so at both appointments.  

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 9 
 
When comparing the measurements of claimant’s range of motion, the biggest 
change is between the time he was discharged from physical therapy on March 31, 
2023, to the time of Dr. Rondinelli’s IME on August 10, 2023, over four months later. 
Despite his statements, the measurements Dr. Mooney took on July 28, 2024, were 
overall not terribly different from Dr. Rondinelli’s measurements. (Compare Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
11 and Def. Ex. A, p. 8) There was only a 10-degree difference in most measurements, 
although there was a 20-degree difference in adduction and 15 degrees difference in 
internal rotation. Dr. Mooney’s IME took place approximately 16 months after claimant’s 
discharge from physical therapy, and almost one year after Dr. Rondinelli’s IME. There 
is also no indication that Dr. Mooney performed any type of validity testing, while Dr. 
Rondinelli noted Waddel’s signs were all negative.  
 
It is not surprising that claimant’s range of motion changed in that amount of 
time, especially if he was not diligent in performing his home exercise program. At his 
deposition, which was taken on November 8, 2024, he testified that he continued to do 
his home exercise program, which consisted of “basically door stretches” using 
resistance bands. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 16-17, Depo. Tr., pp. 20-21) He also testified that the 
exercises helped temporarily, and that the condition of his shoulder was worse or about 
the same as it was six months prior to the deposition. That being said, range of motion 
is not static. It can change with an individual’s overall conditioning. Claimant credibly 
testified that at times his pain and stiffness are worse. I also note that Dr. Rondinelli 
gave claimant an opportunity to warm up prior to taking his measurements. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
11) There is no indication as to whether Dr. Mooney did so. This could explain many of 
the differences between the two sets of measurements.  
 
Despite feeling his measurements may not be valid, Dr. Mooney provided a 
rating for administrative purposes. He also provided a fairly detailed explanation as to 
why Dr. Rondinelli’s rating related to shoulder joint laxity was inapplicable, as well as his 
rating for loss of strength in the hand. In comparing Dr. Mooney’s statements on these 
issues with the Guides, I find his opinions to be most convincing. It does not appear that 
Dr. Rondinelli’s rating should have included impairment for scapulothoracic motion loss, 
nor for decreased grip/pinch strength. That being said, I do not agree with Dr. Mooney’s 
contention that Dr. Jacobson’s rating is probably the most accurate. Dr. Jacobson did 
not perform any testing or take any independent measurements of claimant’s range of 
motion. Presumably, his rating was based on the physical therapy discharge report, but 
it is unclear. Given the approximately 16 months between claimant’s physical therapy 
discharge and Dr. Mooney’s examination, it is reasonable to believe his range of motion 
deteriorated. Claimant credibly testified regarding his issues, including testimony at his 
deposition that his shoulder condition was worse at that time than it was 6-months prior. 
He credibly testified at hearing that he gave maximum effort at both IMEs, and Dr. 
Mooney did not perform any documented validity testing to prove otherwise. His only 
basis for opining that his measurements were invalid was due to the differences 
between the three sets of measurements. As Dr. Mooney took the most recent set of 
measurements, I find his rating of 13 percent of the upper extremity to be the most 
accurate at the time of hearing. 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 10 
 
For reasons discussed below, I find that claimant’s injury is limited to his right 
shoulder, and he has sustained 13 percent permanent impairment. He is therefore 
entitled to 52 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). In this case, the main issue for resolution is the nature and extent of 
claimant’s permanent disability. Claimant contends his injury extends to the body as a 
whole, and that he has sustained moderate industrial disability. Defendants argue that 
claimant’s injury is limited to the shoulder, and that Dr. Jacobson’s 5 percent rating is 
the appropriate measure of his permanent disability. In the alternative, defendants 
argue that if claimant’s injury does extend to the body as a whole, he has demonstrated 
little, if any, industrial disability. 
In 2017 the Iowa Legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.34. Before the 2017 
changes, shoulder injuries were considered proximal to the arm and compensated as a 
body as a whole injury, under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u). Prior to the 2017 
changes, a shoulder injury was compensated as an unscheduled injury, and based on 
industrial disability. See Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 N.W.2d 161 
(1949). Through the 2017 legislative changes, the legislature added the shoulder to the 
list of scheduled members. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) states: “[f]or the loss of a 
shoulder, weekly compensation during four hundred weeks.” Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n). This amendment went into effect on July 1, 2018. The legislature did not 
define the term “shoulder.”  
The Iowa Supreme Court in Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662 (Iowa 
2022), and Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 972 N.W.2d 727 (Iowa 2022), affirmed that 
the shoulder was construed in a functional sense to include the glenohumeral joint as 
well as all of the muscles, tendons, and ligaments that were essential for the shoulder to 
function. The Iowa Supreme Court acknowledged that the rotator cuff tendons that were 
injured and repaired in those cases attach proximally to the glenohumeral joint. 
However, the fact that those tendons attached proximally to the joint was not the 
controlling factor in determining if an injury is considered a “shoulder” injury. Instead, the 
Iowa Supreme Court fashioned a “functionality” test to determine whether an injury is 
confined to the shoulder or extends beyond the shoulder. The Court held that “Defining 
‘shoulder’ in the functional sense under section 85.34(2)(n) best achieves the statute's 
purpose.” Chavez, at 669. In Chavez the Court also noted that throughout her medical 
records the physicians who treated or assessed the injury considered it to be a shoulder 
injury. Chavez, at 670.   
In the present case, claimant failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the 
evidence that his September 1, 2022, injury extends beyond the right shoulder. He 
argues that Dr. Rondinelli’s explanation of the integrated functional loss in the 
scapulothoracic joint, which is proximal to the glenohumeral joint, should distinguish his 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 11 
case from others in which industrial disability was declined. I disagree. Dr. Rondinelli’s 
explanation of the scapulothoracic joint actually disproves claimant’s argument, as he 
notes the joint is “mechanically important to upper limb functioning as it positions the 
glenohumeral joint in an elevated and forward flexed position with respect to the torso, 
to enable forceful and sustained activity at or above shoulder level.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) 
Additionally, as Dr. Mooney explained, the scapulothoracic joint’s motion is significantly 
dependent on motion of the upper extremity and shoulder. (Def. Ex. A, p. 10) He found 
a direct correlation between the shoulder surgery and any weakness in the 
scapulothoracic joint. This also led to his opinion that the scapulothoracic joint motion 
should not be rated separately from the glenohumeral joint in this case.  
Applying the Court’s functionality test, I conclude the evidence demonstrates that 
claimant’s injury is contained to the shoulder. See Chavez. The fact that claimant’s 
scapulothoracic joint was affected by the rotator cuff surgery is not controlling in defining 
whether the injury is a shoulder injury. Rather, looking at the purpose of the surgery, as 
the Commissioner did in Ojeda, the surgery was performed for the purpose of improving 
or maintaining function in claimant’s right shoulder. Ojeda v. Sivyer Holdings; File Nos. 
20008020.01; 21005432.01 (App. July 8, 2024) Additionally, Dr. Rondinelli’s 
recommended restrictions are solely for the protection and comfort of claimant’s 
shoulder, as they all involve work at or above shoulder level. Finally, in reviewing the 
evidence, “medical records consistently show that the physicians who treated or 
assessed” his September 1, 2022 injury considered his injury to be a shoulder injury.  
See Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 670. Thus, like in Chavez, the claimant’s own medical 
records support the conclusion that his injury is a “shoulder” injury. 
Because the disability is limited to the shoulder, it is classified as a scheduled 
member disability. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). Under the schedule, 400 weeks is 
the maximum number of weeks of compensation for loss of a shoulder. Id. Iowa Code 
states,  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(x).   
The Commissioner has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001). 876 IAC 2.4. With regard to section 85.34(2)(x), 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has stated: 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 12 
Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with an injured worker's actual 
functional loss or disability as determined by the evidence, but rather the 
impairment rating as assigned by the adopted version of The AMA 
Guides. The only function of the agency is to determine which impairment 
rating should be utilized. 
Merlyn Brown, Jr., v. Naylor Seed Co., File No. 5067998, 2021 WL 5575264, at *8 (Nov. 
23, 2021). 
In reviewing the AMA Guides, I find Dr. Mooney’s opinions regarding the portions 
of Dr. Rondinelli’s rating related to “shoulder instability” and loss of grip strength to be 
most persuasive. As Dr. Mooney notes, there is no evidence of scapulothoracic joint 
motion abnormalities, and the Guides do not provide for scapulothoracic motion loss 
associated with glenohumeral conditions. Therefore, I do not find Dr. Rondinelli’s 
diagnosis-based rating applicable. 
Additionally, with respect to Dr. Rondinelli’s strength-based rating, the principles 
of section 16.8A of the Guides allow for the loss of strength to be rated separately, “if 
the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor 
that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the Guides.” The Guides 
note, “[i]f the examiner judges that loss of strength should be rated separately in an 
extremity that presents other impairments, the impairment due to loss of strength could 
be combined with other impairments, only if based on unrelated etiologic or 
pathomechanical causes.” Guides, Section 16.8a, page 508. The Guides emphasize, 
“[o]therwise, the impairment ratings based on objective anatomic findings take 
precedence.” Id. The Guides do not allow for rating based upon decreased strength in 
the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or absence of parts 
that prevent effective application of maximal force in the evaluated area. Id. Manual 
muscle testing of major groups is to be used for testing shoulder strength. Id.   
Also, as Dr. Mooney points out, there was no neurologic injury that would cause 
weakness in grip, and his assessment showed nearly identical grip strengths between 
claimant’s two hands. As such, I do not find Dr. Rondinelli’s strength-based rating 
applicable. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I found Dr. Mooney’s range of motion 
impairment rating to be the most accurate, as his range of motion measurements were 
taken most recently. As explained above, while he did not believe his measurements 
were accurate, the basis of that opinion was the difference he found between his 
measurements, Dr. Rondinelli’s measurements almost a year prior, and the physical 
therapy measurements 16 months prior. I found that based on the evidence, including 
claimant’s credible testimony, the actual measurements of each examination, and the 
circumstances of each evaluation (including timing, the ability to warm up, and validity 
testing), it was more likely than not that Dr. Mooney’s measurements were an accurate 
reflection of claimant’s range of motion at the time of his examination. As such, I find his 
rating of 13 percent of the upper extremity to be the most accurate representation of 
claimant’s permanent functional disability related to his September 1, 2022 right 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 13 
shoulder injury. This entitles claimant to 52 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits.  
The next issue for determination is reimbursement of claimant’s IME with Dr. 
Rondinelli under Iowa Code section 85.39. Defendants argue that only the examination 
portion of the IME fee is reimbursable under section 85.39. 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a 
physician retained by the employer and the employee believes this 
evaluation to be too low, the employee shall, upon application to the 
commissioner and upon delivery of a copy of the application to the 
employer and its insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the 
reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee’s own choice, and reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred for the examination.    . . .   An employer is only liable 
to reimburse an employee for the cost of an examination conducted 
pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee is being 
examined is determined to be compensable under this chapter or chapter 
85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of such an examination 
if the injury for which the employee is being examined is determined not to 
be a compensable injury.  A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination made pursuant to this subsection shall be based on the 
typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating 
in the local area where the examination is conducted.     
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).     
The Iowa Supreme Court determined that an “examination” required “to perform 
an impairment rating” must include certain steps as required under the AMA Guides. 
Mid American Construction, LLC, v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024). These steps 
include: determining whether an injured worker achieved MMI, reviewing past medical 
records to ascertain knowledge as to any past injuries to the injured worker, opining as 
to whether the work injury caused the impairment, conducting a physical examination of 
the claimant in order “to assess the employee’s status and perform accurate 
measurements…”, and determining a diagnosis. Id. at 851.   
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination. The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). This burden may 
be met either by “…evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to support or 
challenge the fee charged in a particular case…” or by agency expertise in adjudicating 
claims in the local area where the examination was conducted. Mid American 
Construction, LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 849 (Iowa 2024).   

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 14 
Dr. Rondinelli’s IME invoice was for a total of $4,675.00, which included 8.5 
hours of work at the rate of $550.00 per hour. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 107) He further itemized his 
time by noting he spent 2 hours reviewing medical records, 1.5 hours on the history and 
physical examination, 2 hours on composition and dictation of his report, and 3 hours on 
editing, researching, formatting, and proofing his report. His report is 13 pages long, and 
he also included a separate 3-page medical records summary and the one-page 
diagram referenced in his report. I find Dr. Rondinelli’s fee is reasonable and standard 
for workers’ compensation claims in Iowa. (See Pesicka v. Snap-On Logistics, 965 
N.W.2d 638 (Iowa App. 2021); Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 843). 
Claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the entire IME fee under Iowa Code 
section 85.39, not just the portion allocated to the physical examination. Further, I find 
Dr. Rondinelli’s fee is reasonable and standard for an IME in Iowa. As such, defendants 
are responsible to reimburse claimant for $4,675.00 for the IME. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant fifty-two (52) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits, commencing May 9, 2023, at the stipulated rate of seven hundred seventy-five 
and 75/100 dollars ($775.75). 
 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Rondinelli’s IME in the amount of 
four thousand six hundred seventy-five and 00/100 dollars ($4,675.00), pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.  
 
Signed and filed this __28th ___ day of August, 2025. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

KERN V. RICK’S TOWING COMPANY 
Page 15 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jordan Hutchinson   
(via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg  
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
