Case Number: 1652412.02
Case Title:  RIFE, MICHAEL V. P.M. LATTNER MFG CO.
Doc Type:    Decision - Supreme Court
Source:      Rife, Michael-1652412.02.Supreme Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF IOWA 
 
No. 22–1421 
 
Submitted December 13, 2023—Filed February 9, 2024 
 
 
P.M. LATTNER MANUFACTURING CO. and ACCIDENT FUND GENERAL 
INSURANCE CO., 
 
 
Appellees, 
 
vs. 
 
MICHAEL RIFE, 
 
 
Appellant. 
 
 
On review from the Iowa Court of Appeals. 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Michael D. Huppert, 
Judge. 
 
A workers’ compensation claimant challenges a district court ruling 
reversing a commission award of permanent partial disability benefits and 
reimbursement of expenses for independent medical examination. DECISION OF 
COURT OF APPEALS AFFIRMED IN PART AND REVERSED IN PART; DISTRICT 
COURT JUDGMENT REVERSED AND CASE REMANDED WITH INSTRUCTIONS. 
 
McDonald, J., delivered the opinion of the court, in which all justices join. 
 
Anthony J. Olson of Rush & Nicholson, P.L.C., Cedar Rapids, for appellant. 
 
Laura J. Ostrander, General Counsel, Accident Fund Holdings, Inc. d/b/a 
AF Group, Lansing, Michigan, for appellee.  
 
 

 
2 
  
MCDONALD, Justice.  
Michael Rife worked as a welder for P.M. Lattner Manufacturing Company. 
In 2009, Rife sustained an injury to his shoulder arising out of and in the course 
of his employment with P.M. Lattner and sought workers’ compensation benefits. 
Rife and P.M. Lattner entered into a commutation settlement agreement for that 
injury. In 2018, Rife sustained another injury to his shoulder arising out of and 
in the course of his employment and sought workers’ compensation benefits. The 
commissioner found the injury caused a new permanent partial disability and 
awarded Rife benefits. There are two questions presented in this appeal. First, 
how should Rife’s benefits for his second permanent partial disability be 
determined to “prevent all double recoveries and all double reductions in 
workers’ compensation benefits for permanent partial disability.” 2004 Iowa Acts 
1st Extraordinary Sess. ch. 1001, § 20. Second, whether and to what extent is 
Rife entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical examination he 
obtained while pursuing his claim for benefits. 
I. 
In 2009, Rife sustained an injury to his right shoulder in the course of his 
employment with P.M. Lattner. Three doctors assessed the injury and issued 
impairment ratings. One doctor issued an impairment rating of 14% to the right 
shoulder, or 8% to the body as a whole. Another doctor issued an impairment 
rating of 12% to the right shoulder, or 7% to the body as a whole. A third doctor 
issued an impairment rating of 15% to the right shoulder, or 9% to the body as 
a whole. The commissioner never made a finding regarding the impairment 
rating because the parties entered into a commutation settlement agreement in 
September 2010. The commutation settlement stipulated that Rife sustained a 
permanent partial disability of 29.6% to the body as a whole.  
At the time of the 2009 injury, permanent partial disability arising out of 

 
3 
  
an injury to the shoulder was a nonscheduled disability. See Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(u) (2009). As a nonscheduled permanent partial disability, 
compensation was determined by the percentage loss in the “employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the disability.” Id. Determining the amount of compensation 
for a permanent partial disability based on the employee’s reduction in earning 
capacity was and is known as the industrial method for calculating an industrial 
disability. See Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 320–21 (Iowa 1998) 
(“[U]nscheduled injuries are compensated by determining the employee’s 
industrial disability. One arrives at industrial disability by determining the loss 
to the employee’s earning capacity.”); Second Inj. Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 
N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994) (“Industrial disability goes beyond body 
impairment and measures the extent to which the injury impairs the employee’s 
earning capacity.”); Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 14 (Iowa 1993) 
(stating the industrial method measures “the loss to the employee’s earning 
capacity”). 
In 2017, the general assembly changed the method of calculating 
permanent partial disability benefits for an injury to the shoulder. 2017 Iowa 
Acts ch. 23, § 7 (codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n) (2018)). The 2017 
amendment reclassified a permanent partial disability arising out of an injury to 
the shoulder as a scheduled disability. See id. Compensation for a scheduled 
disability was and is based on the percentage of functional impairment to the 
scheduled member in relation to a set number of weeks. See Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(a)–(v) (2018). With respect to a shoulder injury resulting in permanent 
partial disability, specifically, compensation is now based on the percentage of 
functional impairment to the shoulder in relation “four hundred weeks” of 
compensation. See id. § 85.34(2)(n).  
Rife sustained a second work-related injury to his right shoulder in August 

 
4 
  
2018 and filed this claim for workers’ compensation benefits against P.M. Lattner 
and its insurer, Accident Fund General Insurance Co. (collectively, “P.M. 
Lattner”). After treating with several physicians, Rife sought an independent 
medical examination with Dr. Sunny Kim. Dr. Kim had performed an 
impairment rating for Rife’s prior injury. On this occasion, Dr. Kim assessed Rife 
with a 19% impairment to the shoulder, or 11% to the body as a whole. Dr. Kim 
did not distinguish between the 2009 and 2018 shoulder injuries when assessing 
Rife’s permanent functional impairment.  
The matter proceeded to an arbitration proceeding. The deputy 
commissioner found Rife suffered a 19% functional impairment to his right 
shoulder and would be entitled to 19% of 400 weeks’ compensation. P.M. Lattner 
argued that it was entitled to an apportionment of liability pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(7) and sought an offset or credit for its prior partial disability 
payment. Section 85.34(7) provides that an “employer is not liable for 
compensating an employee’s preexisting disability that arose out of and in the 
course of employment from a prior injury with the employer, to the extent that 
the employee’s preexisting disability has already been compensated.” Id. 
§ 85.34(7). P.M. Lattner argued that because Rife’s 29.6% loss of earning 
capacity caused by the prior injury was greater than Rife’s 19% functional 
impairment to his shoulder caused by the subsequent injury, then Rife was not 
entitled to any compensation.  
The deputy commissioner rejected P.M. Lattner’s apportionment argument 
under section 85.34(7) on two grounds. First, as a legal matter, the deputy 
commission concluded it “would be absurd to provide defendants a credit against 
a scheduled award for prior industrial disability benefits paid.” The two awards 
were based on wholly different criteria. The deputy commissioner concluded that 
P.M. Lattner might be entitled to an offset or credit “based upon the impairment 

 
5 
  
ratings attributed to the first injury.” Second, as a factual matter, P.M. Lattner 
did not produce evidence to establish the impairment rating attributable to the 
first injury for which they might be given credit. 
At the arbitration hearing, Rife sought reimbursement for the costs of 
Dr. Kim’s independent medical examination (IME). The deputy commissioner 
concluded that Rife was entitled to seek an IME and ordered P.M. Lattner to 
reimburse Rife in the amount of $2,250 for the same. The deputy commissioner 
found the fee was reasonable based on Dr. Kim’s opinion that the cost was 
“reasonable and customary in his geographic area.”  
P.M. Lattner filed an intra-agency appeal of the arbitration decision. The 
commissioner affirmed the deputy’s conclusions and findings regarding the 
compensation to be paid for Rife’s permanent partial disability. On the question 
of apportionment, the commissioner concluded that P.M. Lattner’s theory and 
method of apportionment were not supported by the statutory text or the general 
body of workers’ compensation law governing permanent partial disabilities. The 
commissioner reasoned that to conclude otherwise would be to compare apples 
and oranges. The commissioner’s reasoning was persuasive, and we quote it at 
length: 
Not only is there no mechanism in the statute for apportioning 
past compensation for industrial disability against compensation for 
a scheduled member, . . . but the statute, as amended, does not 
support such an apportionment. . . .  
Because claimant’s prior shoulder injury occurred before the 
legislature’s 2017 overhaul of chapter 85, it was not compensated 
as a scheduled member. Instead, claimant’s pre-existing disability 
was compensated under former Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (now 
subsection (2)(v)), which is the section for unscheduled losses that 
provides compensation based on a reduction in earning capacity. 
In determining a claimant’s reduction of earning capacity, 
functional impairment is an element to be considered, but 
consideration must also be given to the injured employee’s age, 

 
6 
  
education, qualifications, experience, motivation, loss of earnings, 
severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage 
in employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer’s 
offer of work or failure to so offer. Before the 2017 amendments, this 
agency stated in countless decisions over several decades that 
“[t]here are no weighting guidelines that indicate how each of the 
industrial disability factors is to be considered.” See, e.g., Logan v. 
ABF Freight System, Inc., File No. 5047979 (App. April 25, 2018).  
In this case, the parties agreed upon a settlement for 
claimant’s prior right shoulder injury. While part of the settlement 
was certainly for claimant’s functional impairment, the agreed-upon 
compensation exceeded what would have been payable for 
claimant’s functional impairment alone. In other words, the parties 
considered other industrial disability factors when arriving at their 
settlement. 
Claimant’s current right shoulder injury, however, is a 
scheduled 
member 
under 
the 
newly 
added 
Iowa 
Code 
section 85.34(2)(n). Claimant’s compensation under this section is 
limited only to the extent of loss or permanent impairment of the 
shoulder itself. . . .  
Thus, if defendants in this case were entitled to a credit for 
the entirety of their settlement, which was for industrial disability, 
against claimant’s current scheduled member injury, they would 
receive an unfair excess credit for considerations and factors that 
are not applicable to claimant’s current injury. Put differently, their 
credit would be for apples against an award for oranges. 
I agree with the deputy commissioner that defendants could 
arguably be entitled to a credit based solely upon the functional 
impairment attributable to claimant’s preexisting shoulder injury—
a credit for oranges against an award for oranges. 
(Citations omitted.) Like the deputy commissioner, the commissioner also 
concluded that if P.M. Lattner were entitled to a credit based on the prior 
functional impairment, it failed to carry its burden of proving the amount of the 
credit. P.M. Lattner “did not identify which impairment ratings the parties 
adopted . . . nor did they offer any evidence (expert opinions or otherwise) to shed 
light on which of the impairment ratings was more persuasive than the others.” 
On the question of reimbursement for the costs of Dr. Kim’s IME, the 
commissioner stated that P.M. Lattner contested only that the costs of Dr. Kim’s 

 
7 
  
IME included expenses for an examination of an unrelated right ankle injury. 
The commissioner rejected that argument. The commissioner affirmed the 
deputy commissioner’s decision that P.M. Lattner was required to reimburse Rife 
$2,250 for the IME.  
P.M. Lattner appealed the decision to the district court. The district court 
concluded that the commissioner’s ruling on the apportionment issue was 
erroneous. In the district court’s view, the commissioner failed to address and 
interpret the relevant statutes and the commutation settlement. The district 
court concluded that this legal failure was a failure “to consider all the evidence.” 
Although the district court concluded the agency failed to “consider all the 
evidence,” the district court remanded the case back to the agency to consider 
the law. Specifically, the district court remanded the case to the agency to 
“reevaluate . . . the intent and language of subsection 7; the full commutation 
statutes, caselaw, and terms.” On the question of the IME, the district court 
concluded that Rife was not entitled to any reimbursement and reversed the 
agency’s decision. 
Rife appealed the decision of the district court, and we transferred the 
appeal to the court of appeals. On the apportionment issue, Rife argued that 
apportionment under section 85.34(7) was not applicable because the statute 
did not specify the method of apportionment. The court of appeals, citing our 
decision in Warren Properties v. Stewart, 864 N.W.2d 307 (Iowa 2015), rejected 
the argument. In its view, “the lack of express means to apportion benefits does 
not preclude the application of section 85.34(7).” The court of appeals concluded 
that pursuant to section 85.34(7), P.M. Lattner was entitled to some credit for 
its disability payments made under the prior commutation settlement. The court 
of appeals concluded that it could not determine the amount of the credit on this 
record, and it remanded the case to the commissioner to apportion liability 

 
8 
  
pursuant to section 85.34(7). 
On the question of the IME, the court of appeals held that the district court 
erred in concluding that Rife was not entitled to reimbursement for the IME. The 
court of appeals concluded, however, that Rife could only be reimbursed for the 
cost of the impairment rating rather than the cost for the entire examination. 
The court of appeals remanded the matter to the commissioner “to determine 
what portion of Dr. Kim’s examination related to the impairment rating of Rife’s 
right shoulder.”  
II. 
We 
granted 
Rife’s 
application 
for 
further 
review. 
Iowa 
Code 
section 17A.19(10) “governs judicial review of administrative agency decisions.” 
Coffey v. Mid Seven Transp. Co., 831 N.W.2d 81, 88 (Iowa 2013). Our standard 
of review for the commissioner’s interpretation of statutes is contingent. If “the 
legislature clearly vested the agency with the authority to interpret the statute 
at issue,” we give deference to the agency’s interpretation and will reverse the 
agency’s decision only when its interpretation is “irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable.” NextEra Energy Res. LLC v. Iowa Utils. Bd., 815 N.W.2d 30, 36–37 
(Iowa 2012) (quoting Doe v. Iowa Dep’t of Hum. Servs., 786 N.W.2d 853, 857 
(Iowa 2010)). If the legislature did not clearly vest the agency with interpretive 
authority over the statute at issue, we review the agency’s decision for the 
correction of errors at law. Id. at 37. We have previously concluded the legislature 
has not vested the workers’ compensation commissioner with interpretive 
authority regarding Iowa Code chapter 85. Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 
N.W.2d 1, 4–5 (Iowa 2012). Therefore, we “review the commissioner’s 
interpretation of Iowa Code chapter 85 for correction of errors at law instead of 
deferring to the agency’s interpretation.” Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 
235, 243 (Iowa 2018). 

 
9 
  
A. 
We first address the commissioner’s ruling regarding the apportionment 
of liability pursuant to section 85.34(7). Section 85.34(7) provides that an 
“employer is not liable for compensating an employee’s preexisting disability that 
arose out of and in the course of employment from a prior injury with the 
employer, to the extent that the employee’s preexisting disability has already 
been compensated.” Iowa Code § 85.34(7). The legislature’s stated purpose in 
enacting section 85.34(7) was to “prevent all double recoveries and all double 
reductions in workers’ compensation benefits for permanent partial disability.” 
2004 Iowa Acts 1st Extraordinary Sess. Ch. 1001, § 20. “The general assembly 
intend[ed] that an employer shall fully compensate all of an injured employee’s 
disability that is caused by work-related injuries with the employer without 
compensating the same disability more than once.” Id. 
This case is resolved by Loew v. Menard, Inc., ___ N.W.3d ___ (Iowa 2024). 
In that case, we addressed the question of how the commissioner should 
apportion liability when compensation for the employee’s first injury resulting in 
permanent partial disability was based on a loss of earning capacity and 
compensation for the second injury resulting in permanent partial disability was 
to be compensated based on a loss of functional impairment. See id. at ___. Like 
the commissioner and the court of appeals in this case, we concluded that 
offsetting an award based on functional impairment against a prior award based 
on loss of earning capacity was an improper comparison of apples to oranges. 
See id. at ___. Rather than comparing these incommensurables, the employer is 
entitled to an offset or credit for the functional impairment caused by the first 
injury. See id. at ___. Stated differently, section 85.34(7) requires that the 
employer can only be liable for the marginal increase in functional impairment 
caused by the second injury. See id. at ___ (concluding that employee was 

 
10 
  
entitled to compensation for the 8% marginal increase in functional impairment 
caused by the second injury). Distinguishing marginal increases in functional 
impairment caused by different injuries is a factual inquiry well within the 
agency’s expertise. See, e.g., Floyd v. Quaker Oats, 646 N.W.2d 105, 110 (Iowa 
2002) (discussing agency finding distinguishing permanent impairment caused 
by work injury and additional impairment caused by subsequent aggravation). 
Although the commissioner in this case articulated the correct framework 
for apportioning the employer’s liability for the second injury,1 the commissioner 
declined to apportion liability on the ground that P.M. Lattner failed to provide 
evidence on the extent of the prior impairment. “When there has been a failure 
of a required record, we frequently must decide whether it is appropriate to 
remand a case in order to supply the missing record. The answer most often is 
no; in view of limited judicial resources, we can ordinarily accord but one trial 
for each controversy.” Murillo v. Blackhawk Foundry, 571 N.W.2d 16, 19 (Iowa 
1997). In administrative appeals, however, “[i]f it is shown to the satisfaction of 
the court that the additional evidence is material and that there were good 
reasons for failure to present it in the contested case proceeding before the 
agency, the court may order that the additional evidence be taken before the 
agency upon conditions determined by the court.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(7).  
“We think the record here calls for a remand for additional evidence.” 
Murillo, 571 N.W.2d at 19. The application of section 85.34(7) under the 
 
1We note that after the district court reversed the commissioner’s decision in this case, 
the commissioner changed course and offered different interpretations of section 85.34(7) on 
similar apportionment questions. See Reeves v. Plymouth Cnty. Solid Waste, Iowa Workers’ 
Comp. Comm’n No. 21006846.02, 2023 WL 6953980, at *28 (Oct. 16, 2023); Brunk v. Glenwood 
Res. Ctr., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n No. 19003535.02, 2023 WL 2376894, at *3–*4 (Feb. 27, 
2023) (noting uncertainty in law after district court decision in this case). For the reasons 
expressed in Loew and in this opinion, we conclude the commissioner’s interpretation of 
section 85.34(7) as expressed in this case was correct.  

 
11 
  
circumstances presented here was unclear. Under section 85.34(7), P.M. Lattner 
is required to compensate Rife only for the marginal increase in the functional 
impairment of his right shoulder caused by the 2018 injury. To ascertain that 
amount, it must be determined whether Dr. Kim’s 19% functional impairment 
rating was in addition to, or inclusive of, Rife’s preexisting functional 
impairment. P.M. Lattner should be afforded the opportunity to present evidence 
under the correct standard as set forth in Loew and this opinion. See id. 
(remanding for additional evidence after clarification of workers’ compensation 
provision). 
B. 
We next address the question of whether Rife was entitled to 
reimbursement for the expense of Dr. Kim’s IME. The deputy commissioner 
found Rife was entitled to reimbursement and found the fee of $2,250 was 
reasonable based on Dr. Kim’s opinion that the cost was “reasonable and 
customary in his geographic area.” The commissioner affirmed this finding. The 
district court concluded that Rife was not entitled to any reimbursement. The 
court of appeals concluded that the district court erred and Rife was entitled to 
reimbursement. The court of appeals concluded, however, that Rife was entitled 
to reimbursement only for the costs of the impairment rating and not for the 
entire examination.  
We agree with the court of appeals that the district court erred in 
concluding Rife was not entitled to reimbursement for the cost of the IME. 
However, we conclude the court of appeals erred in holding that Rife was entitled 
to reimbursement only for the cost of the impairment rating and not the cost of 
the examination. “[T]he employee is entitled to the reasonable cost of the 
examination accompanying the physician’s determination of the impairment 
rating, not merely the component cost of the impairment rating itself.” Mid Am. 

 
12 
  
Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, ___ N.W.3d ___, ____ (Iowa 2024). The Code “provides for 
reimbursement of the reasonable cost of the examination to determine the 
impairment rating, and the examination encompasses the records review, the 
physical examination and testing, and a written report.” Id. at ___; see also Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2). 
We conclude the commissioner’s reimbursement decision should be 
affirmed. The reasonableness of the fee for an IME “is to be based on the typical 
fee charged in the locale where the examination is performed.” Id. at ___. 
“Whether the fee is reasonable is a question of fact, and the commissioner’s 
finding of reasonableness is to be affirmed if supported by substantial evidence.” 
Id. at ___. Here, the commissioner found the $2,250 fee was reasonable based 
on Dr. Kim’s opinion that his fee was the reasonable and customary fee in the 
geographic area. The commissioner’s finding is thus supported by substantial 
evidence.  
III. 
For these reasons, we affirm in part and reverse in part the decision of the 
court of appeals. We reverse the judgment of the district court. We remand this 
matter to the district court with instructions to remand this matter to the 
workers’ compensation commissioner for further proceedings. 
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS AFFIRMED IN PART AND REVERSED IN 
PART; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT REVERSED AND CASE REMANDED WITH 
INSTRUCTIONS.  
