Case Number: 21015492.01
Case Title:  PENA, REYNALDO V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Pena Reynaldo-21015492.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
REYNALDO PENA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 File No. 21015492.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION DECISION           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GREAT AMERICAN ALLIANCE  
  : 
INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
   Head Notes: 1100; 1108; 1108.50 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Reynaldo Pena, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer LeClaire Manufacturing Co. (“LeClaire”), and their 
insurer, Great American Alliance Insurance Company.  Andrew Bribriesco appeared on 
behalf of the claimant.  Lori Scardina Utsinger appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on July 20, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the hearing 
occurred electronically.  The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibit 1-13, 
and Defendants’ Exhibits A-I.  The exhibits were received into the record without 
objection.   
The claimant testified on his own behalf with the assistance of interpreter Angel 
Martinez.  Ralf Valle testified on behalf of the defendants.  Angie Maddux was 
appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the end of the hearing, and the matter was fully submitted 
on September 2, 2022, after briefing by the parties.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Oct-25  07:41:23     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 2 
 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
 
2. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
3. That, if the alleged injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, it is a 
scheduled member disability to the right shoulder. 
 
4. That the claimant had gross weekly earnings of nine hundred seventy-three 
and 45/100 dollars ($973.45) per week, was married, and was entitled to six 
exemptions at the time of the alleged injury.  This provided a weekly 
compensation rate of six hundred sixty-seven and 87/100 dollars ($667.87).   
 
5. That, with regard to the disputed medical expenses: 
 
a. The fees or prices charged by providers are fair and reasonable. 
b. The treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c. That, although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses, and the defendants did not offer contrary evidence.  
d. That, although the causal connection of the expenses to a work injury 
cannot be stipulated, the listed expenses were at least causally connected 
to the medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based.   
 
6. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 12 were paid.   
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.  Entitlement to credits against 
any award is no longer in dispute.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the 
course of employment, on August 31, 2020.   
  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary partial disability benefits 
between September 6, 2020, and January 23, 2021.    
 
5. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded.   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 3 
 
  
6. If the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, whether the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits should be 
January 13, 2021, or April 20, 2021.   
 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for past medical expenses, 
and whether: 
 
a. The listed expenses are causally connected to the work injury; and/or, 
b. The requested expenses were authorized by the defendants.   
  
8. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
  
9. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27.    
 
10. Whether an assessment of costs is appropriate.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Reynaldo Pena, the claimant was 27 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He resides in Davenport, Iowa, with his wife and four children.  
(Testimony).  His highest level of education completed is middle school.  (Defendants’ 
Exhibit I).   
Prior to working for the defendant-employer, the claimant worked at Rich Metals.  
(DE I).  He worked cutting metal with a torch.  (DE I).  He left that job because LeClaire 
offered him a higher rate of pay.  (DE I).  He began working for LeClaire in October of 
2017.  (Testimony).  At that time, he had a preemployment physical, which he passed.  
(Testimony).   
On August 31, 2020, Mr. Pena worked as a machine operator at LeClaire.  
(Testimony).  He performed that job for close to two and one-half years before his 
alleged injury.  (Testimony).  He had been working for about two hours.  (Testimony).  
As part of his job as a machine operator, Mr. Pena worked with metal and molds.  
(Testimony).  Metal was poured into a mold, and then pushed onto a metal table.  Mr. 
Pena then put a piece on top to remove it.  (Testimony).  He would then cut the piece off 
and put it in a basket.  (Testimony).  He lifted parts when they were still hot.  
(Testimony).  This time, he lifted a part, and did not have a good grip on it due to the 
heat.  (Testimony).  He testified that he thought the part weighed 80 pounds.  
(Testimony).  When he lifted the hot piece at about chest level, he felt pain in his 
shoulder.  (Testimony).  He testified that nothing unusual happened with the part when 
he was working with it.  (Testimony).  Prior to this date, he testified that he had no 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 4 
 
issues with his shoulders.  (Testimony).  He never had restrictions for his shoulders, and 
never had any symptoms in his shoulders.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Pena testified that he lifted parts over and over again, and that it was simply 
this one time that he began to notice pain in his bilateral shoulders.  (Testimony).  His 
left shoulder felt “a strain on the top area,” while his right shoulder felt “as if it had come 
off.”  (Testimony).  He reported his alleged injury to his supervisor, Ralf Valle.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Valle and/or a safety person filled out a safety report.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Valle indicated that on August 31, 2020, the claimant told him that he injured 
his right shoulder.  (Testimony).  He took Mr. Pena to visit with Paul Miller, the safety 
coordinator.  (Testimony).  He opined that Mr. Pena appeared to be double jointed.  
(Testimony).  It is unclear as to Mr. Valle’s medical qualifications to opine on this, but 
this is what he testified.  (Testimony). 
Mr. Pena was sent to Genesis.  (Testimony).  Genesis provided him with certain 
work restrictions, which the company respected.  (Testimony).  This reduced his work 
hours down to 32 hours per week.  (Testimony).   
On September 9, 2020, Mr. Pena reported to Genesis Occupational Medicine.  
(Joint Exhibit 2:5-7).  Mr. Pena complained to Jane Anderson PA-C of pain in his right 
and left shoulders.  (JE 2:5).  He indicated that his right shoulder pain began on August 
31, 2020, and he described it as intermittent.  (JE 2:5).  The pain was made worse by 
use, and manifested as a deep, stabbing, dull ache.  (JE 2:5).  He rated his pain 7 out of 
10 in his right shoulder.  (JE 2:5).  His left shoulder pain began on September 3, 2020, 
and was made worse by use.  (JE 2:5).  He described his pain the same as that in his 
right shoulder.  (JE 2:5).  Mr. Pena told the provider via interpreter that he was carrying 
an 80-pound part, and that afterwards, he experienced pain in both shoulders.  (JE 2:5).  
He also indicated that he felt a pop in his right shoulder with an onset of pain 
immediately.  (JE 2:5).  He then had pain in his left shoulder three days later.  (JE 2:5).  
He told the provider further that the part did not slip or jerk.  (JE 2:5).  At the time of his 
appointment, he was working light duty while supervising new workers.  (JE 2:5).  His 
right shoulder popped during examination, and he had 50 percent to 60 percent of full 
range of motion.  (JE 2:6).  The provider diagnosed Mr. Pena with pain in his right and 
left shoulder, and an unspecified sprain of each shoulder.  (JE 2:6).  X-rays were 
completed due to pain in his shoulders.  (JE 1:1-2).  X-rays of the left shoulder were 
normal with no soft tissue abnormalities.  (JE 1:1).  X-rays of the right shoulder were 
also normal with no soft tissue abnormalities.  (JE 1:1-2).  Ms. Anderson provided 
temporary restrictions, which included: 10 pounds of lifting, pulling, and pushing in his 
combined bilateral hands.  (JE 2:6).  He also was to perform no above shoulder work or 
“far reaching” with his bilateral arms.  (JE 2:6).  Ms. Anderson recommended that the 
claimant also ice the affected areas, take over-the-counter ibuprofen, supplemented 
with Tylenol as needed, and pursue physical therapy.  (JE 2:6-7).   
Mr. Pena returned to Genesis Occupational Medicine again on September 23, 
2020, for his bilateral shoulder pain.  (JE 2:8-10).  Mr. Pena noted that he had a 
“popping out” sensation with rotation of his right shoulder.  (JE 2:8).  He continued to 
rate his pain 7 out of 10.  (JE 2:8).  Overall, he felt his bilateral shoulders felt the same.  

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 5 
 
(JE 2:8).  His physical therapy had yet to be approved, and he was working light duty.  
(JE 2:8).  However, “due to the rapid rate,” Mr. Pena found the light duty work to be 
painful.  (JE 2:8).  Ms. Anderson’s diagnoses of Mr. Pena remained the same.  (JE 2:9).  
She continued to recommend that he remain on restricted duty.  (JE 2:9).  Her 
restrictions for Mr. Pena included 20 pounds maximum of lifting, pulling, or pushing with 
his bilateral hands for no more than 12 times per hour.  (JE 2:10).  He also was 
restricted from performing above shoulder work or reaching far with his bilateral arms.  
(JE 2:10).  Ms. Anderson continued to recommend a referral to physical therapy.  (JE 
2:10).   
On October 6, 2020, Ms. Anderson examined Mr. Pena again at Genesis 
Occupational Medicine for his complaints of bilateral shoulder pain.  (JE 2:11-13).  Mr. 
Pena noted that his issues remained unchanged, and that his right arm pain remained 7 
out of 10, while his left arm had pain of 6 out of 10.  (JE 2:11).  His pain was located in 
the anterior joint on both sides.  (JE 2:11).  He described radiating numbness down his 
right arm into his forearm when he lifted with his fist closed.  (JE 2:11).  He told Ms. 
Anderson that his right shoulder seemed to pop with movements that go from directly 
ahead of him to his side.  (JE 2:11).  He did not have these issues on the left side.  (JE 
2:11).  He still did not have physical therapy scheduled, and was working light duty in an 
8 hour shift, rather than a 10 to 12 hour shift.  (JE 2:11).  His diagnoses remained 
unchanged.  (JE 2:12).  Ms. Anderson kept Mr. Pena’s restrictions the same and kept 
him on restricted duty.  (JE 2:13).  She recommended that the claimant pursue physical 
therapy, and continue to take Ibuprofen and Tylenol if needed.  (JE 2:13).   
Mr. Pena returned to Genesis Occupational Medicine on October 20, 2020, for 
his ongoing bilateral shoulder issues.  (JE 2:14-17).  Mr. Pena continued to have the 
same pain issues, which were worse on his right than the left.  (JE 2:14).  He reported 
that he attended six physical therapy sessions with no significant improvement; 
however, he reported feeling stronger.  (JE 2:14).  He took ibuprofen and continued 
icing his shoulders.  (JE 2:14).  Mr. Pena told the provider that he was having more pain 
at work, which he attributed to repetitive lifting of more than 20 pounds “despite 
restrictions.”  (JE 2:14).  The provider reviewed the therapy notes and spoke to the 
therapist.  (JE 2:15).  The therapist was concerned that Mr. Pena had forward posture, 
which affected his shoulder movement and ability to improve.  (JE 2:15).  The therapist 
felt that Mr. Pena had signs of impingement.  (JE 2:15).  The therapist felt that there 
was “not much more” he could offer to the claimant.  (JE 2:15).  Upon physical 
examination, Mr. Pena still displayed 50 percent to 60 percent of full range of motion, 
and it was noted that his right shoulder popped when it was elevated over his head.  (JE 
2:15).  Mr. Pena’s diagnoses remained unchanged, but impingement syndrome of the 
right shoulder was added.  (JE 2:15).  The provider increased Mr. Pena’s restrictions to 
a maximum of 10 pounds lifting, pushing, and pulling in his bilateral hands for no more 
than 12 times per hour.  (JE 2:16).  He also was to perform no work above his shoulders 
and avoid reaching “far” with his bilateral arms.  (JE 2:16).  The provider recommended 
that the claimant continue in light duty work and referred the claimant to Dr. Frederick 
due to a lack of progress.  (JE 2:16).   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 6 
 
On October 28, 2020, Mr. Pena continued his care with Genesis Occupational 
Health.  (JE 2:17-20).  A new provider met with Mr. Pena during this visit.  (JE 2:17).  He 
continued to complain of bilateral shoulder pain, and noted that it was worse on the right 
than the left.  (JE 2:17).  Mr. Pena told the provider that he did not remember lifting a 
specific item before his right shoulder pain began.  (JE 2:17).  He indicated that the right 
shoulder pain was localized to the anterior and superior shoulder, while the left shoulder 
pain was in the superior shoulder.  (JE 2:17).  He found no improvement in his 
shoulders despite participation in physical therapy, icing his shoulder, and taking 
meloxicam.  (JE 2:17).  He worked an 8-hour shift with a 10-pound lifting restriction, and 
noted trouble with repetitive movement of his right shoulder.  (JE 2:17).  Upon 
examination, the provider did not find pain on motion or palpation in the right shoulder.  
(JE 2:19).  Mr. Pena also displayed normal strength, and normal range of motion.  (JE 
2:19).  His diagnosis was pain in the right and left shoulder.  (JE 2:19).  The provider 
kept Mr. Pena on restricted duty and increased his restrictions to no lifting over 5 
pounds with the right hand, and no more than 10 pounds with the left hand.  (JE 2:20).  
Mr. Pena also was to avoid above shoulder work, and was to be allowed to work at his 
own pace.  (JE 2:20).  The provider ordered an MRI arthrogram of the right shoulder to 
evaluate his issues.  (JE 2:20).  The provider recommended that the claimant continue 
to ice his right shoulder and take meloxicam.  (JE 2:20).  The provider opined, “[t]he 
patient’s report of mechanism of injury does not allow for a clear picture of causation.  
He reports a discrete event causing left shoulder pain and then right shoulder pain over 
then [sic] next few days without a specific mechanism of action.”  (JE 2:20).  She 
recommended that a job evaluation be done.  (JE 2:20).   
On November 27, 2020, Mr. Pena had an MR arthrogram of his right shoulder.  
(JE 1:3-4).  The interpreting physician found that Mr. Pena had an anterior inferior labral 
tear without underlying cartilage defect.  (JE 1:4).  The MR arthrogram showed an intact 
rotator cuff, and mild acromioclavicular osteoarthritis.  (JE 1:3).   
Camilla Frederick, M.D., examined the claimant on December 16, 2020, at 
Genesis Occupational Health, for his bilateral shoulder pain.  (JE 2:21-25).  Mr. Pena 
continued to complain of the right shoulder being worse than the left.  (JE 2:21).  He 
described his shoulders as 20 percent of his baseline for his right shoulder and 90 
percent for his left.  (JE 2:21).   Dr. Frederick found the claimant to have normal range 
of motion and normal strength in his right shoulder.  (JE 2:23).  She diagnosed the 
claimant with pain in his left shoulder and a superior glenoid labrum lesion of the right 
shoulder.  (JE 2:23).  Dr. Frederick provided updated work restriction to include no 
above shoulder work, and no lifting over 20 pounds.  (JE 2:23, 25).  Dr. Frederick 
recommended that a job evaluation be done to determine causation, and after that “will 
[sic] decide about shoulder.”  (JE 2:23).  She recommended that he return to her office 
in two weeks for a potential injection.  (JE 2:23).   
On December 30, 2020, Mr. Pena returned to Dr. Frederick’s office.  (JE 2:26-
30).  He continued to complain of issues with his right shoulder while indicating that his 
left shoulder returned to 100 percent.  (JE 2:26).  Upon physical examination, Dr. 
Frederick again found no pain on motion, and normal range of motion and strength in 
the right shoulder.  (JE 2:28).  Mr. Pena felt pain with palpation of the right biceps.  (JE 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 7 
 
2:28).  Dr. Frederick’s diagnoses remained unchanged.  (JE 2:28).  Mr. Pena’s 
temporary restrictions remained unchanged.  (JE 2:28, 30).  Dr. Frederick continued to 
recommend a job evaluation, and requested that the claimant again return in two 
weeks.  (JE 2:28).   
On January 7, 2021, Genesis at Work completed a functional job analysis for Mr. 
Pena’s position with LeClaire.  (Defendants’ Exhibit E:22-23).  Genesis found three 
essential job functions for Mr. Pena’s position: standing for job completion; moving parts 
through the production cycle to complete part manufacturing; and, using hand tools, 
band saws and grinders to complete part manufacturing as needed.  (DE E:22).   Mr. 
Pena had to stand and walk continuously as part of his job.  (DE E:22).  He lifted 
occasionally, which was defined as 6 percent to 33 percent of the time.  (DE E:22).  
Parts weighed between 5 pounds and 55 pounds.  (DE E:22).  On the date that Mr. 
Pena was working, the report indicates that the claimant worked with three different 
parts, the heaviest of which weighed 55 pounds.  (DE E:22).  Moving of parts used waist 
to waist transfers and only is lowered into a parts basket upon completion.  (DE E:22).  
This also only lasted about 8 minutes, which results in “down time from lifting activities.”  
(DE E:22).  The report noted that Mr. Pena also occasionally moved parts around a 
work surface, and reached with his arms close to his body.  (DE E:22).  This was done 
mostly when parts were removed from the mold.  (DE E:22).  During this time, the 
analysis noted that his job functions were done below shoulder height.  (DE E:22).  The 
examiner also noted, “[f]rom the observations done on this date, there are no areas of 
concern,” with regard to the claimant’s position having caused his shoulder injury.  (DE 
E:23).  Due to the lifting being done at waist level, the examiner opined that there was 
“no excessive strain at the shoulder.”  (DE E:23).  Based upon this review, the lack of 
OSHA risk factors for ergonomics, and the AMA Guide to Disease and Injury Causation, 
Curtis Witt, PT, opined that the claimant’s bilateral shoulder pain was not work related.  
(DE E:23).   
Mr. Pena discussed the functional job analysis provided by the defendants.  
(Testimony).  He testified that he lifts parts that are heavier than the 50 to 60 pounds 
mentioned in the report.  (Testimony).  He also disagreed with the report, which says 
that his work is done at waist height, while in reality, he believes that his work is done at 
chest height.  (Testimony).  He testified further that there are uncomfortable positions in 
which he has to place his body.  (Testimony).  Finally, he testified that he had to spend 
50 percent of his day lifting parts, and not 30 percent like the report indicated.  
(Testimony).   
Dr. Frederick examined Mr. Pena again on January 13, 2021, for his continued 
shoulder complaints.  (JE 2:31-35).  His pain had not improved in his right shoulder.  (JE 
2:31).  He remained at 20 percent of his baseline.  (JE 2:31).  Dr. Frederick explained 
the results of the previous MRI and the job evaluation and noted that Mr. Pena had a 
labrum tear and that the job evaluation “showed no RF.”  (JE 2:31).  Mr. Pena again 
demonstrated a normal range of motion in his right shoulder, with no pain on motion.  
(JE 2:33).  He also had normal strength.  (JE 2:33).  He demonstrated pain on palpation 
over his “biceps, pec [sic], and trap.”  (JE 2:33).  Dr. Frederick opined that the 
examination did not indicate a labrum issue during this visit, and noted that the 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 8 
 
examination was “more [indicative] of impingement.”  (JE 2:31, 33).  She recommended 
physical therapy, and a possible injection.  (JE 2:31).  She did not make any changes to 
the claimant’s temporary restrictions.  (JE 2:35).   
On January 20, 2021, Dr. Frederick responded to a check-box type letter from 
Paradigm regarding the claimant’s condition.  (DE F:24-25).  Dr. Frederick opined that 
the claimant’s right labral tear found on the November 27, 2020, MRI was not causally 
related to the claimant’s work activities.  (DE F:24).  She reiterated this in response to 
several other questions.  (DE F:24).  Finally, Dr. Frederick hand wrote, “he has a non 
work related labral tear that is symptomatic.  He needs care for this.  I placed temporary 
restrictions allowing him time to get into Ortho [sic] or PMD [sic].  I rec [sic] he see Ortho 
[sic] as could go to WI clinic – expediting care.”  (DE F:24).   
Mr. Pena had physical therapy on February 1, 2021.  (JE 3:36-37).  He indicated 
feeling about the same after his initial evaluation.  (JE 3:36).  He told the therapist at 
Genesis that he shoveled snow all weekend, and “had to take frequent rest breaks due 
to shoulder pain.”  (JE 3:36).  Manual therapy helped improve some of his symptoms.  
(JE 3:36).   
LeClaire issued a letter on February 1, 2021, denying liability for the shoulder 
injury.  (CE 5:15).  They indicated in the letter that this was not a work-related injury.  
(CE 5:15).   
On February 10, 2021, Mr. Pena had another therapy visit.  (JE 3:38-39).  He felt 
good after the previous session.  (JE 3:38).  He reported that he could perform all of his 
activities of daily living comfortably, including washing his hair, vacuuming, and reaching 
overhead.  (JE 3:38).  He only felt pain when he was required to do forceful activities 
“over time.”  (JE 3:38).  He also indicated that his shoulder fatigued with prolonged 
activity.  (JE 3:38).   
Kristyn Darmafall, M.D. of Orthopaedic Specialists examined the claimant on 
February 10, 2021.  (JE 5:54-55).  Mr. Pena complained of constant sharp pain in his 
right shoulder, which radiated to the right anterior aspect of his shoulder.  (JE 5:54).  He 
told Dr. Darmafall that he was carrying a part when his injury occurred.  (JE 5:54).  He 
also indicated that his symptoms were aggravated by overhead lifting.  (JE 5:54).  Upon 
examination, Dr. Darmafall found no tenderness to palpation at the AC joint, but did find 
some at the biceps tendon.  (JE 5:55).  His rotator cuff strength was found to be normal.  
(JE 5:55).  Dr. Darmafall reviewed the imaging done to date, as well.  (JE 5:55).  She 
diagnosed Mr. Pena with right shoulder instability, anterior subluxation of the right 
humerus, and pain in the right shoulder.  (JE 5:55).  The doctor recommended an 
injection, and ordered an additional MRI and arthrogram.  (JE 5:55).     
Mr. Pena had an additional right shoulder MRI arthrogram on February 19, 2021, 
as prescribed by Dr. Darmafall.  (JE 4:50-53).  Nicholas Ludwig, M.D. reviewed the MRI 
report.  (JE 4:50).  The results were compared with those of the previous x-rays and 
MRI.  (JE 4:50).  The MRI showed no high-grade rotator cuff tear, but mild bursal 
surface fraying of the supraspinatus.  (JE 4:51).  It also showed an intact, “non-subluxed 
intra-articular long head biceps tendon” with minimal tendinosis.  (JE 4:51).  Third, Dr. 
Ludwig found anterior mid to anterior-inferior labral tearing and posterior-superior to 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 9 
 
posterior labral fraying and tearing.  (JE 4:51).  There also was small fluid accumulation 
and mild acromioclavicular joint arthrosis.  (JE 4:51).   
Mr. Pena had additional physical therapy on February 22, 2021.  (JE 3:40-41).  
He had been feeling good, and performed his home exercise plan.  (JE 3:40).  He had 
no issues with activities of daily living.  (JE 3:40).  He hoped to return to work, but “right 
now his shoulder fatigues with repetitive activity.”  (JE 3:40).   
Dr. Darmafall examined the claimant again on February 23, 2021, at which time 
she reviewed his MRI results with him.  (JE 5:56-58).  Dr. Darmafall opined that the 
clinical and imaging findings indicated a diagnosis of multidirectional instability.  (JE 
5:57).  She recommended conservative management, which she opined had “close to 
an 80% chance of success.”  (JE 5:57).  She noted that this could take 6 to 12 months 
to fully heal.  (JE 5:57).  Dr. Darmafall also released the claimant to work full duty and 
noted that the injury was not work related.  (JE 5:58; DE G:26).   
Mr. Pena returned for more physical therapy on February 24, 2021.  (JE 3:42-
43).  He indicated that he saw his chiropractor and reviewed results of an MRI.  (JE 
3:42).  Mr. Pena indicated that someone told him that his injury “is not really bad,” and 
that he was told he may benefit from physical therapy.  (JE 3:42).  He performed all 
strengthening exercises with no aggravation, though he reported fatigue by the end of 
the session.  (JE 3:42).   
On March 12, 2021, Mr. Pena had more physical therapy.  (JE 3:44-45).  Mr. 
Pena reported feeling good after his therapy sessions.  (JE 3:44).  He planned to cut a 
tree down in the coming week.  (JE 3:44).  He performed all exercises without increased 
pain, but reported fatigue by the end of the session.  (JE 3:44).  The therapist opined 
that the claimant demonstrated good endurance during the exercise, but continued to 
fatigue with repetitive functional activities at home.  (JE 3:44).   
Mr. Pena returned for physical therapy on March 22, 2021.  (JE 3:46-47).  He 
reported having no pain during this visit.  (JE 3:46).  He attributed this to not having to 
do much work with his shoulder.  (JE 3:46).  Mr. Pena demonstrated an ability to 
perform “high level overhead shoulder activity even after fatiguing the musculature.”  
(JE 3:46).   
On March 31, 2021, the claimant returned for another therapy session.  (JE 3:48-
49).  He reported that he returned to work and had no increase in his pain.  (JE 3:48).  
He was scheduled for 40 hours that week, and had not returned to his traditional 50-
hour week, yet.  (JE 3:48).  He continued to perform his home exercise plan every day, 
and asked about work restrictions.  (JE 3:48).  The therapist opined that the claimant 
achieved his functional goals and discharged Mr. Pena to a home program.  (JE 3:48).   
On April 20, 2021, Mr. Pena returned to Dr. Darmafall’s office.  (JE 5:59-60).  He 
noted that he completed physical therapy for his right shoulder with “moderate relief.”  
(JE 5:59).  He rated his pain 4 out of 10 and demonstrated a full range of motion.  (JE 
5:59).  Mr. Pena requested “to possibly see Dr. Kari’s office for pain relief.”  (JE 5:59).  
Dr. Darmafall planned to order “an image guided corticosteroid injection,” and 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 10 
 
recommended that the claimant continue his home exercise program.  (JE 5:60).  Dr. 
Darmafall discharged the claimant to return on an as needed basis.  (JE 5:60).   
Upon the arrangement of Mr. Pena’s counsel, Mr. Pena visited Richard Kreiter, 
M.D., for an IME on March 15, 2022.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 3:9-12).  Dr. Kreiter issued a 
report subsequent to his examination of the claimant.  (CE 3:9-12).  Dr. Kreiter practices 
in orthopedics and is board certified in orthopedic surgery.  (CE 4:14).   
Dr. Kreiter reviewed the claimant’s medical history.  (CE 3:11-12).  Dr. Kreiter 
opined that the claimant had chronic pain and instability of his right shoulder with labral 
fraying and no significant rotator cuff tear.  (CE 3:12).  He found the claimant to have 
tenderness in and around the right AC joint and minimal tenderness in the biceps 
groove.  (CE 3:12).  Dr. Kreiter found the claimant to have active right shoulder flexion 
to 150 degrees, abduction to 110 degrees, external rotation to 60 degrees, and internal 
rotation to the lumbosacral spine.  (CE 3:12).  Dr. Kreiter also noted that the claimant 
had “good” strength in all of his muscle groups with abduction, internal and external 
rotation.  (CE 3:12).  Mr. Pena complained that he could not sleep on his right side due 
to his shoulder pain.  (CE 3:12).  He also had no dislocations.  (CE 3:12).   
Dr. Kreiter opined that the claimant had cumulative trauma to his right shoulder 
as a result of his work with LeClaire.  (CE 3:9).  Dr. Kreiter indicated that this was 
because Mr. Pena performed repetitive activity, “sometimes in awkward positions, with 
the right upper extremity for three years.”  (CE 3:9).  Mr. Pena described lifting 
aluminum casting weighing between 50 and 80 pounds positioned just above chest 
level on his right.  (CE 3:9).  Dr. Kreiter noted, “[i]t is my opinion on or about August 31, 
2020 the instability increased and he became more painful.”  (CE 3:9).  Dr. Kreiter 
continued by opining that lifting 50 to 80 pound aluminum castings from slightly above 
the chest level to the floor on a repetitive basis aggravated the labral structures of Mr. 
Pena’s right shoulder.  (CE 3:9).  Dr. Kreiter continued, “[t]he humeral head butting 
against the labral structure accelerated the wear of the labral tissue, leading to the 
instability now present in the right shoulder.”  (CE 3:9).  At the time of the examination, 
Mr. Pena’s right shoulder remained unstable.  (CE 3:9).  Due to this, Dr. Kreiter 
recommended that the claimant have a second opinion at the University of Iowa 
orthopedic department to see if a “capsular reconstruction” might stabilize his shoulder.   
Dr. Kreiter used table 16-26 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, to provide a permanent impairment rating for Mr. Pena.  (CE 
3:10).  Dr. Kreiter used this because of Mr. Pena’s history of acute and cumulative 
trauma and issues that were reproducible on shoulder stability testing.  (CE 3:10).  Dr. 
Kreiter opined that this equated to a 12 percent upper extremity impairment, or a 7 
percent whole person impairment.  (CE 3:10).  Dr. Kreiter provided one restriction, 
which was that the claimant should refrain from using any overhead throwing-type 
motion with his right arm.  (CE 3:10).   
Mr. Pena testified that he spent about an hour with Dr. Kreiter for his IME.  
(Testimony).  Dr. Kreiter told Mr. Pena that he should go see a specialist in Iowa City for 
his right shoulder.  (Testimony).  Mr. Pena would like to see a specialist for his right 
shoulder so that he can “find a solution to this.”  (Testimony).   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 11 
 
On June 8, 2022, Matthew Bollier, M.D., F.A.O.A., an orthopedic surgeon 
affiliated with Musculoskeletal Consulting, LLC, performed a records review on behalf of 
the defendants.  (DE H:27-31).  Mr. Pena testified that he never visited with Dr. Bollier.  
(Testimony).  Dr. Bollier diagnosed Mr. Pena with right shoulder chronic anterior inferior 
labral tear and resolved left shoulder pain.  (DE H:30).  Dr. Bollier continued by opining 
that Mr. Pena’s bilateral shoulder pain was “not caused or aggravated by a work injury 
at LeClaire Manufacturing in 2020.”  (DE H:30).  Dr. Bollier agreed with Dr. Frederick’s 
causation opinion and Mr. Witt’s causation analysis.  (DE H:30).  Dr. Bollier continued, 
“[t]his opinion is based on the fact that there was no discrete work injury to either 
shoulder, no clear mechanism of injury, and no acute structural tearing on the shoulder 
MRI.”  (DE H:30).  Dr. Bollier then opined that the anterior inferior chronic labral tear 
seen on the February of 2021 MRI of the right shoulder was “not caused by a work 
injury.”  (DE H:30).  This is because, according to Dr. Bollier, “[i]t is very common to see 
small non-displaced shoulder labral tears on MRI that are related to wear and tear over 
time.”  (DE H:30).  Dr. Bollier noted that there were no signs of an acute labral tear on 
the MRI, such as bone bruising, a Hill-Sachs lesion, or bony edema.  (DE H:30).   
Dr. Bollier opined that the claimant may require treatment for a chronic right 
shoulder labral tear, but that this was not work related.  (DE H:31).  According to Dr. 
Bollier, Mr. Pena required no further treatment for his shoulder related to a work injury.  
(DE H:31).  Dr. Bollier offered no restrictions for either the left or right shoulder, and 
allowed Mr. Pena to continue working.  (DE H:31).  Dr. Bollier placed Mr. Pena at MMI 
effective January 13, 2021, and concluded that Mr. Pena was not doing damage to the 
chronic anterior inferior labral tear by using his right arm.  (DE H:31).  Dr. Bollier 
concluded that the claimant had no permanent partial disability to either upper extremity 
based upon the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  
(DE H:31).   
During his time off, the claimant applied for short-term disability.  (DE I; DE D:21).  
The application for short-term disability did not arise out of employment.  (DE D:21).  As 
a result, the application was silent as to whether a workers’ compensation claim was 
filed.  (DE D:21).  Of note, it is unclear whether the claimant filled out the form himself, 
and there is no indication regarding this issue.  (DE D:21).   
Subsequent to his injury, the employer accommodated Mr. Pena’s restrictions.  
(Testimony).  First, they had Mr. Pena cleaning up different areas of the plant.  
(Testimony).  Once his restrictions decreased, they “moved him along.”  (Testimony).  
He is now working full time with no restrictions.  (Testimony).  He also has not 
requested any devices for accommodation.  (Testimony).   
As of the time of his hearing, Mr. Pena continued to work for LeClaire.  
(Testimony).  He worked full duty with no restrictions.  (Testimony).  He worked full-time 
hours including overtime, which amounted to about 58 hours per week.  (Testimony).  
He testified that he uses air hammers at work, and that the vibrations from the air 
hammers cause him to tire and lose strength.  (Testimony).  He worked in a saw 
position where he cuts parts.  (Testimony).   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 12 
 
When he is at home, he has problems mowing his lawn.  (Testimony).  Keeping 
his right shoulder in certain positions causes him to have pain.  (Testimony).  He 
continued to perform his home exercise plan and lifting small dumbbells.  (Testimony).   
Ralf Valle testified that he worked for LeClaire since 1999.  (Testimony).  He 
worked a variety of positions before progressing to his current management position.  
(Testimony).  He is currently the molding manager.  (Testimony).  He speaks to each 
individual employee, and then supports supervisors.  (Testimony).  At the time of the 
claimant’s alleged injury, Mr. Valle was a mold supervisor.  (Testimony).  He was the 
claimant’s direct supervisor.  (Testimony).  He testified that on the alleged date of injury, 
Mr. Pena was working on parts that weighed 50 pounds.  (Testimony).  He indicated 
that he checked the production schedule for that day, which indicated the weight of the 
part in question.  (Testimony).  He further testified that Mr. Pena would drag the part 
from one table to the next, would saw off certain parts, and then would pick up and 
move the part.  (Testimony).  The table upon which Mr. Pena worked is at waist height, 
according to Mr. Valle.  (Testimony).  He felt that Mr. Pena is a good worker, and a 
credible person.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Causation 
Before beginning any analysis of the other issues, I must first examine whether 
the claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of his employment with LeClaire.  
The claimant contends that his job duties caused his right shoulder injury.  The 
defendants allege that the claimant had a personal condition, and that his alleged right 
shoulder injury did not arise out of, or in the course of his employment with LeClaire.   
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, that the employee’s injuries arose out of, and in the 
course of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 
528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place and 
circumstances of the injury.  Id.  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 13 
 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment merely 
because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically prescribed 
task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act which he deems 
necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer.   
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  Rose v. 
John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  It is well 
established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a preexisting condition or 
disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability found to exist,” the 
claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 
900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held,  
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to finally 
disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is whether 
the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the employment was a 
proximate contributing cause.   
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).   
There also is some discussion that the claimant may have sustained a 
cumulative trauma.  While the claimant does not explicitly allege this, they seem to 
imply that the claimant may have sustained a cumulative trauma.   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 14 
 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part of all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  However, increased disability from a prior injury, 
even if brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury.  St. Luke’s Hosp. 
v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 
(Iowa 1999); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by Iowa Code 85A is specifically excluded from the 
definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code 85A.8; Iowa Code 
85A.14. 
 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the facts may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent.  The statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  Herrera 
v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 
N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 
1985).   
First, I must consider whether the claimant’s alleged right shoulder injury arose 
out of his employment with LeClaire.  The claimant testified that he was working for 
about two hours, and had lifted several parts weighing, what he alleged, to be upwards 
of 80 pounds.  He testified that he felt a pain in his shoulders while lifting the part.  He 
also felt a pop.  He also testified that the parts were hot and had to be carried away 
from his body in order to avoid the heat.  There is also a contemporaneous report and 
the claimant’s supervisor testified that the claimant reported an injury on this date.  
Using his arms and lifting items was a part of the claimant’s employment with LeClaire.  
Therefore, an injury to a shoulder is a rational consequence of a hazard connected with 
his employment.  Additionally, Dr. Kreiter concluded that the claimant’s injury was 
caused by his work at LeClaire.  Dr. Kreiter further concluded that the claimant’s injury 
was the result of repetitive or cumulative trauma.   
On the other hand, I am concerned with the inconsistent reports of the claimant 
to his medical providers.  While the claimant does not speak fluent English, his 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 15 
 
providers utilized translators when meeting with him.  First, the claimant has 
consistently told his providers, including Dr. Kreiter, that the part he was lifting weighed 
80 pounds.  The claimant attempts to explain this away in his posthearing brief by 
arguing that this amount includes other parts of the cast and therefore his estimate is 
accurate.  Mr. Valle testified that he reviewed the specifications for the parts cast at the 
time that the claimant alleges the injury, and noted that they weighed 50 pounds.  He 
also testified that the claimant would drag a part from one table to the next, and saw off 
certain parts of the casting, before lifting the casting.  Therefore, the claimant’s 
argument that the part weighed 80 pounds does not seem accurate.   
During his September 9, 2020, visit to Genesis, the claimant indicated his right 
shoulder pain began on August 31, 2020, and his left shoulder pain began several days 
later.  He was consistent with his hearing testimony insofar as he described carrying an 
80-pound part; however, there was some inconsistency in that he testified at the hearing 
that he immediately dropped the part.  He told the provider that the part did not slip or 
jerk.   
When he met with a new provider at Genesis on October 28, 2020, through a 
translator, Mr. Pena noted that he did not remember lifting a specific item before his 
right shoulder pain.  He also reported that his pain began in his left side, and then 
progressed to his right side several days later.  He again told the provider that he lifted 
parts up to 80 pounds from chest height to the floor.  This does not seem to align with 
the other evidence in the record.  The provider at this visit opined that Mr. Pena’s report 
as to his mechanism of injury did not paint a clear picture of causation.  She 
recommended a job evaluation and an MRI.  That MRI revealed an anterior inferior 
labral tear without an underlying cartilage defect.   
On December 30, 2020, Dr. Frederick saw the claimant.  He again described 
carrying an 80-pound part when he felt a pop in his bilateral shoulders.  He was 
consistent in that he denied that the part slipped or jerked before his pain occurred.   
Genesis at Work performed a functional job analysis.  I did not find this to be of 
much importance in reviewing the causation elements of this particular case.  However, 
it was the basis for Dr. Frederick’s opinion that the claimant’s right labral tear was not 
causally related to the claimant’s work activities.  She recommended that he see an 
orthopedic doctor for his non-work-related right shoulder issues.   
The claimant also saw Dr. Darmafall.  Dr. Darmafall reviewed the claimant’s 
clinical and imaging findings, and diagnosed him with multidirectional instability.  She 
also released him to full duty and opined that the claimant’s injury was not work related.   
The only provider to opine that the claimant’s right shoulder injury was related to 
his work was Dr. Kreiter.  Dr. Kreiter was retained by the claimant to provide opinions 
regarding the claimant’s condition.  Of note, there are more inconsistencies with Dr. 
Kreiter’s examination of the claimant.  Dr. Kreiter opined that the claimant had a 
cumulative trauma to his right shoulder, and that the claimant had right shoulder 
instability which increased and became more painful on August 31, 2020.  Dr. Kreiter’s 
report indicates that Mr. Pena told him that his pain “came on rather slowly, increasing 
over time.”  (CE 3:11).  This contradicts Mr. Pena’s testimony and his reports to other 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 16 
 
providers.  Mr. Pena testified to having no shoulder issues prior to August 31, 2020.  It 
calls into question the validity of Dr. Kreiter’s opinions and the veracity of Mr. Pena’s 
testimony.   
Perhaps the most convincing piece of evidence comes from Dr. Bollier.  While 
Mr. Pena was never examined by Dr. Bollier, Dr. Bollier reviewed medical records, and 
both of the right shoulder MRIs.  It appears from the report and Dr. Bollier’s commentary 
on the same, that he reviewed the actual MRI studies.  Dr. Bollier’s report is based upon 
the objective medical records, and was not influenced by some of the inconsistencies 
noted above.  Dr. Bollier opined that the February of 2021 MRI showed an anterior 
inferior small chronic labral tear.  According to Dr. Bollier, this was very common and 
related to wear and tear over time.  Dr. Bollier indicated that there were no signs of 
acute labral tear in the right shoulder, such as bone bruising, a Hill-Sachs lesion, or 
bony edema.  Most convincingly, Dr. Bollier indicated that acute anterior labral tears 
were caused by shoulder dislocation or subluxation.   
Dr. Bollier concluded that the claimant did not require any treatment for his right 
shoulder that was related to a work injury.  He opined that the claimant required 
additional care, but that it was for his chronic, non-work-related condition.   
When taking Dr. Bollier’s opinions in conjunction with the opinions of other 
treating doctors, and the inconsistencies in the claimant’s iterations of the mechanism of 
his injury, I find that the claimant failed to carry his burden to show that the right 
shoulder injury arose out of his employment with LeClaire.   
Having ruled that the claimant’s injury did not arise out of his employment with 
LeClaire, any discussions regarding whether the injury occurred in the course of his 
employment with LeClaire are moot.  Additionally, whether the injury caused temporary 
disability and/or permanent disability and the accompanying disputes with regard to 
those issues is also moot.   
Payment of Medical Expenses 
The claimant requests reimbursement for certain medical expenses.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 1975).   
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27, claimant is entitled to payment of reasonable 
medical expenses incurred for treatment of a work injury.  Claimant is entitled to an 
order of reimbursement if he/she has paid those expenses.  Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider.  See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 17 
 
 
In cases where the employer’s medical plan covers the medical expenses, 
claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment costs; 
otherwise, the defendants are ordered to make payments directly to the provider.  See 
Krohn, 420 N.W.2d at 463.  Where medical payments are made from a plan to which 
the employer did not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment.  Midwest 
Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold 
that the commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past 
medical expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant 
independent of any employer contribution.”).  See also Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 
873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 2015)(Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323.   
The employee has the burden of proof to show medical charges are reasonable 
and necessary, and must produce evidence to that effect.  Poindexter v. Grant’s Carpet 
Service, I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Decisions, No. 1, at 195 (1984); McClellan v. 
Iowa S. Util., 91-92, IAWC, 266-272 (App. 1992).    
The employee has the burden of proof in showing that treatment is related to the 
injury.  Auxier v. Woodward State Hospital School, 266 N.W.2d 139 (Iowa 1978), 
Watson v. Hanes Border Company , No. 1 Industrial Comm’r report 356, 358 (1980) 
(claimant failed to prove medical charges were related to the injury where medical 
records contained nothing related to that injury)  See also Bass v. Vieth Construction 
Corp., File No 5044438 (App. May 27, 2016)(Claimant failed to prove causal connection 
between the injury and claimed medical expenses); Becirevic v. Trinity Health, File No. 
5063498 (Arb. December 28, 2018) (Claimant failed to recover on unsupported medical 
bills) 
 
Nothing in Iowa Code section 85.27 prohibits an injured employee from selecting 
his or her own medical care at his or her own expense following an injury.  Bell Bros. 
Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 205 (Iowa 2010).  In order to 
recover the reasonable expenses of the care, the employee must still prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that unauthorized care was reasonable and beneficial.  
Id.  The Court in Bell Bros. concluded that unauthorized medical care is beneficial if it 
provides a “more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by 
the care authorized by the employer.”  Id.   
 
As previously discussed, the claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that his right shoulder injury arose out of his employment with LeClaire.  
Therefore, the medical care regarding the right shoulder would be the responsibility of 
the claimant.   
Reimbursement for IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 18 
 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.   
. . .  
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.   
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).   
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify for 
reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008).  An opinion finding a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero 
percent impairment rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 
(Iowa App. 2021).   
 
The claimant requests reimbursement for the IME of Dr. Kreiter.  They argue 
that, even if causation is not found, the IME should be reimbursed.  I previously found 
that the claimant did not sustain a right shoulder injury that arose out of his employment 
with LeClaire.  Based upon the claimant failing to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that his injury arose out of his employment with LeClaire, he is not entitled to 
reimbursement for the costs of Dr. Kreiter’s IME.   
Alternate Care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obligated to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 19 
 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 
1997).   
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.”  Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)).  “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), 
our legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the 
competing interests of their employers.”  Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing 
Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 202, 207; IBP, Inc. v. Harker, 633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 
2001)).   
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 19, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening Decision, June 
17, 1986).   
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.”  Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003)(emphasis in original).  Such 
employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Iowa Code section 85.27(4).   
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  An 
injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack thereof) may 
share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties cannot reach an 
agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order the care.”  Id.  “Determining what care 
is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123; Pirelli-
Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436.  As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable.  Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 
N.W.2d at 436.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 20 
 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such care 
unreasonable.  Id.   
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that, “when evidence is presented to the 
commissioner that the employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and 
that such care is ‘inferior or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the 
employee, . . . the commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate 
care.”  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 437.   
 
The claimant requested alternate care in the form of a second opinion from an 
orthopedic doctor at the University of Iowa, as recommended by Dr. Kreiter.  Having 
previously found that the claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that his shoulder condition arose out of his employment with LeClaire, I likewise find that 
the claimant is not entitled to alternate care. 
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 12.  Costs 
are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 
876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the 
examination itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa 
Supreme Court reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing 
because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying 
medical expenses associated with the examination do not become costs of a report 
needed for a hearing, just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  
Id.  (noting additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of 
the underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report 
or deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. Dec., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File 
No. 5056857 (App. Dec., September 27, 2019).   

PENA V. LECLAIRE MANUFACTURING CO. 
Page 21 
 
 
The claimant requests reimbursement of costs as follows: 
 Filing Fee 
 
 
 
 
 
$   100.00 
 Certified Mail 
 
 
 
 
 
$     13.34 
 IME Report of Dr. Kreiter 
 
 
 
$1,000.00 
 Hearing Transcript 
 
 
 
 
Left Blank 
Total:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
$1,113.34 
 
In my discretion, I decline to award the claimant costs in this matter. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this ___25th _ day of October, 2022. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Andrew Bribriesco (via WCES) 
Lori Scardina Utsinger (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
