Case Number: 5059031
Case Title:  CORBIN, STEPHEN V. PRO PLATINUM CONST & REM
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Corbin, Stephen-5059031.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
 
ATLANTIC STATES INSURANCE 
COMPANY AND 
PRO PLATINUM CONSTRUCTION AND 
REMODELING, LLC, 
 
Petitioners, 
 
vs. 
 
STEPHEN CORBIN, 
 
Respondent. 
 
 
                 Case No. CVCV060094 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER ON JUDICIAL  
REVIEW  
 
 
Petitioners Atlantic States Insurance Company and Pro Platinum Construction and 
Remodeling Inc. (together, Petitioner) filed a petition for judicial review (the Petition) 
from a final decision of the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner (the 
Commissioner).   
Telephonic oral argument was held on September 4, 2020.  Petitioner was 
represented by attorney William H. Larson for attorney Timothy Clausen.  Respondent 
was represented by attorney Paul Salabert, Jr.   Oral argument was not reported. 
Upon review of the Petition and the court file, including the certified agency 
record, and after careful consideration of the respective arguments of counsel, the court 
enters the following Order. 
BACKGROUND FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS 
Respondent filed a workers’ compensation claim against Petitioner following a 
workplace injury to Respondent’s right leg.  This matter proceeded to an arbitration 
hearing on July 26, 2018, in front of a deputy commissioner (the Deputy).  Contested 
issues at hearing included: (1) whether an employer-employee relationship existed 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
between Petitioner and Respondent at the time of the alleged injury; (2) the extent of 
Respondent’s entitlement to industrial disability/permanent partial disability benefits; and 
(3) the extent of Respondent’s entitlement to medical benefits.  The Deputy entered an 
arbitration decision on February 28, 2019, for Respondent.  Petitioners sought intra-
agency review. The Commissioner entered an appeal decision on April 6, 2020, affirming 
the Deputy’s decision. 
The single issue for the court to decide on judicial review is whether the 
Commissioner erred in finding that an employer-employee relationship existed between 
Petitioner and Respondent at the time of Respondent’s work related injury.  
The following facts were found by the Deputy at the arbitration hearing and 
affirmed by the Commissioner:  Respondent testified that he was 35 years old.  (Tr. at p. 
9).  He is not married and has no children.  (Tr. at p. 9).  He lives in Williamsburg, Iowa.  
(Tr. at p. 9).  He completed the twelfth grade and has no other certificates or degrees.  
(Tr. at pp. 9-10).  Prior to working for Petitioner, Respondent worked doing lawn care, 
manual labor, and some retail work.  (Tr. at p. 10).   
Respondent began working for Petitioner on July 18, 2016.  (Tr. at p. 11).  
Respondent is an LLC operated by Mike Moulds and his wife. (Tr. at p. 65).  Respondent 
located his employment through his brother who worked for Petitioner.  (Tr. at p. 11).   
Respondent testified that prior to starting work for Petitioner he did not negotiate 
his pay.  He was told by Mr. Moulds that he would be paid $12.00 an hour.  (Tr. at p. 12).  
He would work 40 hour per week and usually would work overtime.  (Tr. at p. 12).  He 
was hired to do a variety of tasks including setting mobile homes, working with sub-
contractors like ServiceMaster, and doing demolition work.  (Tr. at p. 12).   
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
Respondent testified that prior to working for Petitioner he did not have a separate 
business doing that type of work.  (Tr. at pp. 12-13; 83).  In fact, Respondent had not 
done that type of work prior to working for Petitioner.  (Tr. at p. 13).  He was not 
working anywhere else while employed with Petitioner.  (Tr. at p. 13).  While working 
for Petitioner, Respondent did not have any employees and didn’t pay any employees.  
(Tr. at pp. 13; 84).  Respondent did not recall signing an independent contractor 
agreement when he started working for Petitioner on July 18, 2016.  (Tr. at p. 13). 
On July 18, 2016, Respondent presented for work at 7:30 a.m. in Petitioner’s 
conference room where Mr. Moulds assigned all Petitioner’s employees their daily jobs.  
(Tr. at pp.13-14).  Mr. Moulds would tell employees what needed to get done, would tell 
them what trucks to take, and would let them know what materials need to be loaded or 
picked up.  (Tr. at p. 14).  Respondent was not hired to do a specific job but rather a 
variety of jobs.  (Tr. at p. 14).   
Mr. Moulds told Respondent that he only need to bring a tool bag with hammers 
and a pair of pliers to work.  (Tr. at p. 14).  Petitioner provided all of the power tools, 
large equipment, trucks and trailers needed to perform work.  (Tr. at pp. 14; 80).  The 
work vehicles provided were marked with Petitioner’s name on them.  (Tr. at p. 14).   
Respondent testified that Mr. Moulds supervised his work.  (Tr. at p. 14).  He further 
testified that he took directions from Mr. Moulds.  (Tr. at pp. 15; 88).   Respondent did 
not personally supervise anyone.  (Tr. at p. 14).  Respondent did not control any of the 
work that was to be done.  (Tr. at p. 15).  Respondent’s schedule was set by Mr. Moulds.  
(Tr. at p. 15).   
Petitioner paid Respondent by check every two weeks.  (Tr. at p. 16).  He was 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
paid by the hour for work performed and not by the job.  (Tr. at pp. 16; 84).  He was 
required to fill out a time sheet provided by Mr. Moulds to get paid.  (Tr. at p. 16; Ex. 3 at 
pp. 18-74).  Claimant was also given one week of vacation.  (Tr. at pp. 18-19).  Mr. 
Moulds testified that he did not give vacation pay or at least it would not be identified as 
such on pay checks.  (Tr. at p. 72).  He would, however, give out bonuses.  (Tr. at p. 72).   
Respondent testified that he was provided a company credit card with his and 
Petitioner’s name on it.  (Tr. at p. 21; Ex. 4).  Petitioner would pay the credit card bill.  
(Tr. at p. 22).  Respondent would use the credit card to purchase materials needed for the 
jobs and Mr. Moulds would instruct Respondent about what materials to purchase.  (Tr. 
at pp. 22; 80).  In addition to the credit card, Respondent was given keys to Petitioner’s 
business.  (Tr. at pp. 22-23).   
Respondent testified that he would set mobile homes and helped with demo work 
for Petitioner.  (Tr. at p. 23).  In setting up mobile homes, Respondent would haul blocks, 
level them, and put anchors and skirting on them.  (Tr. at p. 24).  With regard to demo 
work, he would demo mobile homes and haul materials from the demo to the landfill.  
(Tr. at p. 24).  All of the equipment and vehicles claimant used for those jobs belonged to 
Petitioner.  (Tr. at p. 25).   Mr. Moulds described Respondent’s job as a laborer, a “grunt 
guy,” with no skills.  (Tr. at p. 76).  According to Mr. Moulds, that is why Respondent 
did a lot of running around or picked up blocks.  (Tr. at p. 76).   
Petitioner would take crews to do jobs for ServiceMaster. (Tr. at p. 26).  
Respondent was paid by Petitioner for work he did for ServiceMaster.  (Tr. at p. 27).   
At the hearing Petitioner presented an independent contractor agreement signed 
by Respondent on January 4, 2017.  (Ex. A; Tr. at pp. 27-28).   Mr. Moulds handed the 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
agreement to Respondent and told him he had to sign and return it.  (Tr. at p. 28).  
Respondent testified that he did not read every bit of the agreement and it was not 
explained to him by Mr. Moulds.  (Tr. at pp. 28-29).   
Mr. Moulds testified that in 2013 and 2014 Petitioner had employees but there 
was not enough work to keep them around.  (Tr. at p. 66).  According to Mr. Moulds, 
Petitioner went to an independent contractor model and had Respondent sign an 
independent contractor agreement in 2016.  (Tr. at p. 67).  No agreement signed in 2016 
was presented or introduced by Petitioner at the hearing.  (Tr. at pp. 82-83). 
Respondent testified that on May 31, 2017, he was working for Petitioner at a 
mobile home court in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.  (Tr. at p. 29).  He was working at the job site 
where mobile homes where being set into place.  (Tr. at p. 29).   His job was to get blocks 
under the homes and set them into place.  (Tr. at p. 29).   
On that day after setting one mobile home, Respondent sat on the front of a 
translift. The translift was used to move the mobile homes.  (Tr. at pp. 31-32).  The 
translift was operated by co-worker Zach Griffin.  (Tr. at p. 32).  Respondent said the 
machine got shaky and it caught his right leg underneath the track.  (Tr. at pp. 32-33).  
Mr. Griffin stopped the machine and got it off Respondent’s leg.  (Tr. at p. 32).  Someone 
called 911 and Mr. Moulds directed the ambulance to take Respondent to the hospital.  
Mr. Moulds testified that he was present at the scene of the accident.  (Tr. at p. 85). 
                                                CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The Commissioner found Respondent proved by a preponderance of the evidence 
that an employer-employee relationship existed at the time of his May 31, 2017, injury.   
The workers’ compensation act provides coverage for “any and all personal 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in course of the employment.” Iowa 
Code § 85.3(1).  Iowa Code section 85.61(11) defines who is an employee:  “Worker” or 
“employee” means a person who has entered into the employment of, or works under 
contract of service, express or implied, or apprenticeship, for an employer . . .” Iowa 
Code § 85.61(11).  The act also lists certain people who do not meet this broad definition, 
including independent contractors.  Iowa Code § 85.61(11)(c)(2). 
It is Respondent's duty to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was 
an employee of Petitioner within the meaning of the law.  If Respondent establishes a 
prima facie case, Petitioner then has the burden of going forward with the evidence which 
rebuts Respondent's case.  Petitioner must establish by a preponderance of the evidence 
any pleaded affirmative defense or bar to compensation. Nelson v. Cities Serv. Oil Co., 
259 Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261 (1967); Finch v. Schneider Specialized Carriers, 700 
N.W.2d 328 (Iowa 2005). 
When a party challenges the ultimate conclusions reached by the agency, the 
challenge is to the agency’s application of the law to the facts.  In that event, the question 
on judicial review is whether the agency abused its discretion by, for example, employing 
wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring relevant evidence.  Meyer v. I.B.P., Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  The court will only reverse the agency’s application of 
the law to the facts if it is irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518 (Iowa 2012). 
The agency cited the accepted factors for determining if an employment 
relationship existed between Petitioner and Respondent at the time of Respondent’s 
injury. These factors are: (1) the existence of a contract for the performance by a person 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
of a certain piece or kind of work at a fixed price; (2) the independent nature of his 
business or of his distinct calling; (3) his employment of assistants, with the right to 
supervise their activities; (4) his obligation to furnish necessary tools, supplies, and 
materials; (5) his right to control the progress of the work, except as to final results; (6) 
the time for which the workman is employed; (7) the method of payment, whether by 
time or by job; and (8) whether the work is part of the regular business of the employer.  
Stark Constr. v. Lauterwasser, 847 N.W.2d 612, (Iowa Ct. App. 2014) 
In applying those factors, the Commissioner affirmed and adopted the Deputy’s 
conclusion that Respondent was performing work as an employee for Petitioner at the 
time of his injury on May 31, 2017.  The thorough and well-reasoned arbitration decision 
adopted by the Commissioner states in pertinent part: 
I apply the eight Nelson factors as follows: 
(1) The existence of a contract for the performance by a person of a 
certain piece or kind of work at a fixed price.   
 
There was a written contract.  The contract (ICA) provides {Respondent] 
will be paid an hourly rate. Mr. Moulds told [Respondent] it was $12.00 
an hour and paid him at that rate. [Respondent] did not have the 
opportunity to profit by bidding for his work and doing the work in an 
independent manner. He was hired as an hourly worker.  
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship.   
 
(2) Independent nature of his business or of his distinct calling.   
 
[Respondent] was assigned work to do. Mr. Moulds described that 
[Respondent] was performing “grunt” work.  [Respondent] had no prior 
skills or training on setting up mobile homes.  He was assigned specific 
work each day by [Petitioner].   
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship. 
  
(3) His employment of assistants, with the right to supervise their 
activities.   
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
 
[Respondent] did not hire assistants.  The ICA did provide [Respondent] 
with the “right” to hire assistance (sic), but given the fact Mr. Moulds 
assigned all work and paid [Respondent] an hourly rate of $12.00 per hour 
the right to hire was illusory. 
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship. 
 
(4) His obligation to furnish necessary tools, supplies, and materials.   
 
[Respondent] used some hand tools, a hammer, pliers and a tool belt.  All 
other tools and supplies were provided by [Petitioner]. 
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship. 
 
(5) His right to control the progress of the work, except as to final 
results.   
 
[Respondent] did not control the progress of the work.  While 
[Respondent] could take some time off to coach or when he did not want 
to work, he had no control on scheduling the projects he was working on 
and when to complete any project. 
 
[Respondent] was not hired for a particular job, but was hired to report to 
work and receive assigned work. 
 
This factor leads to a finding of an independent contractor relationship.   
 
(6) The time for which the workman is employed.   
 
[Respondent] was employed from July 18, 2016 through May 31, 2017 by 
[Petitioner].  [Respondent] was not engaged in any substantial work for 
anyone else during this time.   
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship.   
 
(7) The method of payment, whether by time or by job.   
 
[Respondent] was paid by the hour.  [Respondent] received vacation pay 
in December 2016.   
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship.   
 
(8) Whether the work is part of the regular business of the employer.  
 
[Respondent] was doing regular work for [Petitioner].  [Respondent] was 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
installing/leveling mobile homes, demolishing mobile homes and clean up 
for [Petitioner] under . . . [Petitioner’s] contract with Service Master. 
 
This factor leads to finding an employee/employer relationship. 
 
(02/28/19 Arb. Dec. at pp. 9-11).   
 
 
The Deputy further addressed the independent contractor agreement as it relates 
to the W-9 signed by Respondent.  In finding Petitioner’s argument on this point 
unpersuasive, the Deputy correctly cited to the following relevant law: 
 
The Lauterwasser court cited 3 Larson, § 61.05, at 61-8 noting. 
The treatise further states: “But, even without the imputation of such an 
evasive intent, the contractual designation of the relationship as 
employment or contractorship may be so plainly and completely at odds 
with the undisputed facts that the contractual designation must be 
disregarded.” Id. 
 
Stark Constr. v. Lauterwasser, 847 N.W.2d 612 (Iowa Ct. App. 2014) (Table).   
(02/28/19 Arb. Dec. at pp. 9-11). The Commissioner reasonably adopted and affirmed the 
Deputy’s finding on this point as well. 
When this record is considered as a whole, the agreement signed by Respondent 
does not reflect the reality of the parties’ employment relationship, as recognized in the 
Deputy’s conclusion (affirmed by the Commissioner) that while “[t]here are many 
legitimate independent contractor relationships in the workforce, this is not one of them.” 
(02/28/19 Arb. Dec. at p. 11, ¶ 10).  The agency committed no error in reaching this 
conclusion. 
                                               CONCLUSION 
When all of the relevant factors stated and discussed above are considered, it is 
clear under this record when it is considered as a whole that Petitioner did not prove its 
independent contractor defense.  The employment agreement between Petitioner and 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
Respondent was an agreement in name only.  Both parties acted and performed as if an 
employer-employee relationship existed.  Petitioner has not met its burden to establish 
that Respondent was an independent contractor at the time of his injury arising out of and 
in the course of his employment on May 31, 2017.   
The final agency decision should be affirmed in its entirety, the Petition should be 
dismissed, and costs should be assessed to Petitioner. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the 
Commissioner’s decision is affirmed in its entirety. 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the Petition 
is dismissed. 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that costs are 
assessed to Petitioner. 
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
ORDER ON APPEAL
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV060094
PRO PLATINUM CONSTRUCTION ET AL VS STEPHEN CORBIN
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-11-03 17:33:45     page 11 of 11
E-FILED  2020 NOV 03 5:33 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
