Case Number: 1651146.01
Case Title:  FISHER, NICOLE V. ARCONIC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Fisher Nicole-1651146.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NICOLE FISHER, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 1651146.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
ARCONIC, INC, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY OF: 
NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1108.20, 1402.40, 
 
Defendants. 
  :                       1803, 1803.1, 1808, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Nicole Fisher, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Arconic, Inc., as the employer and Indemnity Insurance 
Company of North America as the insurance carrier.  This case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on November 17, 2021, via CourtCall video 
conferencing. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 4, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through E.  Claimant testified on her 
own behalf.  Garry Trimble also provided live testimony.  The evidentiary record closed 
at the conclusion of the November 17, 2021, hearing.  
Following the arbitration hearing, the parties filed a joint motion to amend the 
Hearing Report.  The motion sought to change the commencement date from 
September 14, 2018, to October 4, 2020.  The joint motion was sustained. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-12  13:04:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 2 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on January 7, 2022, at which time the 
case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. The nature of claimant’s permanent disability and specifically whether the 
injury is limited to a scheduled bilateral wrist injury or involves permanent 
injuries to claimant’s mental health such that the claim would be compensated 
with industrial disability; 
2. Whether the mental health claim is barred due to Lack of Timely Notice under 
Iowa Code section 85.23;  
3. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits; 
and 
4. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds:  
Nicole Fisher, claimant, sustained a stipulated cumulative injury to her bilateral 
wrists as a result of her repetitive work duties at Arconic on April 5, 2018. (Hearing 
Report)  The parties agree that the injury caused both temporary and permanent 
disability.  (Hearing Report) 
Fisher is a high school graduate, with an associate degree from Colorado 
Technical University Online. (Hearing Transcript, pages 8-9)  She worked in a number 
of positions for Arconic between 2004 and 2020. (Hr. Tr., pp. 9-10)  From September 
2010 to July 2018, Fisher worked in the lab preparing and testing samples. (Hr. Tr., p. 
10)   
After Fisher notified Arconic of the injury, Arconic accepted liability and agreed to 
authorize Tobias Mann, M.D., as claimant’s authorized treating physician. (Joint Exhibit 
3)  By the time Arconic had finished their investigation, Fisher had already started 
seeing Dr. Mann for medical treatment.  Initially, Dr. Mann assessed Fisher with bilateral 
recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome and bilateral ulnar-sided wrist pain. (Joint Exhibit 3, 
page 22)  Dr. Mann recommended conservative care, which consisted of bilateral wrist 
braces, injections, casting, and occupational therapy. (See id.; JE3, p. 47)  These 
modalities helped with the numbness and tingling in Fisher’s upper extremities; 
however, they did little to help Fisher’s overall pain. (JE3, p. 28) 
On May 25, 2018, Dr. Mann ordered a bilateral EMG to further evaluate 
claimant’s recurrent carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE3, p. 28)  He also ordered an MR 
arthrogram of the right wrist to further evaluate the ulnar-sided wrist pain. (Id.)  Dr. Mann 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 3 
chose to address the right wrist before the left, as the right wrist pain was more 
bothersome to claimant at the time. (Id.) 
The bilateral EMG did not show any evidence of focal neuropathy; however, 
there was evidence of C-7 radiculopathy. (See JE3, p. 33)   
The right wrist MRI, dated June 19, 2018, revealed a central triangular 
fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) tear. (JE3, pp. 30-31)  An MRI of claimant’s left wrist, 
dated May 16, 2019, also revealed central and peripheral TFCC tears. (JE3, pp. 59-60) 
Dr. Mann performed a right wrist arthroscopy with TFCC debridement and partial 
synovectomy on June 12, 2019. (JE3, pp. 66-67)  Two months later, he performed the 
same procedure on Fisher’s left wrist. (JE3, pp. 75-76)  She was subsequently referred 
for additional occupational therapy through ORA Physical Therapy and Rock Valley 
Physical Therapy. (See Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Despite undergoing surgery, participating in physical therapy, and receiving 
multiple injections, Fisher continued to report persistent ulnar-sided wrist pain and 
weakness through January 2020. (JE3, pp. 82-86)  Dr. Mann was hopeful that work 
hardening to strengthen her wrists would help improve her symptoms. (JE3, p. 86)  Dr. 
Mann scheduled claimant to return to his office in six weeks; however, said follow-up 
appointment never occurred.   
At some point in February 2020, Fisher terminated her employment with Arconic 
and moved to Rogers, Arkansas for a fresh start. (Hr. Tr., pp. 15-16; see Ex. D, p. 20; 
Ex. E, p. 24) In Arkansas, Fisher obtained a new job as a technical process operator 
with Glad Manufacturing. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 15, 17)  Her medical care was subsequently 
transferred to Robert Benafield, M.D., of Ozark Orthopedics. (See JE4, pp. 88-90)   
Fisher presented to Dr. Benafield for an initial evaluation on March 3, 2020. (JE4, 
p. 88)  She complained of aching pain in her wrists; but denied experiencing any 
numbness or tingling.  On examination, claimant demonstrated full range of motion in 
her fingers, thumbs, wrists, and elbows. (JE4, p. 89)  Dr. Benafield felt Fisher was close 
to a point where she could be released to full duty. (Id.)  He told Fisher it was likely she 
would have some chronic, low-grade aching in the wrists for an indeterminate amount of 
time, however, he did not feel it should keep her from working full duty. (Id.)  Dr. 
Benafield anticipated releasing Fisher to a trial of full duty work in April, 2020. (Id.) 
At the conclusion of the March 3, 2020, appointment, Fisher inquired about 
impairment ratings. (See id.)  Dr. Benafield told claimant that her bilateral wrist condition 
would not warrant much of an impairment rating as she had full range of motion and 
normal sensation. (Id.)  
As anticipated, Dr. Benafield prescribed a trial of full duty work following Fisher’s 
May 7, 2020, follow-up appointment. (JE4, p. 92)   

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 4 
On June 16, 2020, Fisher reported to Dr. Benafield that she returned to full duty 
work “without too much problem.” (JE4, p. 95)  She continued to exhibit full range of 
motion in her fingers, wrists, and elbows on examination. (Id.)  Dr. Benafield 
subsequently released Fisher from his care and prescribed no additional physical 
therapy. (See JE4, p. 95; JE5, p. 96) 
After working for Glad Manufacturing for approximately six months, claimant 
decided to move to Tennessee. (Hr. Tr., p. 17)  Six months later, Fisher moved back to 
Iowa. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19) 
 
Dr. Mann declared maximum medical improvement on June 16, 2020, the date of 
claimant’s last appointment with Dr. Benafield. (Ex. B, p. 4)  Using the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Mann opined that claimant 
sustained one percent upper extremity impairment for each wrist due to her ongoing, 
mild pain. (Id.)  Dr. Mann opined that the range of motion method could not be used as 
a measure of permanent impairment in this case as claimant demonstrated full range of 
motion in both wrists. (Id.)  Dr. Mann did not assign any permanent restrictions. (Id.) 
 
In response, Fisher pursued an independent medical evaluation, performed by 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., on August 3, 2020. (See Ex. 1, p. 2)  During the evaluation, claimant 
complained of pain in her bilateral wrists, and difficulty with gripping things for long 
periods of time. (Ex. 1, p. 11)  Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Mann’s MMI date and did not 
believe further treatment was necessary. (Ex. 1, p. 13)   
Dr. Bansal assigned permanent impairment based on claimant’s loss of grip 
strength. (Id.)  He explained, “However, strength can be utilized as an impairing factor if 
‘the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor 
that has not been considered adequately by other methods.’” (Id.)  Dr. Bansal further 
stated that loss of grip strength with a TFCC tear is recognized in the medical literature. 
(Ex. 1, p. 14)  Therefore, based on Table 16-34 of the AMA Guides, Dr. Bansal 
assigned 10 percent upper extremity impairment to each upper extremity. (Id.)  Dr. 
Bansal concluded his report by recommending a 10-pound lifting restriction. (Id.)   
Dr. Bansal’s restrictions are much more restrictive than those offered by any 
other physician in the evidentiary record.  The maximum weight recommended by Dr. 
Bansal is less than the amount of weight claimant consistently lifted at physical therapy.  
I find the recommendations of Dr. Mann and Dr. Benafield are more objective and 
reliable than the restrictions offered by Dr. Bansal.  Dr. Mann and Dr. Benafield are 
orthopedic surgeons and operated as Fisher’s authorized treating physicians.  Dr. Mann 
had the chance to observe, examine, and treat claimant’s bilateral wrists over an 
extended period of time.  I find Dr. Mann had the best opportunity to evaluate claimant’s 
wrists and assess functional limitations regarding the same.  His opinions are consistent 
with the final evaluations of Dr. Benafield.  I accept Dr. Mann’s opinion regarding 
claimant’s need for permanent restrictions as the most convincing and accurate in this 
evidentiary record. 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 5 
When comparing the impairment ratings offered by Dr. Mann and Dr. Bansal, I 
once again note that Dr. Mann had the chance to evaluate claimant on multiple 
occasions and he performed surgery on both wrists.  That being said, Dr. Mann’s 
impairment assessment is not specific to claimant’s condition.  Dr. Mann utilized Table 
16-10 and assigned permanent impairment based on claimant’s ongoing complaints of 
pain.  His report acknowledges the same and provides, “This, however, is in discussions 
for pain from peripheral nerve disorders and so would not directly fit into Ms. Fisher’s 
problem.” (Ex. B, p. 4) 
Both physicians agree that range of motion should not be used to assess 
claimant’s permanent impairment as she was able to demonstrate near normal range of 
motion in both of her wrists. (See id.)  Dr. Mann elected to assess permanent 
impairment based on claimant’s pain complaints.  Dr. Bansal elected to assess 
permanent impairment based on claimant’s loss of grip strength.   
The AMA Guides does not assign a large role to strength 
measurements/evaluations because they are influenced by subjective factors that are 
difficult to control. (AMA Guides, p. 507)  However, as discussed in Dr. Bansal’s report, 
“In a rare case, if the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an 
impairing factor that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the 
Guides, the loss of strength may be rated separately.” (AMA Guides, p. 508; Ex. 1, p. 
13)   
Notably, Dr. Bansal’s report does not explain how he concluded that claimant 
had sustained 10 percent impairment to both wrists. (See Ex. 1, pp. 13-14)  Table 16-34 
indicates that 10 percent upper extremity impairment correlates with a 10 to 30 percent 
strength loss index. Admittedly, I am not qualified to conduct an impairment 
assessment.  That being said, the undersigned cannot duplicate a 10 to 30 percent loss 
when comparing the grip strength measurements documented in Dr. Bansal’s report 
with Table 16-31 or Table 16-32.   
In this regard, the AMA Guides provide that loss of strength is calculated by 
subtracting an individual’s limited strength measurements from a “normal strength” 
measurement and then dividing by the normal strength measurement.  The “normal 
strength” measurements are be found in Table 16-31 (by occupation) and Table 16-32 
(by age).  The issue with this formula’s application in the matter at hand is that the 
strength measurements recorded by Dr. Bansal exceed the normal strength 
measurements listed for all occupational categories in Table 16-31 and for claimant’s 
age range (Ages 40-49) in Table 16-32.  
Additionally, Dr. Bansal’s report provides two different sets of strength 
measurements.  Under the “Physical Examination” section of the IME report, Dr. Bansal 
notes: 
 
 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 6 
GRIP STRENGTH: 
Grip strength measurements with the dynamometer: 
 
Right:  16 kg, 17 kg, and 17 kg. 
 
Left:  14 kg, 13 kg, and 14 kg. 
(Ex. 1, p. 12)   
Under the “Discussion Questions” section, Dr. Bansal provides: 
 
GRIP STRENGTH: 
 
Grip strength measurements with the dynamometer: 
 
 
Right:  28 kg, 29 kg, and 27 kg. 
 
 
Left:  33 kg, 33 kg, and 34 kg. 
(Ex. 1, p. 14)  Not only does Dr. Bansal provide two different sets of measurements, the 
measurements reflect inconsistent results as to which hand provided the strongest grip.   
Due to Dr. Bansal’s failure to explain his calculations, the undersigned’s inability 
to duplicate the same, and Dr. Bansal’s inconsistent reporting of claimant’s grip strength 
measurements, I afford little weight to the impairment ratings assessed by Dr. Bansal.  
Instead, I find the permanent impairment ratings offered by Dr. Mann to be most 
convincing and consistent with the evidentiary record and the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition.  Dr. Mann’s opinions are consistent with the opinions of Dr. Benafield, an 
orthopedic surgeon, who told claimant that her bilateral wrist condition would not 
warrant much of an impairment rating as she had full range of motion and normal 
sensation. (JE4, p. 89) 
Reviewing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, Table 16-3 on page 439 converts the one percent permanent impairment of the 
right upper extremity to a one percent permanent impairment of the whole person. The 
one percent permanent impairment of the left upper extremity similarly converts to a one 
percent permanent impairment of the whole person under that same table. Using the 
Combined Values Chart found at page 604 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, I find that 
the one percent whole person permanent impairment rating for the right arm combines 
with the one percent whole person impairment rating for the left arm and results in a 
combined rating equal to two percent of the whole person. Therefore, I find that Fisher 
proved a two percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the 
bilateral wrist injuries she sustained on April 5, 2018. 
 
Fisher also asserts that she sustained a mental health injury as a sequela of her 
physical, bilateral wrist injuries.   

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 7 
In support of her claim, Fisher offers the opinions of Beverly A. Doyle, Ph.D. (Ex. 
2)  Dr. Doyle is a licensed psychologist in Nebraska. (Ex. 2, p. 19)  Dr. Doyle conducted 
an over-the-phone interview with Fisher on December 30, 2020. (Id.)  Claimant asserts 
that the telephone conference lasted approximately 60 minutes. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  Dr. 
Doyle’s report is the only mental health record offered into evidence by claimant. 
 
According to Dr. Doyle’s notes, claimant was first diagnosed with depression by 
“Dr. Johnston” in Knoxville, Tennessee on December 21, 2020, or nine days prior to Dr. 
Doyle’s over-the-phone interview. (See id.)  From the undersigned’s review of the 
evidentiary record, Fisher first references a depressed mood at her March 3, 2020, 
appointment with Dr. Benafield. (See JE4, p. 89) (“She has a somewhat depressed 
demeanor.”)  The medical records from the December 21, 2020, appointment with Dr. 
Johnston are not in the evidentiary record for the undersigned’s review.   
According to Dr. Doyle’s report, Dr. Johnston prescribed mental health therapy, 
but did not provide Fisher with the name of a therapist or schedule any appointments for 
Fisher. (See Ex. 2, p. 20)  Dr. Johnston also prescribed claimant anti-depressant 
medication. (See Ex. 2, p. 20) 
 
Dr. Doyle opined that Fisher demonstrates symptoms consistent with moderate 
major depressive disorder with anxious distress. (Ex. 2, p. 20)  She causally related 
Fisher’s condition to “her inability to successfully return to her previous employment 
without experiencing physical symptoms.” (Id.)  The report goes on to note that Fisher 
has been unable to secure employment that does not require the use of her wrists, and 
that she has also experienced anxiety from moving twice and trying to adjust to different 
living and working conditions in a short period of time. (Id.)   
In terms of permanency, Dr. Doyle opined Fisher’s mental health issues could be 
temporary with continued treatment and securing an appropriate work setting. (Id.)  Dr. 
Doyle recommended continued medical treatment for depression as well as mental 
health therapy on a weekly basis. (Id.)   
Defendants obtained a competing mental health evaluation, performed by D. 
Malcolm Spica, Ph.D., a licensed clinical psychologist and neuropsychologist. (Ex. C)  
Dr. Spica did not interview or examine Fisher. (Ex. C, p. 5)  Rather, Dr. Spica reviewed 
Fisher’s medical records and deposition testimony to assess her neurobehavioral 
status. (Id.)   
Dr. Spica opined that the documentation he reviewed does not support a finding 
of any behavioral health injury resulting from Fisher’s occupational activities at Arconic. 
(Ex. C, p. 8)  He further opined that the medical records do not substantiate behavioral 
health symptoms that would rise to the level of impairing her functional capacity. (Id.)  In 
this regard, Dr. Spica points out that the GAF score of 60 documented by Dr. Doyle, 
falls within the normal limits of functional capacity. (Id.)  Lastly, Dr. Spica’s report notes 
that Fisher has not presented for regular and appropriate care for a debilitating mental 
health disorder. (Ex. C, p. 9) 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 8 
Dr. Spica also commented on Dr. Doyle’s opinions. (See Ex. C, pp. 7-10)  Dr. 
Spica opined that Dr. Doyle’s examination has no utility in establishing Fisher’s alleged 
mental health harm related to her employment at Arconic due to multiple factors, 
including Dr. Doyle’s failure to disclose that she never met with Fisher and the fact that 
she offered an opinion regarding Fisher’s psychological status without administering any 
standardized or quantified assessment measures. (Ex. C, p. 7)  Dr. Spica offers other 
critiques of Dr. Doyle’s report; however, the majority of his opinions center on ethical 
issues and the fact Dr. Doyle is not licensed to practice in the state of Tennessee.  At 
one point, Dr. Spica goes as far as to say Dr. Doyle likely broke the law by conducting a 
diagnostic psychological examination of Fisher while Fisher was in Tennessee. (Id.)  I 
did not fond the latter opinions particularly relevant or convincing in this matter.   
The evidence supporting a mental health injury is thin.  The reports of Dr. Doyle 
and Dr. Spica are the only two mental health records in evidence.  At hearing, claimant 
admitted that she did not report a mental health injury to Arconic between April 2018 
and February 2020. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 40-41)  There is no evidence Dr. Doyle, or any 
other mental health specialist, conducted any objective testing relating to claimant’s 
alleged mental health injury.  Defendants arranged for Fisher to undergo a 
neuropsychological evaluation; however, claimant declined to participate in the same. 
(Ex. D, p. 21)   
At the time of hearing, claimant was not taking any medications related to her 
mental health condition, and she was not operating under any restrictions for her mental 
health condition. (Hr. Tr., p. 45) 
While Dr. Doyle and Dr. Spica are not physicians, a psychologist can express an 
expert opinion on the causal relationship of depression to a physical injury.  As I weigh 
the respective experience and credentials of Dr. Doyle and Dr. Spica, I find that Dr. 
Spica’s experience with neuropsychological evaluations is superior and bolsters his 
credibility on the issue of diagnosing mental health issues. (See Ex. C, pp. 11-19; Ex. 2, 
pp. 23-30)  Dr. Spica conducted a comprehensive review of Fisher’s medical records 
and deposition testimony.  He drafted a well-explained and easy to follow report.  For 
these reasons, I accept Dr. Spica’s opinions and find Fisher failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she sustained a permanent and material 
aggravation or worsening of her pre-existing mental health conditions as a result of the 
April 5, 2018, work injury.  While is it entirely possible that claimant is suffering from a 
mental health condition, she simply provided insufficient evidence to establish the same 
is related to her work injury. 
Having found Fisher failed to prove causation with respect to the alleged mental 
health claim, the issue of whether Fisher provided timely notice regarding the same is 
moot.     
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
 
 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 9 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute submitted for resolution is whether claimant sustained a mental 
health injury as a sequela of her physical wrist injuries, entitling her to industrial 
disability benefits.  
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v). The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Fella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole. Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability. It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a) - (u) are applied. Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc, v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods. Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 10 
In this case, I reviewed the expert opinions of Dr. Doyle and Dr. Spica.  I 
ultimately found the training and experience of Dr. Spica to be superior to the training 
and experience of Dr. Doyle.  I further found that Dr. Spica’s opinions were consistent 
with the evidentiary record as a whole.  I accepted Dr. Spica’s causation opinion and 
found that claimant failed to prove she sustained a material aggravation of her mental 
health conditions as a result of the April 5, 2018, work injury. 
Having found that Fisher failed to prove a material aggravation of her mental 
health conditions as a result of the April 5, 2018, work injury, I conclude that claimant 
failed to prove a compensable mental health injury.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant 
has not proven a permanent injury to her mental health that would remove this case 
from a bilateral scheduled member injury to an unscheduled, industrial disability 
situation.  Claimant’s recovery for permanent disability is limited at this time to a bilateral 
scheduled member injury. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s) (2016). 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(u). The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). The 
fact finder must consider both medical and lay evidence relating to the extent of the 
functional loss in determining permanent disability resulting from an injury to a 
scheduled member. Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 N.W.2d 267, 272-273 
(Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994). 
Benefits for permanent partial disability of two members caused by a single 
accident is a scheduled benefit under section 85.34(2)(s); the degree of disability must 
be computed on a functional basis with a maximum benefit entitlement of 500 weeks. 
Simbro v. DeLong’s Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 1983). 
Having found the impairment ratings of Dr. Mann to be most convincing in this 
evidentiary record, I found Fisher proved one percent (1%) permanent impairment of the 
right wrist and one percent (1%) permanent impairment of the left wrist. Pursuant to 
Table 16-3 on page 527 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 
Fifth Edition, I found these impairment ratings combined to equate to one percent (1 %) 
of the whole person for the right wrist and one percent (1%) of the whole person for the 
left wrist. Using the Combined Values Chart found on page 604 of the AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent impairment, Fifth Edition, l found that these impairment 
ratings combined to two percent (2%) of the whole person. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(t), claimant is entitled to a proportional 
award based on a 500-week schedule. Therefore, I conclude that claimant has proven 
entitlement to ten (10) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits for her bilateral 
wrist injuries. 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 11 
Lastly, claimant is seeking an assessment of her costs.  Costs are to be 
assessed at the discretion of the workers’ compensation commissioner or the deputy 
hearing the case.  876 IAC 4.33.   
Claimant seeks assessment of her filing fee, totaling $103.00.  This cost is 
appropriate and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement in the amount of $2,649.00 for the cost of 
Dr. Bansal’s report.  In her post-hearing brief, claimant asserts that she is entitled to 
reimbursement pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  While the IME report meets the 
requirements of Section 85.39, claimant did not assert entitlement to the same on the 
Hearing Report.  As such, I will only address claimant’s request for reimbursement 
under Agency rule 4.33(6).   
Agency rule 4.33(6) permits the assessment of the reasonable costs of “obtaining 
no more than two doctors' or practitioners' reports.”  However, the Iowa Supreme Court 
has held that only the cost of drafting the expert's report is permissible in lieu of 
testimony. Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 845-
846 (Iowa 2015).  The Court stated that the “underlying medical expenses associated 
with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, just as they 
do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.” (Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846 
(Iowa 2015).   
Exhibit 4 provides that Dr. Bansal attributed $2,076.00 to the cost of writing the 
IME report.  Defendants assert no argument with respect to the reasonableness of Dr. 
Bansal’s fee.  I therefore find Dr. Bansal’s fee to be reasonable and assess the same 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay ten (10) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of October 4, 2020. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of six hundred thirty-five and 87/100 
dollars ($635.87).   
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.   
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs totaling two thousand one hundred 
seventy-nine and 00/100 dollars ($2,179.00). 

FISHER V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 12 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __12th __ day of July, 2022. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Nathaniel Boulton (via WCES) 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
