Case Number: 22008659.01
Case Title:  WALBRUN, REGINA V. NORDSTROM INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Walbrun Regina-22008659.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
REGINA WALBRUN, 
No. 22008659.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
NORDSTROM, INC., 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
Headnotes:  1801.10, 1802, 1803, 2801 
 
Employer, 
 
Defendant. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
Claimant Regina Walbrun seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendant, self-insured employer Nordstrom, Inc. (Nordstrom). The undersigned 
presided over an arbitration hearing on June 18, 2024, held via live internet-based 
video. Walbrun participated personally and through attorney Zeke R. McCartney. 
Nordstrom participated by and through attorney Thomas D. Wolle.  
II.  
ISSU ES . 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) Did Walbrun sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment with Nordstrom on February 24, 2021? 
2) Did Walbrun give timely notice of the alleged work injury? 
3) Is Walbrun entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or healing period (HP) 
benefits from October 5, 2021, through March 28, 2022? 
4) Is Walbrun entitled to temporary partial disability (TPD) benefits from March 
28, 2022, through May 5, 2022? 
5) What is the nature and extent of functional impairment or permanent 
disability, if any, caused by the alleged injury? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jan-21  13:25:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 2 
 
6) What is the commencement date for permanency benefits, if any are 
awarded? 
7) If Walbrun is entitled to workers’ compensation, what is the weekly rate? 
8) Is Walbrun entitled to payment of medical expenses relating to the alleged 
work injury? 
9) Is Walbrun entitled to mileage reimbursement for travel relating to care for 
the alleged work injury? 
10) Is Walbrun entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
11) Is Walbrun entitled to taxation of the costs against Nordstrom? 
III .  
STIP U LATION S. 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Walbrun and Nordstrom 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Although entitlement to temporary disability or healing period benefits cannot 
be stipulated, Walbrun: 
a) Was off work from October 5, 2021, through March 28, 2022. 
b) Worked four hours per day from March 28, 2022, through May 5, 2022. 
3) If Walbrun sustained a work injury on the alleged injury date, it is a cause of 
functional impairment or industrial disability. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE9; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 8;  
 Defendant’s Exhibits A through F; and 
 Hearing testimony by Walbrun.  

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 3 
 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
A .  
Wa l b r u n ’ s  B a c k g r o un d.  
Walbrun was 56 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10) She 
graduated from high school in 1985. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10) At the time of hearing, Walbrun had 
not participated in any postsecondary education or special training, so she had no 
degrees or certificates. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10)  
There is no indication that Walbrun has participated in any formal medical 
education or training. The weight of the evidence establishes that Walbrun’s education 
and work history leave her unqualified to diagnose an injury or prescribe treatment for 
such. At all times material hereto, she lacked the type of specialized education and 
training necessary to make a credible diagnosis of a medical condition. 
After graduating from high school, Walbrun got her first job and has steadily held 
one ever since. Her first job was as a cashier at K-Mart. (Hr’g Tr. p. 10) Her job duties 
also included watering plants in the summer and helping fill stock in the pet department. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 10) She earned the minimum wage and worked there for about seven years. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 11) 
After K-Mart, in or around the year 2000, Walbrun got a job with Sara Lee, a 
bread store and bakery outlet. (Hr’g Tr. p. 11) Her job duties included waiting on 
customers, balancing the cash register, and stocking product such as bread, buns, 
bagels, muffins, and cakes. (Hr’g Tr. p. 11) Stocking product required carrying large 
trays that were heavy. (Hr’g Tr. p. 12) The nature of Walbrun’s duties meant she spent 
most of her shift on her feet. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 11–12)  
While employed at Sara Lee, Walbrun also worked for Operation New View. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 13) She was a Head Start cook, who helped provide food and nutrition for 
children enrolled in the program. (Hr’g Tr. p. 13) Her job duties included cooking meals 
and other kitchen-related tasks such as sweeping and cleaning. (Hr’g Tr. p. 13) Walbrun 
also helped out in a teaching role. (Hr’g Tr. p. 13) 
After 13 years, Walbrun’s employment with Sara Lee came to an end when the 
company closed the store where she worked. (Hr’g Tr. p. 12) Unemployed, Walbrun 
babysat her granddaughter for two years. (Hr’g Tr. p. 12) After that, Nordstrom hired 
Walbrun and she began her employment with the corporation on July 18, 2014. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 14) 
During most of Walbrun’s time at Nordstrom, she worked in the job of processor. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 14) She worked in the warehouse scanning, sorting, boxing, and hanging 
clothes. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 14–15) 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 4 
 
B . 
C a r e  B e f o r e  F e b r u a r y  2 4 ,  2 0 2 1 .  
Before 2021, Walbrun experienced back pain as well as what she categorized as 
“tweaks” to her body. (Hr’g Tr. p. 15) When she experienced soreness or pain, her 
typical first step would be over-the-counter medication such as Tylenol or ibuprofen. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 15) If her symptoms continued, she would seek medical care. (Hr’g Tr. p. 15) 
In 2004, Walbrun was pregnant. (Ex. JE6, p. 123) She received care from a 
chiropractor for pain in her low back and buttocks. (Ex. JE6, p. 123) Because 
chiropractic care was ineffective, she went to Finley Hospital in Dubuque, where her 
obstetrician practiced, for the pain and acute lumbar muscle spasms on April 9, 2004. 
(Ex. JE6, p. 123) They prescribed Lortab or Extra Strength Tylenol for the pain and 
physical therapy. (Ex. JE6, p. 123) The pain continued and on April 20, 2004, she 
inquired about a maternity support belt, which Finley ordered for her. (Ex. JE6, p. 123) 
On April 8, 2005, Walbrun returned to Finley with complaints of intermittent low 
back pain that had worsened over the prior five days. (Ex. JE6, p. 124) She had tried 
chiropractic care with limited benefit. (Ex. JE6, p. 124) On examination, her symptoms 
appeared to reflect musculoskeletal etiology. (Ex. JE6, p. 124) She received a 
prescription for Lortab to be used on an as needed basis for pain control. (Ex. JE6, p. 
124) However, the medication caused her stomach pain and cramping. (Ex. JE6, p. 
125) Walbrun then experienced increased back pain from lifting at work and returned to 
Finley. (Ex. JE6, p. 125) She was taken off work for three days, which helped reduce 
her back pain. (Ex. JE6, p. 125) 
After giving birth, Walbrun continued care at Finley. (Ex. JE6, p. 126) At a July 
20, 2005 appointment, she reported low back pain after twisting while setting down a 
bag of laundry. (Ex. JE6, p. 126) Walbrun received a prescription for Tylenol #3 with 
instructions to use it judiciously, but that prescription also made her feel very ill. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 126) Because of the pain caused by lifting up her daughter and the issues with 
medication, Walbrun sought chiropractic care. (Ex. JE6, p. 126) 
Walbrun had a follow-up appointment at Finley on July 25, 2005, and complained 
of a changing dynamic with her pain. (Ex. JE6, p. 127) There is a note in the record 
from this visit which states, “The pain seems to continue to be in the left lumbar region, 
but it radiates around the outer aspect of her left hip and now into her left groin.” (Ex. 
JE6, p. 127) On examination, Walbrun had “a diffuse area of reproducible discomfort in 
the left lumbar paraspinal muscles.” (Ex. JE6, p. 127) The diagnosis evolved to, 
“[]ongoing musculoskeletal low back pain with a degree of radicular pattern wrapping 
around her left hip into the left groin.” (Ex. JE6, p. 127) 
Walbrun shared that ice offered her significant relief of symptoms, as did physical 
therapy during her previous pregnancy and bout of low back pain. (Ex. JE6, p. 127) 
Because she was in her first trimester of pregnancy and had experienced past issues 
with pain medicine, no medication was prescribed. (Ex. JE6, p. 127) The course of care 
for her pain symptoms was ice, physical therapy, and a back brace, with no medication. 
(Ex. JE6, p. 127)  

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 5 
 
The Finley records have subsequent notes documenting that Walbrun called to 
get permission for hair removal while pregnant and a release to wear shorts while 
working. (Ex. JE6, p. 127) However, there is no indication in the Finley records that 
Walbrun notified staff about pain in her back, hip, or groin area in the months following 
her July 25, 2005 appointment. (Ex. JE6, pp. 127–28) Thus, the evidence establishes it 
is more likely than not the conservative approach to care worked. (Ex. JE6, p. 127) 
There is no indication in the records that Walbrun experienced low back 
symptoms—let alone such that also included radiating pain into the left hip—significant 
enough to seek medical care between the July 15, 2005 appointment at Finley and the 
end of the calendar year 2006. This time period spans nearly a year and a half.  
On January 2, 2007, Walbrun fell on icy steps and struck her tailbone. (Ex. JE6, 
p. 128) This acute injury caused her “pain localized in her tailbone” for which Finley 
prescribed Tylenol with codeine, but her symptoms improved minimally by late 
February. (Ex. JE6, p. 128) On February 20, 2007, she telephoned Finley, explained 
what had happened, and requested care. (Ex. JE6, p. 128) The next day, she went to 
Finley and described her pain as in the tailbone with no radiation of the pain down her 
legs, numbness, weakness, or tingling. (Ex. JE6, p. 128) Examination showed 
Walbrun’s pain was “over the lower aspect of the sacrum.” (Ex. JE6, p. 128) X-rays did 
not reveal a fracture, so Walbrun was diagnosed with a significant sacral contusion. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 128) She received a prescription for Lortab to be used to help her sleep, 
instructions to use Ibuprofen to lessen her daytime pain, a recommendation to purchase 
a sacrum protecting donut pillow, and directions to alternate ice and heat to the sacrum. 
(Ex. JE6, p. 128)  
There is no indication Walbrun sought additional care for her sore tailbone after 
going to Finley on February 20, 2007. Thus, the weight of the evidence shows that 
conservative care helped alleviate her sacral contusion. The sacral contusion was a 
temporary condition that did not cause permanent impairment or disability.  
Walbrun returned to Finley on September 13, 2007, with complaints of low back 
pain and spasms. (Ex. JE6, pp. 128–29) The notes in the Finley medical records from 
Walbrun’s visit describe her symptoms as “crescendoing pain across the low back, no 
radicular pain to the lower extremities or buttocks per [se].” (Ex. JE6, p. 129) Walbrun 
was unable to identify an injury that may have been causing her symptoms. (Ex. JE6, p. 
129) She was diagnosed with lumbar muscle spasm with lumbosacral dysfunction, 
prescribed at-home exercises and the medications Flexeril and Lortab, directions to wait 
a couple of days to see her chiropractor to get some of the acute spasticity out of her 
back, and advised to return to see Dr. McKenna if she was “not having excellent clinical 
response within a week.” (Ex. JE6, p. 128)  
Walbrun called Finley on September 19, 2007, with complaints about her eye, 
but not her back, so the evidence shows it is more likely than not that the care helped 
alleviate her symptoms in the short term. (Ex. JE6, p. 128) However, on November 5, 
2007, Walbrun contacted Finley again with complaints of ongoing low back pain and 
requested they order a refill of her pain medication and muscle relaxer, and asked if she 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 6 
 
should see her chiropractor. (Ex. JE6, p. 129) Finley staff ordered refills of her 
prescriptions and instructed her that it was okay to see her chiropractor. (Ex. JE6, p. 
129)  
On November 7, 2007, Walbrun returned to Finley with complaints of ongoing 
pain. (Ex. JE6, p. 130) She denied any radicular symptoms. (Ex. JE6, p. 130) Walbrun 
was put on 800 mg of Ibuprofen, given a new prescription for Lortab, continued on 
Flexeril, and directed to try physical therapy. (Ex. JE6, p. 130) If the physical therapy 
and anti-inflammatories did not reduce Walbrun’s symptoms, she would need magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). (Ex. JE6, p. 130) 
Walbrun followed up by telephone on November 13, 2007, requesting a refill of 
Lortab because she could not work due to the pain without the medication. (Ex. JE6, p. 
130) Finley staff advised her to come in for an exam with a doctor if her symptoms were 
not improving and she stated she would schedule an appointment. (Ex. JE6, p. 130) But 
three days later, she called and said she felt 100 percent better, was no longer taking 
her medications, and was participating in physical therapy once a week. (Ex. JE6, p. 
130) 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Walbrun had  
symptoms in her hip during the 2007 flareup of low back pain. Further, there is no 
indication she experienced ongoing pain symptoms in her back or sacroiliac joint after 
her November 16, 2007 phone call to Finley that were significant enough to merit care. 
The record shows that Walbrun did not experience symptoms significant enough to 
contact or seek care at Finley again until just under two and a half years after the 
temporary flareup of low back pain. 
On March 9, 2010, Walbrun went to Finley due to swelling relating to a tattoo. 
(Ex. JE6, p. 131) Two weeks later, she telephoned Finley because of nausea and 
stomach pain. Ex. JE6, p. 131) Walbrun called in on March 24, 2010, with complaints of 
back and stomach pain. (Ex. JE6, p. 131) That same day, she returned to Finley for an 
exam and explained that she felt like she threw her back out from all the vomiting 
because any time she flexed forward with her upper or lower back, she felt pain. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 131) Walbrun was diagnosed with viral gastroenteritis and acute 
musculoskeletal strain in her back due to vomiting. (Ex. JE6, p. 131) 
Walbrun returned to Finley on May 17, 2010, because of issues with her 
menstrual cycle. (Ex. JE6, p. 132) Accompanying the issue was back pain she 
described as “more of an internal cramping in the back.” (Ex. JE6, p. 132) Finley 
performed some lab work and referred Walbrun to the Women’s Wellness Center. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 132) Two days later, Walbrun telephoned because Aleve was not providing her 
relief from her back pain and requested something stronger. (Ex. JE6, p. 133) Finley 
staff called in a prescription of Lortab. (Ex. JE6, p. 133) On May 24, 2010, Walbrun 
reported to Finley staff that the Lortab helped reduce her back pain, but she had 
ongoing nausea. (Ex. JE6, p. 133) Walbrun’s symptoms caused her to go the Finley 
Emergency Room (ER) on June 3, 2010, where she was diagnosed with acute 
diverticulitis. (Ex. JE3, p. 133) 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Based on the limited evidence in the record following her diagnosis, it appears 
that care for Walbrun’s acute diverticulitis was successful. There is no indication that 
she contacted Finley after the diagnosis with ongoing complaints about internal 
cramping in her back or any other type of back pain. The weight of the evidence shows 
that the back pain Walbrun experienced in mid-2010 was related to her acute 
diverticulitis and resolved.  
The lack of evidence relating to medical care for any back or hip complaints in 
the years that followed supports the conclusion that Walbrun was relatively symptom 
free. There is an insufficient basis in the record to support a finding that Walbrun 
experienced back pain significant enough to seek medical care for approximately nine 
years after her trip to the Finley ER for acute diverticulitis. Nothing in evidence suggests 
Walbrun experienced any hip issues during this time period.  
Walbrun began experiencing back pain again on September 26, 2019. (Ex. JE8, 
p. 152) She was laying down, stood up, and it “felt weird to walk.” (Ex. JE8, p. 152) 
Walbrun went to bed that night and when she woke up the next morning, she could 
hardly stand up because of the pain. (Ex. JE8, p. 152) Walbrun worked three hours that 
day and then had an unrelated medical appointment. (Ex. JE8, p. 152) She underwent 
chiropractic care that she felt worsened her pain. (Ex. JE8, p. 152) Walbrun continued 
to have symptoms so bad they caused her to miss work. (Ex. JE8, p. 152) 
On September 30, 2019, Walbrun saw Nicole Schlosser, N.P., at Advanced 
Wellness Center, P.C., for complaints of low back and pain shooting into both legs. (Ex. 
JE7, p. 138) At the time of the exam, Walbrun’s right leg pain remained but had 
lessened while she had newly developed shooting pain from her left buttock to her left 
calf. (Ex. JE7, p. 138) Walbrun reported that she was unable to work due to the pain. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 138) Schlosser recommended physical therapy, Walbrun declined, and 
Schlosser administered a Toradol injection. (Ex. JE7, p. 138) 
Walbrun telephoned Advanced Wellness on October 2, 2019, because of 
ongoing pain symptoms. (Ex. JE7, p. 139) Ibuprofen was not effective in reducing her 
pain. (Ex. JE7, p. 139) There is no indication in the notes that Walbrun complained of 
hip pain. (Ex. JE7, p.139) Walbrun requested a release to return to work. (Ex. JE7, p. 
139) Schlosser sent in a prescription for Tramadol with directions for Walbrun to take as 
needed, reinforced that she needed to perform her stretching exercises, and issued a 
release for her to return to work. (Ex. JE7, p. 139) 
The next day, Walbrun telephoned Advanced Wellness to report that her low 
back pain radiating down her left leg was persisting despite the Tramadol. (Ex. JE7, p. 
140) The note from the phone call does not reflect any complaint of hip pain by 
Walbrun. (Ex. JE7, p. 140) Schlosser thought imaging of Walbrun’s back was needed 
due to her ongoing symptoms after conservative care. (Ex. JE7, p. 140) 
Walbrun underwent x-rays of her lumbar spine at Finley on October 4, 2019, that 
showed mild degenerative disc disease but no acute osseous injury. (Ex. JE7, p. 142) 
Schlosser saw Walbrun that day and noted that the x-rays were negative. (Ex. JE7, p. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 8 
 
141) On examination, Schlosser noted Walbrun continued to have pain radiating down 
both legs that she rated at seven out of ten. (Ex. JE7, p. 141) 
On examination, Schlosser noted a normal gait that was “smooth with equal 
stride and good base of support." (Ex. JE7, p. 141) With respect to Walbrun’s 
extremities, she noted, “Full range of motion with all extremities against gravity and 
resistance. Muscle strength is 5/5 with no gross anomalies.” (Ex. JE7, p. 141) Schlosser 
diagnosed Walbrun with lumbago with sciatica on the left side. (Ex. JE7, p. 141) She 
advised rest and stretching, filled out paperwork for leave under the federal Family and 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA), and maintained the prescriptions for Flexeril and Tramadol 
to take as much as three times daily as needed. (Ex. JE7, p. 141) 
On October 9, 2019, Walbrun had her intake appointment at Dubuque Physical 
Therapy. (Ex. JE8, p. 152) She was experiencing pain across the center of her back 
and down the back of her left leg and calf as well as numbness down her left leg when 
she sat. (Ex. JE8, p. 152) Range-of-motion testing when sitting showed internal rotation 
of the left hip at 25 degrees with pain and external rotation at 30 degrees with pain. (Ex. 
JE8, p. 153) Left hip flexion was 4+/5. (Ex. JE8, p. 153) 
Walbrun reported improvement at her October 17, 2019 physical therapy 
session. (Ex. JE8, p. 154) She had less pain when sitting and was able to walk further 
before experiencing pain. (Ex. JE8, p. 154) However, Walbrun still had symptoms 
through the back of her left leg. (Ex. JE8, p. 154)  
Walbrun had a follow-up appointment on October 18, 2019, with Schlosser. (Ex. 
JE7, p. 143) Walbrun reported that her back pain was improving but continued and that 
the Tramadol and Flexeril were helping. (Ex. JE7, p. 143) Schlosser noted that Walbrun 
was worried about the job duties she was unable to perform due to the pain, such as 
lifting, pushing, pulling, and bending. (Ex. JE7, p. 143) There is no indication in the 
records relating to the appointment that Walbrun expressly complained of any hip pain. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 143) 
 Schlosser examined Walbrun and noted the same normal gait as before with an 
“equal stride and good base of support.” (Ex. JE7, p. 143) She again noted full range of 
motion and five out of five strength in Walbrun’s extremities. (Ex. JE7, p. 143) Schlosser 
maintained her diagnosis of lumbago with sciatica on the left side, instructed Walbrun to 
continue Flexeril and Tramadol as needed, and provided information on stretching 
exercises. (Ex. JE7, p. 143) 
Walbrun had physical therapy on November 6, 2019, and reported her pain was 
at its worst when standing, at seven out of ten. (Ex. JE8, p. 155) She also shared that 
she was not waking up at night due to pain. (Ex. JE8, p. 155) It bothered her a little in 
her hip and leg to lay on her left side. (Ex. JE8, p. 155) Walbrun said she still 
experienced some occasional pain down her left leg. (Ex. JE8, p. 155) 
Also on November 6, 2019, Walbrun returned to Advanced Wellness for a follow-
up with Schlosser. (Ex. JE7, p. 144) Schlosser noted some success with physical 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 9 
 
therapy but that Walbrun felt she could not return to full duty work because of her 
ongoing pain. (Ex. JE7, p. 144) There is nothing in the record from this visit that 
suggests Walbrun voiced complaints of hip pain to Schlosser. (Ex. JE7, p. 144) 
Schlosser’s examination of Walbrun was similar to those performed previously. 
(Ex. JE7, p. 144) Her gait was normal with a good base of support and smooth and 
equal stride. (Ex. JE7, p. 144) Walbrun demonstrated full range of motion with all 
extremities against gravity and resistance as well as five out of five strength. (Ex. JE7, 
p. 144) Schlosser continued the Flexeril and Tramadol as needed and provided 
information on stretching exercises. (Ex. JE7, p. 144) Nothing in the record from this 
appointment suggests Walbrun complained of any sort of hip issue to Schlosser. (Ex. 
JE7, p. 144) 
Two weeks later, Walbrun followed up with Schlosser for a return-to-work 
examination. (Ex. JE7, p. 145) Walbrun was concerned about lifting on the job and 
working a full eight hours per day despite improvement in her back pain. (Ex. JE7, p. 
145) On examination, Schlosser noted full range of motion for all extremities against 
gravity and resistance as well as five out of five muscle strength with no anomalies. (Ex. 
JE7, p. 145) Schlosser released Walbrun to return to work without restrictions and 
advised her to work on core strengthening to help alleviate her back issues. (Ex. JE7, p. 
145) 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Walbrun 
experienced symptoms significant enough for her to seek medical care between her last 
appointment at Advanced Wellness on November 20, 2019, and August 2020. 
On August 6, 2020, Walbrun went to Advanced Wellness, where she saw Claire 
Nemmers, N.P., for a jammed left ring finger and low back pain on the right side, 
primarily in her buttock, radiating down into her hip and knee. (Ex. JE7, p. 147) The pain 
caused Walbrun to limp and her right buttock had tenderness on palpation. (Ex. JE7, p. 
147) Her work duties exacerbated the pain because she was often on her feet and had 
to do a lot of lifting and twisting. (Ex. JE7, p. 147) On examination of Walbrun’s 
extremities, Nemmers noted full range of motion against gravity and resistance as well 
as five out of five strength. (Ex. JE7, p. 147) Nemmers prescribed prednisone and 
referred Walbrun for physical therapy. (Ex. JE7, p. 148) 
Nemmers instructed Walbrun, “Follow up as needed if symptoms fail to improve 
or worsen on current treatment plan.” (Ex. JE7, p. 148) There is no indication Walbrun 
sought care from Advanced Wellness because her buttock pain failed to subside. The 
lack of records relating to any such care shows it is more likely than not they subsided 
with conservative care.  
About five months later, Walbrun saw Nemmers again on January 5, 2021, when 
she went to Advanced Wellness with complaints of left leg pain that began about five 
days earlier. (Ex. JE7, p. 149) Walbrun described the pain as a throbbing and cramping 
sensation that started in her knee and radiated up the thigh and down the calf. (Ex. JE7, 
p. 149) She rated her pain level as seven out of ten. (Ex. JE7, p. 149)  

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 10 
 
On examination, Nemmers observed Walbrun walked with a limp. (Ex. JE7, p. 
149) With respect to Walbrun’s extremities, Nemmers noted, “point tenderness to left 
popliteal fossa, posterior & lateral thigh & calf.” (Ex. JE7, p. 149) Nemmers ordered an 
x-ray of the left knee and advised Walbrun to ice and heat as needed and take Tylenol 
or ibuprofen as needed. (Ex. JE7, p. 149) Walbrun underwent x-rays that same day, 
which showed no fracture or bone destruction. (Ex. JE7, p. 151) Nemmers also referred 
Walbrun to the Finley pain clinic. (Ex. JE7, p. 150)  
On January 12, 2021, Walbrun saw Timothy Miller, M.D., at the Dubuque Pain 
Clinic. (Ex. JE9, pp. 156–59) Dr. Miller requested an MRI to assess whether a lumbar 
disc was causing radicular pain. (Ex. JE9, p. 157) He also felt it would be prudent to get 
an electromyography (EMG) nerve conduction velocity to try to assess possible 
neuropathy. (Ex. JE9, p. 157) 
Three days after Dr. Miller ordered an MRI, Walbrun went to Tri-State Family 
Practice to see Michael McKenna, M.D., for help with FMLA paperwork and her ongoing 
symptoms. (Ex. JE6, p. 134) Dr. McKenna had provided care to Walbrun previously, but 
had not seen her since 2017, when she transferred care away from him and his clinic. 
(Ex. JE6, p. 134) Upon learning of her symptoms and the various providers she had 
seen for her pain, he expressed frustration that she had come to the clinic because he 
felt it was inappropriate for him to treat her pain given the doctor-patient relationships 
she had established with other providers. (Ex. JE6, pp. 134–35) Dr. McKenna informed 
Walbrun that he would attempt to assist her with the paperwork “out of courtesy.” (Ex. 
JE6, p. 135) He performed an examination of Walbrun, found she had symptoms 
consistent with lumbar radiculopathy, and completed her FMLA paperwork, and issued 
her an ultimatum that she decide who her primary care physician will be moving forward 
and use that physician for care. (Ex. JE6, pp. 136–37) 
After Walbrun saw Dr. McKenna for help with her FMLA paperwork, she 
continued her course of care at the Finley pain clinic on February 4, 2021. (Ex. JE9, p. 
160) Dr. Miller reviewed the MRI with Walbrun, which showed “a disc extrusion fairly 
laterally at L5-S1 consistent with her symptoms going down from the buttock through 
leg lateral calf top of foot associated [with] positive straight leg raise.” (Ex. JE9, p. 160) 
They discussed surgery but decided to try a lumbar epidural steroid injection for her 
symptoms. (Ex. JE9, pp. 160–63) 
Walbrun reported back on February 18, 2021, the injection had provided short-
lived relief but she had pain returning to both legs at the time of the exam. (Ex. JE9, p. 
164) Dr. Miller and Walbrun decided to attempt another injection. (Ex. JE9, pp. 164, 
166) Dr. Miller also advised that she undergo a surgical consultation. (Ex. JE9, p. 164) 
The evidence establishes Walbrun had a chronic back condition that caused her 
to experience pain in the lumbar area of her back that radiated into both of her legs. The 
MRI establishes that a disc extrusion at L5-S1 is the likely cause of her symptoms. 
However, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude that it is 
the cause of ongoing symptoms in Walbrun’s hip.  

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 11 
 
C . 
I n j u r y.  
On February 24, 2021, Walbrun worked for Nordstrom. (Hr’g Tr. p. 20) At the end 
of Walbrun’s shift, she was cleaning the area in which she had been working using a 
broom to sweep debris. (Hr’g Tr. p.  20) She testified credibly to the following 
occurrence: 
I went down to sweep. I had swept everything into a pile and then I bent 
down and I was actually on my left knee and had my other leg up and then 
I was sweeping it into the dust pan and then I went to go up and I didn't 
make it all the way up. And I fell down. And then I -- I had hit my -- this -- 
my right buttock on my left shoe. Sorry. And then I thought, "What the 
heck just happened?" It's like, "I got to do this again." So I'm like, "I got to 
just propel up with more force." That's what I thought. I didn't know what 
the heck happened and then I went up again and it's like my legs just went 
out from under me and that's when I fell down, fell back. I hit my -- my 
buttock on my right side, hit my back and fell back and cracked my head. 
And I laid there because I couldn't get up. And I'm like, "What the heck? Is 
somebody going to come and get help? Is somebody going to come and 
help me?"  
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 20–21) 
Nobody came to help Walbrun get up. (Hr’g Tr. p. 21) She eventually worked her 
way over to a pole and sat up against it. (Hr’g Tr. p. 21) From there, Walbrun managed 
to maneuver herself to a standing position. (Hr’g Tr. p. 21) She then set out as best she 
could to notify a manager of her fall. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 21–24) 
D . 
N o t i c e .  
Around the time of Walbrun’s February 24, 2021 injury, Nordstrom was in the 
process of changing how the organization handled workers’ compensation reports. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 82) Prior to Walbrun’s injury, a Nordstrom health and safety tech would have 
handled the reporting. (Hr’g Tr. p. 82) That individual was named Rachel and she left 
the position before February 24, 2021. (Hr’g Tr. p. 83) On that date and in the weeks 
that followed, the position was vacant, which meant that individual supervisors such as 
Ryan Driscoll had to handle the duties that position had historically performed. (Hr’g Tr. 
p. 83) 
After Walbrun fell, she sought out Driscoll and told him that she had fallen while 
working. (Hr’g Tr. p. 21) During the hearing, Driscoll testified he had no recollection of 
the conversation he and Walbrun had after she fell on February 24, 2021. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
86) The undersigned finds Walbrun’s account of their conversation credible. It more 
likely than not accurately reflects the substance of the conversation she had with 
Driscoll about her fall that day at work. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 12 
 
After speaking with Walbrun about her injury, Driscoll completed a “Nordstrom 
Employee Injury Incident Report.” (Ex. C, p. 36; Hr’g Tr. pp. 80–81) The “Nordstrom 
Employee Injury Incident Report” has a blank with the header, “How was Nordstrom 
Notified:” with a space for the person to provide the method of notice. In this blank, 
Driscoll provided, “Employee Notice to Company/Store/Division.” (Ex. C, p. 36) Thus, 
regardless of the fact that Driscoll could not recall any details about his conversation 
with Walbrun regarding her February 24, 2021 fall and injury, the evidence establishes 
she shared enough information with him to notify him and Nordstrom that she had 
sustained an injury that merited filling out a form the employer had titled, “Nordstrom 
Employee Injury Incident Report.” (Ex. C, p. 36) 
Under “Incident Description,” Driscoll wrote that Walbrun “was sweeping and 
bent down to one knee to sweep dust into dust pan, [she] lost her balance when 
standing back up, which caused her [to] fall resulting in her twisting [her] left ankle while 
trying to catch herself.” (Ex. C, p. 49) Driscoll further indicated that Walbrun’s “Disability 
Type” was “INJ Injuries” and filled in the injury type as a sprain to the left ankle. (Ex. C, 
p. 49)  
At hearing, Walbrun testified that this description was inaccurate. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 49, 
52) She expressly denied that she twisted her ankle and that she told Driscoll she did. 
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 49, 52) Rather, she informed Driscoll that she was trying to protect her left 
leg because it had been symptomatic. (Hr’g Tr. p. 49) During Driscoll’s hearing 
testimony, he did not refute this fact; instead, he testified that he could not recall the 
details of their conversation. The information Driscoll provided in the “Nordstrom 
Employee Injury Report” is hearsay—Driscoll relaying what Walbrun told him—and 
therefore is given less weight than Walbrun’s sworn testimony based on her firsthand 
experience, which the undersigned finds credible.  
On the “Nordstrom Employee Injury Report,” Driscoll checked the box next to, 
“Reported injury and do not need medical treatment.” (Ex. C, p. 36) Again, this 
expressly conveys that Walbrun reported an injury to Driscoll and that he relayed the 
report to Nordstrom when he filled out and submitted the “Nordstrom Employee Injury 
Report.” Walbrun explained during her credible hearing testimony that she did not 
immediately feel like she needed medical care and the injury occurred at the end of her 
shift, so she clocked out and went home after reporting the injury to Driscoll. (Hr’g Tr. 
pp. 50–51)  
There is no indication in the record that Driscoll or anyone else with Nordstrom 
followed up with Walbrun after Driscoll submitted the completed “Nordstrom Employee 
Injury Incident Report.” In the days after Walbrun’s fall and injury, her hip “felt weird” and 
she started “walking weird” to compensate for it. (Hr’g Tr. p. 50) She began to develop 
pain and it “progressively got worse the more I was walking on it day after day after 
day.” (Hr’g Tr. p. 50) 
A couple of days after Walbrun’s fall and injury, she told Driscoll that something 
was wrong with her hip and she needed to talk to Rachel. (Hr’g Tr. p. 50) At hearing, 
Driscoll testified about what he typically would do if an employee raised such concerns 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 13 
 
but conceded that he had no recollection of a conversation with Walbrun about how she 
felt something was wrong with her and wanted to talk to Rachel about it. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
85–86) Walbrun’s testimony is therefore uncontroverted. Based on her demeanor and 
recollection of details, the undersigned finds it credible. The weight of the evidence 
establishes that Walbrun told Driscoll she needed to talk to Rachel because something 
was wrong with her hip and he told her that Rachel was not there, asked no follow-up 
questions, and took no action to arrange for care. 
E . 
R a t e .  
Section 6 of the Hearing Report addresses rate. The parties identified as in 
dispute Walbrun’s gross earnings, her marital status, and the number of exemptions to 
which she was entitled. Naturally, this meant that the weekly rate based on the disputed 
factors used to calculate it was also in dispute at the time of hearing. 
1 .  
E x e m p t i o n s.  
On February 24, 2021, Walbrun was married. (Hr’g Tr. p. 9) She is the mother to 
two children, one of whom was 18 and the other 19 at the time of hearing. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 
9–10) The hearing took place over two years after February 24, 2021, which means 
both children were under the age of 18 and therefore minors on the injury date.  
2 .  
Wa g e s .  
For Walbrun’s work at Nordstrom during the weeks leading up to February 24, 
2021, she earned $19.70 per hour. (Ex. 4, pp. 84–95) Nordstrom required employees to 
work four ten-hour days and mandatory overtime—put otherwise, a 40-hour workweek 
plus overtime. Walbrun missed work for a personal health condition for the five weeks 
from November 1, 2020, through December 5, 2020, and the two weeks from December 
20, 2020, through January 2, 2020. (Ex. 4, p. 83) Consequently, she earned no wages 
during these weeks, which was atypical for someone in her position.  
Walbrun put together a proposed calculation substituting out the weeks in which 
she earned nothing with earlier weeks of representative earnings. (Ex. 4, p. 83) In 
Nordstrom’ post-hearing brief, they concede that this calculation is correct. (Def. Brief, 
p. 9) As a result, the parties no longer dispute Walbrun’s weekly workers’ compensation 
rate. Therefore, the calculation found on page 83 of Claimant’s Exhibit 4 is hereby 
adopted. 
F .  
C a r e  &  I M E s  A f t e r  F e b r u a r y  2 4 ,  2 0 2 1 .  
On March 17, 2021, Walbrun received care at the University of Iowa Hospitals 
and Clinics (UIHC) for her ongoing low back pain and radiculopathy. (Ex. JE1, pp. 1–2) 
Walbrun saw Kathleen Dlouhy, M.D. on March 29, 2021, for her low back pain and 
radiculopathy. (Ex. JE1, p. 3) Dr. Dlouhy noted Walbrun’s symptoms began due to 
severe coughing she had after contracting COVID-19 and included “low back pain which 
radiated to her left leg down the back of her leg to her knee.” (Ex. JE1, p. 2) Walbrun 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 14 
 
reported that her low back pain was 50 percent better at the time of the exam than at 
onset. (Ex. JE1, p. 2) Dr. Dlouhy opined that the “MRI of the lumbar spine shows L5-S1 
disc herniation slight paracentral to the left possibly compressing the traversing S1 
nerve root.” (Ex. JE1, p. 4) Because of Walbrun’s improvement with conservative care, 
Dr. Dlouhy decided to continue on that course, adding a brace and Mobic for her pain 
and prescribing work restrictions for eight weeks. (Ex. JE1, p. 5) 
Walbrun followed up at UIHC with Dr. Dlouhy on May 17, 2021, and reported the 
radiculopathy into her legs was completely gone and her low back pain had significantly 
improved. (Ex. JE1, p. 8) She reported right lateral thigh pain that occurred when she 
increased her activity or changed positions. (Ex. JE1, p. 8) After examining Walbrun, Dr. 
Dlouhy opined: 
I believe her lateral leg pain could be hip related. We will send her to 
orthopedic surgery for hip evaluation. We will see her back in a couple of 
months and see how she is doing at that time. 
Ex. JE1, p. 10) Dr. Dlouhy issued a work release stating, “From a neurosurgical 
standpoint [Walbrun] may increase her work hours as tolerated with no restrictions.” 
(Ex. JE1, p. 11) 
On May 26, 2021, Walbrun telephoned the UIHC Neurosurgery Clinic. (Ex. JE1, 
p. 14) The staff note documenting the phone call states Walbrun wanted “to come to 
UIHC for her treatment for her right hip pain. She needs to have an internal referral 
entered. She would also like to have something for pain. She states that her pain is 
getting worse and it[’]s making it hard to . . . get up and around.” (Ex. JE1, p. 14) 
During the hearing, claimant’s counsel (Q) and Walbrun (A) had the following 
exchange: 
Q 
Okay. Now at the initial visit in Iowa, or during that time period, 
where were you all having pain? 
A 
I was having pain in my back and down my right side with my hip. 
(Hr’g Tr. p. 25) The question identifies two different times—the specific date of her first 
appointment at UIHC and “during that time period,” a nebulously defined but broader 
period. As detailed above, the evidence shows that Walbrun informed her treating 
physicians during the time period of her treatment at UIHC that the radiculopathy into 
her legs had resolved, her back pain had improved, and she had hip pain. Thus, this 
testimony is generally consistent with Walbrun’s complaints as documented in her UIHC 
medical records. The undersigned draws no negative inference regarding the veracity of 
her testimony or statements to treating physicians from the way she answered the 
vague question. 
Walbrun went to Tri-State Family Practice on April 23, 2021, where she saw 
Jennifer Burds, A.R.N.P., for complaints of ongoing low back pain, trouble focusing, and 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 15 
 
depression. (Ex. JE2, pp. 15–18) There is no indication Walbrun reported hip pain to 
Burds. (Ex. JE2, pp. 15–18) Burds diagnosed Walbrun with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and 
lumbar radiculopathy. (Ex. JE2, p. 18) 
On May 24, 2021, Walbrun returned to Tri-State Family Practice for another 
appointment with Burds. (Ex. JE2, p. 19) She described as improved her depression, 
anxiety, and low back pain with radiculopathy. (Ex. JE2, p. 19) Burds noted, “She now is 
just dealing with pain into her right hip and knee which the neurosurgeon thinks is more 
Ortho related.” (Ex. JE2, p. 19) Burds lumped all of Walbrun’s pain symptoms together 
and further explained that UIHC was referring her to an orthopedic specialist closer to 
home. (Ex. JE2, p. 21) 
The referral from the UIHC Neurosurgery Clinic to an orthopedic specialist took 
some time. (Hr’g Tr. p. 27) Consequently, Walbrun transferred care to Southwest Health 
in Platteville, Wisconsin, because it was closer to her home, with Joshua Lindsey, M.D., 
about whom she had heard good things. (Ex. JE3, p. 22; Hr’g Tr. p. 28) Walbrun 
underwent x-rays of her pelvis on June 9, 2021, that showed normal alignment, no 
fractures, and mild bilateral hip joint osteoarthritis. (Ex. JE3, p. 23) On June 10, 2021, 
Walbrun saw Melissa Brunton, a medical assistant, for “right hip pain.” (Ex. JE3, p. 22) 
Brunton noted, “No known injury.” (Ex. JE3, p. 22) Dr. Lindsey performed an injection 
and prescribed work restrictions and scheduled a follow-up exam. (Ex. JE3, p. 25) 
Walbrun followed up on June 30, 2021. (Ex. JE3, p. 26) She reported that the 
injection dulled her symptoms for about a week before her pain returned and had been 
increasing. (Ex. JE3, p. 26) Dr. Lindsey noted on examination that she was still having 
tenderness along her right hip and that she did not have limitations with limping or an 
antalgic gait. (Ex. JE3, p. 26) He scheduled an MRI to determine if she had sustained a 
gluteus medius minimus tear and continued her work restrictions through July 14, 2021. 
(Ex. JE3, p. 25)  
The MRI on July 6, 2021, showed severe tendinosis and partial tear of the 
gluteus minimus tendon insertion on the right greater trochanter. (Ex. JE3, pp. 28–29) 
After the MRI, Dr. Lindsey telephoned Walbrun to ask if she had been in an accident 
and she explained she had not been in an accident but had fallen on concrete while 
working at Nordstrom. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 28–29) Dr. Lindsey referred Walbrun to UW-
Platteville Clinics due to the MRI findings. (Hr’g Tr. p. 29; Ex. JE4, p. 33) 
On July 12, 2021, Walbrun had her initial consultation for right hip pain at UW-
Platteville Clinics with Andrea Spiker, M.D. (Ex. JE4, p. 33) Walbrun told Dr. Spiker her 
right hip had “been hurting since February of 2021 and is unsure if this is related to a fall 
that she had at work.” (Ex. JE4, p. 33) Dr. Spiker noted the pain was “located over the 
lateral aspect of her right hip and radiates down into her knee.” (Ex. JE4, p. 33)  
On examination, Dr. Spiker observed “a slight trendelenburg gait, which worsens 
with more walking.” (Ex. JE4, p. 35) Dr. Spiker personally reviewed the imaging of 
Walbrun’s pelvis and hip. (Ex. JE4, p. 37) With respect to the MRI, she noted it 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 16 
 
“demonstrates chondromalacia on the acetabular side most prominently with labral tear 
present and femoral impaction cyst at the femoral head neck junction present. The 
abductor tear appears to have full-thickness tearing of the gluteus medius and minimus 
as well as inflammation around the insertion.” (Ex. JE4, p. 37) 
Dr. Spiker informed Walbrun that her right hip adductor tear appeared to be the 
primary root of her symptoms. (Ex. JE4, p. 37) She further stated Walbrun had signs of 
early arthritis but that these were not affecting her nearly as much as the hip abductor 
tear. (Ex. JE4, p. 37) Dr. Spiker discussed surgical repair given the ineffectiveness to 
date of conservative care. (Ex. JE4, p. 37) 
On October 5, 2021, Dr. Spiker performed right hip gluteus medius and gluteus 
minimus open repair surgery with excision of the trochanteric bursa. (Ex. JE4, pp. 45–
51) Dr. Spiker took Walbrun off work for a period of convalescence after the surgery that 
lasted about seven months. (Hr’g Tr. p. 30) Walbrun participated in post-surgery 
rehabilitative care that consisted of follow-ups with Dr. Spiker and physical therapy. (Ex. 
JE4, pp. 52–66)  
In March of 2022, Walbrun telephoned UW-Platteville Clinics to attempt to have 
her work restrictions lifted so she could return to work. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 30–31; Ex. JE4, p. 
69) At Walbrun’s request, Dr. Spiker allowed her to return to work on March 28, 2022. 
(Ex. JE4, p. 70) The plan was to gradually lessen Walbrun’s restrictions to allow her to 
work her way back to full duty. (Ex. JE4, pp. 72, 78; Hr’g Tr. p. 31)  
Walbrun had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Spiker on April 6, 2022, during 
which she rated her hip pain at a two out of ten. (Ex. JE4, p. 74) Dr. Spiker continued 
physical therapy for Walbrun’s hip. (Ex. JE4, p. 74) Additionally, she opined that 
Walbrun’s chronic lumbar spine issues could be causing ongoing symptoms and 
recommended a lumbar MRI. (Ex. JE4, p. 74) 
Walbrun underwent an MRI of the lumbar spine on May 5, 2022, that showed 
degenerative changes and a left paracentral disc protrusion at L5-S1. (Ex. JE4, p. 79) 
Dr. Spiker saw Walbrun for low back pain on May 11, 2022, and opined the L5-S1 disc 
protrusion was the likely cause of her low back pain with radiculopathy. (Ex. JE4, pp. 
81–82) Dr. Spiker advised Walbrun to continue care for her low back pain and 
radiculopathy with the Finley Pain Clinic. (Ex. JE4, p. 82) 
Nordstrom arranged for Walbrun to undergo an IME with Jonathon Fields, M.D., 
on July 7, 2022. (Ex. A, p. 1) Dr. Fields reviewed medical records relating to care 
Walbrun received for her back condition and hip injury, performed a physical 
examination, and issued a report dated July 13, 2022, with his opinions in response to 
questions posed by defense counsel. (Ex. A, pp. 1–7) With respect to Walbrun’s hip 
injury, Dr. Fields diagnosed her with severe tendinosis and partial tear of the gluteus 
minimus tendon insertion on the right greater trochanter. (Ex. A, p. 5) 
Defense counsel asked Dr. Fields, “Was the alleged February 24, 2021 work 
injury a factor in causing the need for surgery on October 05, 2021?” (Ex. A, p. 5) Dr. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Fields opined that it was not because “Walbrun’s reported mechanism of injury and 
medical history are inconsistent with the alleged incident from February 24, 2021, 
resulting in the need for surgery.” (Ex. A, p. 5) At the end of his answer regarding 
causation, Dr. Fields cites to three medical articles in support of the following: 
Notably, tears of the gluteus medius and gluteus minimus are common 
causes of chronic peritrochanteric pain, with gluteus medius tears 
affecting up to 25% of late-middle-aged women. While the etiology 
remains unclear, tears of the gluteus medius and gluteus minimus are 
generally believed to be attributable to a degenerative process of the 
trochanteric enthesis. Acute traumatic tears in asymptomatic patients are 
exceedingly rare, with very few cases reported in the literature. 
(Ex. A, pp. 5–6 (footnotes omitted)) 
Defense counsel next asked if the fall at Nordstrom permanently and materially 
aggravated, accelerated, or lit up Walbrun’s low back and right hip condition such that 
she required surgery on October 5, 2021. (Ex. A, p. 6) Dr. Fields opined: 
In my medical opinion, there is no medical evidence to suggest that a work 
injury occurred during the alleged incident on February 24, 2021. Mrs. 
Walbrun’s medical records do not report an incidence of a fall or trauma 
on that date. Rather, medical records indicate that she developed 
symptoms earlier in January of 2021 after having “coughing fits” from 
COVID[-]19. 
(Ex. A, p. 6)  
In response to a question by defense counsel about MMI and permanent 
impairment, Dr. Fields opines that because there is no evidence of a work injury, there 
is no condition from which Walbrun could reach MMI or to perform an evaluation of 
permanent impairment or disability. (Ex. A, p. 6)  
On November 4, 2022, Walbrun received a right greater tronchanteric bursa 
(GTB) injection that was ultrasound guided. (Ex. JE4, p. 91) Walbrun telephoned Dr. 
Spiker’s office on November 8, 2022, to request an end date to her work restrictions and 
a follow-up post-injection. (Ex. JE4, p. 93) On November 18, 2022, Walbrun saw Dr. 
Spiker who noted, “She had at least one fall at work after her surgery, which has flared 
a number of symptoms.” (Ex. JE4, p. 95) Dr. Spiker noted on examination that Walbrun 
walked with a subtle limp favoring her right leg. (Ex. JE4, p. 95) 
Claimant’s counsel sent Dr. Spiker a letter on the question of causation, dated 
December 14, 2022, in which he states (sic): 
As you know, Ms. Walbrun has a history of low back and buttock 
complaints. However, on February 24, 2021, at while at work Ms. Walbrun 
and a fall when she experienced shooting pain in her low back, right hip, 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 18 
 
and right buttocks. While Ms. Walbrun did not initially realize that she had 
injured herself, her symptoms continued and led her to seek treatment. As 
you know, an MRI eventually revealed severe tendinosis and a partial tear 
of the gluteus minimus tendon insertion on the right greater trochanter. 
This eventually resulted in surgery which you performed on October 5, 
2021. In addition, MRI’s revealed disk bulging and L4-L5 and L5-S1. 
It is my understanding that it is your medical opinion that the work incident 
on February 24, 2021 was a substantial contributing factor to Ms. 
Walbrun’s conditions, or at a minimum that the February 2021 incident 
aggravated a pre-existing condition(s). It is further my understanding that it 
is your opinion for eventual need for surgery was also causally related to 
the February 2021 incident. 
(Ex. 6, p. 109; Ex. JE4, pp. 97–98) Claimant’s counsel requested a response regarding 
the accuracy of the above understanding of Dr. Spiker’s medical opinion as Walbrun’s 
treating surgeon. (Ex. 6, p. 109; Ex. JE4, pp. 97–98) 
On December 21, 2022, Walbrun saw Dr. Spiker for a follow-up appointment. 
(Ex. JE4, pp. 99–100) Dr. Spiker noted Walbrun had “struggled with lateral sided right 
hip pain and right knee pain post-operatively.” (Ex. JE4, p. 99) She also recorded that 
Walbrun was “tolerating” work at Nordstrom even though prolonged walking or sitting 
aggravated her symptoms. (Ex. JE4, p. 100) Walbrun asked to return to physical 
therapy and was encouraged by the results from the pain relief injection she had 
received. (Ex. JE4, p. 100) The success of the injection led Dr. Spiker to believe her 
ongoing symptoms were due to inflammation and the two discussed future care that 
included periodic injections. (Ex. JE4, p. 101) 
Walbrun telephoned Dr. Spiker’s office on January 3, 2023, because she was 
struggling with right hip pain but could not undergo another GTB injection until March. 
(Ex. JE4, p. 102) The pain caused Walbrun to leave work at Nordstrom the day prior 
and was still bothering her. (Ex. JE4, p. 102) She reported that treating her hip with heat 
was helpful but requested advice on how to reduce her pain. (Ex. JE4, p. 102) Staff 
encouraged Walbrun to increase her ibuprofen to 800 mg every eight hours and Tylenol 
to 1,000 mg every eight hours to see if that helped reduce her pain. (Ex. JE4, p. 102)  
Walbrun continued to telephone Dr. Spiker’s office with complaints of ongoing 
pain in the weeks that followed. (Ex. JE4, pp. 105–06) On January 20, 2023, Dr. Spiker 
continued her work restrictions through May 24, 2023, including working a maximum of 
eight hours per day, four days per week, with a thirty-pound lifting restriction. (Ex. JE4, 
p. 108)  
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Walbrun to undergo an IME with Robin 
Sassman, M.D. (Ex. 1, pp. 1–3) As part of the IME, Dr. Sassman reviewed medical 
records relating to Walbrun’s care, performed an in-person examination on February 1, 
2024, and authored a report dated March 18, 2024, that addressed questions posed by 
claimant’s counsel relating to causation, MMI, permanent impairment or disability, and 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 19 
 
work restrictions. (Ex. 1, pp. 4–19) Dr. Sassman does not identify Advanced Wellness 
records as among those reviewed. (Ex. 1, p. 5) Consequently, she does not discuss 
Walbrun’s pre-work injury hip complaints or the nature of her symptoms on January 5, 
2021. (Ex. 1, pp. 5–13) 
On the question of causation, Dr. Sassman opines, “Given the mechanism of the 
injury and the fact that she had no prior right-sided symptoms prior to the injury in 
question, it is my opinion that the fall on 2/24/2021 was a direct a causal factor in the 
right gluteus minimus tear, the need for surgery, and her ongoing symptoms in this 
area.” (Ex. 1, p. 16) As discussed above, medical records relating to Walbrun’s pre-
work-injury care reflect intermittent right hip symptoms. This fact undermines the 
credibility of Dr. Sassman’s causation opinion because it is based on an inaccurate 
understanding of Walbrun’s history of right hip symptoms. 
Using the Fifth Edition of the American Medical Association’s Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Dr. Sassman answered claimant’s counsel’s 
question on the extent of permanent impairment thusly: 
[F]or the right hip, turning to Table 17-9 on page 537, she can be assigned 
5% lower extremity impairment for loss of flexion, 0% lower extremity 
impairment for extension, 0% lower extremity impairment for abduction, 
0% lower extremity impairment for adduction, 5% lower extremity 
impairment for internal rotation, and 5% lower extremity impairment for 
loss of external rotation. These are added together for a total of 15% lower 
extremity impairment. Using Table 17-3 on page 527, this is converted to 
6% whole person impairment. This impairment is due to the 2/24/2021 
injury date.  
The Guides state[] on page 508, section 16.8a that strength cannot be 
rated in the presence of decreased range of motion. Therefore, no 
additional rating for loss of strength will be assigned. 
(Ex. 1, p. 16) 
Dr. Sassman opined the following permanent work restrictions are appropriate: 
 Occasional (11–33% of an eight-hour day) standing, walking, and sitting; 
 Change positions frequently; 
 Limit use of stairs and always use a handrail for safety; and 
 Limit her use of ladders to a rare basis. (Ex. 1, p. 17)  
Dr. Sassman identified November 19, 2023, as the date on which Walbrun 
reached MMI because that was the date of her last appointment with Dr. Spiker, her 
treating surgeon. (Ex. 1, p. 17) 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 20 
 
Dr. Sassman reviewed a medical treatment and expense summary covering care 
Walbrun received from March 17, 2021, through February 18, 2024, and opined it was 
fair and reasonable treatment except for care provided by Dr. Miller, which was for her 
low back and not hip. (Ex. 1, p. 18) She also opined it was reasonable and necessary 
and connected to the hip injury Walbrun sustained at Nordstrom. (Ex. 1, p. 18) 
Moreover, she opined her fee for the IME is reasonable and typical based on her 
training, board certifications as an Occupational and Environmental Medicine physician 
and Independent Medical Examiner by the American Board of Independent Medical 
Examiners, her location in Boone, Iowa, and her 19 years of experience performing 
IMEs. (Ex. 1, pp. 18–19) 
In a letter dated March 22, 2023, Dr. Spiker responded to claimant’s counsel’s 
letter of December 14, 2022. (Ex. 7, p. 111) Dr. Spiker opined, “It is my medical opinion 
that it is more likely than not the February 24, 2021, work incident was a contributing 
factor in Regina Walbrun’s ongoing condition relating to her right hip, along with all the 
medical treatment relating to those complaints including the surgery I performed on 
October 5, 2021.” (Ex. 7, p. 111) 
On May 24, 2023, and June 8, 2023, Walbrun telephoned the clinic about her 
work restrictions. (Ex. JE4, pp. 114–16) Walbrun’s next appointment with Dr. Spiker was 
on November 29, 2023, at which time she rated her pain as one out of ten. (Ex. JE4, p. 
117) Dr. Spiker noted continued improvement for Walbrun and recommended activity as 
tolerated and advised her to seek pain management for her back condition with other 
providers. (Ex. JE4, p. 118) Dr. Spiker recommended no additional care for Walbrun’s 
surgically repaired hip. (Ex. JE4, p. 118) 
G .  
C a u s a t i o n.  
The evidence establishes and the parties agree that Walbrun has two 
symptomatic conditions at times material to this case. She had an underlying back 
condition that caused low back pain that radiated into both of her legs. Walbrun also 
had a right hip condition that caused her pain that shot into her leg and ultimately 
necessitated surgery. 
The doctors that have opined on causation in this case have stated that her back 
condition is not work related. Walbrun does not allege that the low back condition is 
related to her work at Nordstrom. The weight of the evidence shows Walbrun’s back 
condition that causes her low back pain that radiates into both of her legs is not related 
to her employment with Nordstrom. 
Dr. Sassman’s opinion on causation is also so flawed as to be unavailing. Dr. 
Sassman’s understanding of Walbrun’s medical history was inaccurate because she did 
not review those records documenting her hip complaints from before the fall at 
Nordstrom. Thus, Dr. Sassman believed Walbrun was asymptomatic before the fall 
when she was not. This makes Dr. Sassman’s opinion unpersuasive. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 21 
 
The credibility of Dr. Fields’s causation opinion is damaged by its internal 
inconsistencies. Dr. Fields based his opinion on three conclusions supported by the 
literature, the final of such being, “Acute traumatic tears in asymptomatic patients are 
exceedingly rare, with very few cases reported in the literature.” (Ex. A, p. 6 (footnotes 
omitted)) In contradiction to this conclusion, he further supports his opinion that the 
injury, surgery, and resulting impairment and disability are not related to Walbrun’s fall 
at work by citing to instances in her medical history in which she complained of hip pain. 
If, as Dr. Fields asserts in the final paragraph of his opinion on causation, “[a]cute 
traumatic tears in asymptomatic patients are exceedingly rare,” the fact that Walbrun 
experienced symptoms in her hip before the fall at work is inconsistent with his 
reasoning and undermines the persuasiveness of his opinion. Put otherwise, the 
symptoms in Walbrun’s hip before the fall at Nordstrom make an acute tear more likely. 
Further eroding the persuasiveness of Dr. Fields’s assertion that Walbrun’s 
“medical records indicate that she developed symptoms earlier in January of 2021 after 
having ‘coughing fits’ from COVID[-]19.” (Ex. A, p. 6) It appears more likely than not that 
Dr. Fields is referencing the records from the care Walbrun received at Advanced 
Wellness. The January 5, 2021 Advanced Wellness record makes no reference to hip 
pain. (Ex. JE7, p. 149) It notes Walbrun just recovered from COVID-19. (Ex. JE7, p. 
149) In the description of the history of present illness, Nemmers notes Walbrun 
“[s]tates the pain starts behind the knee and radiates up the thigh and down the calf.” 
(Ex. JE7, p. 149) There is no reference to hip pain similar to that described after 
February 24, 2021, in the records from this appointment. (Ex. JE7, p. 149) 
The next medical record Dr. Fields discusses in his opinion on causation is that 
from June 10, 2021, in which she went to Southwest Health Platteville for right hip pain 
she rated at five out of ten. (Ex. A, p. 5) Dr. Fields quotes the record from the 
appointment where Brunton notes Walbrun “[s]tates pain started in her knee when she 
was having complications from COVID[-]19 such as coughing fits. No known injury.” 
(Ex. A, p. 5) 
Moreover, Walbrun received care at UIHC closer in time to her onset of 
symptoms while stricken with COVID-19. For example, there is no reference or 
consideration given to the records from Walbrun’s initial consultation at UIHC with Dr. 
Dlouhy, who noted that severe coughing while Walbrun had COVID-19 caused her to 
experience “low back pain which radiated to her left leg down the back of her leg to her 
knee.” (Ex. JE1, p. 2) Dr. Fields also failed to discuss the UIHC records relating to 
Walbrun’s appointment on May 17, 2021, in which Dr. Dlouhy noted Walbrun’s low back 
pain had improved, her radiculopathy was gone, and that she had complaints of right 
lateral thigh pain that occurred with increased activity or changing positions. (Ex. JE1, p. 
8) Nor did Dr. Fields address Dr. Dlouhy’s belief that this pain could be hip related or the 
fact Dr. Dlouhy gave Walbrun a referral for orthopedic consultation. (Ex. JE1, p. 10)  
The contents of the UIHC records are all the more significant because Dr. Fields 
also quotes from the Southwest Health Platteville record, which ties the onset of 
Walbrun’s hip symptoms to coughing from COVID-19. (Ex. A, p. 5) But this stands in 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 22 
 
contrast to the notes from Dr. Dlouhy at UIHC, which tie the cause of a new onset of low 
back pain with radiculopathy to coughing from COVID-19—not hip pain.  
The UIHC records being closer in time to Walbrun’s onset of symptoms make 
them more credible than those from Southwest Health Platteville. Thus, the weight of 
the evidence shows Walbrun’s coughing from COVID-19 caused low back pain with 
radiculopathy, not hip pain. Dr. Fields’s reliance on an inaccurate history from 
Southwest Health Platteville undermines the credibility of his opinion on causation. 
Dr. Fields also offered an opinion that was internally inconsistent. On the one 
hand, he asserted that acute tears of the type Walbrun sustained were rare for 
asymptomatic women. On the other hand, Dr. Fields asserted that Walbrun’s history of 
symptoms before the fall at work meant her worsening symptoms after the fall were not 
related to the fall at work. For the aforementioned reasons, the undersigned finds Dr. 
Fields’s opinion on causation unpersuasive. 
Lastly, there is Dr. Spiker. Nordstrom contend in their brief that Dr. Spiker had an 
inaccurate understanding of Walbrun’s medical history but that is speculation because 
the evidentiary record does not support such a finding. Dr. Spiker treated Walbrun while 
they were diagnosing her hip condition and through the process of identifying the fall at 
work as the cause of her symptoms. This gives her opinion additional heft. Further, Dr. 
Spiker is the surgeon who performed the procedure to correct Walbrun’s injury. For 
these reasons, I find her opinion most persuasive. 
Further reinforcing Dr. Spiker’s opinion is the fact that Dr. Fields cited to a record 
suggesting that acute tears of the type Walbrun sustained were more common amongst 
individuals with pre-existing hip symptoms and the medical records show Walbrun had 
preexisting hip symptoms—however intermittent. As well, those symptoms worsened 
after the fall. These facts join with Dr. Spiker’s opinion to establish it is more likely than 
not Walbrun’s fall at Nordstrom was a factor in worsening her symptoms and the need 
for treatment, including but not limited to surgery and post-surgery care.  
H . 
P e r m a n e n t  I m p a i r m e n t .  
The evidence shows one doctor opined on the extent of permanent impairment:  
Dr. Sassman. But the inquiry does not end there. Her opinion is adopted because the 
evidence shows she reached her opinion solely by utilizing the Guides and substantially 
complied with the framework therein for evaluating hip impairment. Walbrun has 
therefore met her burden of proof. The evidence shows it is more likely than not she 
sustained a six percent permanent impairment to the whole body. 
I .  
E a r n i n g s  A f t e r  R e t u r n  t o  W o r k .  
 In 2020, Nordstrom implemented a work schedule for employees that consisted 
of four shifts ten hours in length per week. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) In addition to those hours, 
Nordstrom required mandatory overtime of its workers. (Hr’g Tr. p. 32) As of the date of 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 23 
 
hearing, Walbrun had been unable to work more than eight hours per day. (Hr’g Tr. p. 
32)  
The evidence shows that, at the time of hearing, Walbrun was working 32 hours 
per week. She was earning $21.20 an hour. It is more likely than not Walbrun averaged 
approximately $678.40 per week. This means her weekly earnings at the time of 
hearing were less than her $743.04 average weekly wage at the time of the work injury. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments took effect on July 1, 2017. Id. at § 
24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). Because the injury at issue in this case occurred 
after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. 
See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5064673, 2020 
WL 6037539 *2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). The 2021 edition of the Iowa Code governs. 
A .  
C a u s a t i o n.  
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must “provide, 
secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability for 
recovery of damages or other compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). “[W]here an accident occurs to an employee in the usual course of his 
employment, the employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and proximately 
flow from the accident.” Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 266 N.W. 480, 482, opinion 
modified on denial of reh'g, 222 Iowa 764, 269 N.W. 925 (Iowa 1936). 
“[T]he burden of proof is on the claimant to prove some employment incident or 
activity was a proximate cause of the health impairment on which he bases his claim.” 
Anderson v. Oscar Mayer & Co., 217 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1974). “[A] possibility is 
insufficient; a probability is necessary.” Id. The claimant must prove causation by a 
preponderance of the evidence. See, e.g., St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 
652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996)). 
“For workers' compensation purposes a cause is proximate if it is a cause; it need not 
be the only cause.” Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994) 
(citing Blacksmith v. All–American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 354 (Iowa 1980)). 
“‘Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” IBP, Inc. v. 
Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency, “as the fact finder, determines the weight to 
be given to any expert testimony.” Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 
1998). The agency must weigh the evidence in a case and accept or reject an expert 
opinion based on the entire record. Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. The agency may 
accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in part. Sherman, 576 N.W.2d at 321. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 24 
 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a 
defense.  Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 
760-61 (1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
As found above, Walbrun has satisfied her burden of proof on the question of 
whether her right hip injury arose out of and in the course of her employment at 
Nordstrom. Acute tears of the gluteus medius and minimus are rare in asymptomatic 
individuals. Walbrun had intermittent hip symptoms that predated her fall at Nordstrom. 
The fall at Nordstrom caused her right hip symptoms to worsen to the point they were 
no longer mild or intermittent. Ultimately, Walbrun’s symptoms necessitated an MRI, 
surgery, and care to help her rehabilitate from the surgery. The weight of the evidence 
establishes Walbrun’s fall while working for Nordstrom was a significant factor in 
worsening her hip condition and necessitating treatment. It also caused Walbrun to 
sustain functional impairment. 
B . 
N o t i c e .  
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. The purpose of the 
notice requirement is to give the employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts 
surrounding the injury.  Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the 
employer must prove by a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Iowa State 
Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91, 92 (1940). 
Here, Walbrun informed Driscoll, a supervisor, that she had fallen while working 
immediately after she was physically able to get herself up off the floor and walking on 
the day of the incident. The information Walbrun provided spurred Driscoll to complete 
and submit a “Nordstrom Employee Injury Incident Report.” Thus, Walbrun provided 
sufficient information to satisfy the intent of section 85.23 to give the employer an 
opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury. The record shows 
Nordstrom took no action to investigate, but that is not due to lack of notice on the part 
of Walbrun. 
C . 
H P  &  T P D  B e n e f i t s .  
“Permanent benefits and temporary benefits are very different. Temporary 
benefits compensate the employee for lost wages until he or she is able to return to 
work, whereas permanent benefits compensate either a disability to a scheduled 
member or a loss in earning capacity (industrial disability).” Mannes v. Fleetguard, Inc., 
770 N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009) (citing Iowa Code §§ 85.33, 85.34) An injured 
employee may receive such temporary benefits as follows: 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 25 
 
 Temporary total disability (TTD) benefits for time lost from work for an injury 
that does not result in a permanent disability. Iowa Code § 85.33(1).  
 Temporary partial disability (TPD) benefits when the employee is able to 
perform light-duty work within restrictions but cannot return to work 
substantially similar to the job performed at the time of the work injury. Id. at § 
85.33(2). 
 Healing period benefits for time lost from work for an injury that results in 
permanent partial disability (PPD). Id. at § 85.34(1). 
Because the work injury to Walbrun’s hip caused permanent disability, the parties’ 
dispute regards her entitlement to HP and TPD benefits. 
1 .  
H P  B e n e f i t s .  
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides that an employer must pay an employee 
who sustains a work injury resulting in permanent disability workers’ compensation for a 
healing period “beginning on the first day of disability after the injury, and until the 
employee has returned to work or it is medically indicated that significant improvement 
from the injury is not anticipated or until the employee is medically capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.” In this case, the parties stipulated 
Walbrun was off work from the date of Dr. Spiker’s surgery, October 5, 2021, through 
March 28, 2022, the date on which Dr. Spiker released Walbrun to return to work on a 
reduced schedule. 
Because the evidence shows Walbrun sustained a work injury to her right hip 
that caused permanent disability, she is entitled to HP benefits. The first day of disability 
was the date of Dr. Spiker’s surgery. Her last day of convalescence before returning to 
work on a reduced schedule was March 28, 2022. The evidence therefore shows 
Walbrun is entitled to 24.857 weeks of HP benefits at the rate of $513.06 per week. 
2 .  
T P D  B e n e f i t s .  
Under Iowa Code section 85.33(4), “The temporary partial benefit shall be sixty-
six and two-thirds percent of the difference between the employee’s weekly earnings at 
the time of injury, computed in compliance with section 85.36, and the employee’s 
actual gross weekly income from employment during the period of temporary partial 
disability.” The parties have stipulated that Walbrun was limited to working four hours 
per day and was off work for the remainder of her ten-hour shift each day from March 
28, 2022, through May 5, 2022, by order of Dr. Spiker. She was earning $20.50 per 
hour at the time. Therefore, she is entitled to two-thirds of the difference between her 
average weekly wage on the injury date of $734.04 and her actual earnings. This totals 
$1,759.39. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 26 
 
D . 
P e r m a n e n cy  B e n e f i t s .  
The parties dispute whether Walbrun is entitled to benefits based on an industrial 
disability analysis or for the functional impairment caused by her injury. Walbrun argues 
she earns less now than at the time of injury because she works fewer hours since 
reaching MMI. Nordstrom argue no doctor has restricted the number of hours per week 
Walbrun can work and her limited hours are self-imposed, which means she is entitled 
to permanency benefits based only on the functional impairment to her hip. 
Workers’ compensation is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 
570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 
(Iowa 1992).  And “it is the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the 
act’s benefits may be obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held: 
The legislature enacted the workers' compensation statute primarily for the 
benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents. Therefore, we apply 
the statute broadly and liberally in keeping with the humanitarian objective 
of the statute. We will not defeat the statute's beneficent purpose by 
reading something into it that is not there, or by a narrow and strained 
construction. 
Gregory v. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 399 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812, 815–16 (Iowa 2008) (citations omitted)).  
“Although the workers' compensation statute is to be liberally construed in favor 
of the worker, the statute is not to be expanded by reading something into it that is not 
there.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Cedar 
Rapids Community School Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). “To determine 
legislative intent, we look to the language chosen by the legislature and not what the 
legislature might have said.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 
(Iowa 2016) (citing Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 337 (Iowa 
2008)). The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation 
(apart from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a 
physical injury.” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 
2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law 
§ 80.02, at 80–2 (2009)).  
In 2017, the legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act to require 
the use of the Guides when determining the functional impairment caused by a work 
injury. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 6 (now codified at Iowa Code § 85.34(2)). The 
legislature also changed how an injured employee’s entitlement to workers’ 
compensation is determined by amending what is now section 85.34(2)(v) to provide: 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 27 
 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability. 
With the 2017 amendments, the legislature changed how permanent disability is 
determined for workers’ compensation purposes. Before the 2017 amendments, the 
agency could use all evidence in the administrative record, as well as agency expertise, 
when determining the permanent disability of an injured worker. See, e.g., Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Under agency rules before 
the 2017 amendments, the Guides were considered a “useful tool in evaluating 
disability.” Seaman v. City of Des Moines, File Nos. 5053418, 5057973, 5057974 (App. 
Oct. 11, 2019) (quoting Bisenius v. Mercy Med. Ctr., File No. 5036055 (App. Apr. 1, 
2013)); see also Westling v. Hormel Foods Corp., 810 N.W.2d 247, 252 (Iowa 2012). 
However, in cases involving injuries on or after July 1, 2017, the Guides are more than 
a tool when determining functional impairment; they are dispositive. 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
As found above, after submission of post-hearing briefs, the parties no longer 
dispute Walbrun’s average weekly earnings at the time of the injury. They agree her 
earnings were $743.04. Walbrun is working an eight-hour shift, four days per week—
which totals 32 hours—because it worsens her hip symptoms to work more than eight 
hours in a day. Nordstrom has accommodated this limitation. At the time of hearing, she 
was an employee at Nordstrom working approximately 32 hours per week. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 28 
 
The statutory text is express and straightforward. It contains no provision that 
limits an injured employee to permanency benefits when she works reduced hours 
based on her personal experience with respect to how it worsens her symptoms as 
opposed to doctor-imposed restrictions. To interpret the statute to contain such a 
condition would run afoul of binding caselaw precedent holding that the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act “is not to be expanded by reading something into it that is not there.” 
Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Cedar Rapids 
Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). 
When an employee remains employed with the defendant-employer at the time 
of hearing, the determination of whether the worker is entitled to permanency benefits 
for permanent impairment or industrial disability is made by answering whether the 
worker’s earnings are less at the time of hearing than they were at the time of the work 
injury. The evidence in this case shows that Walbrun’s weekly earnings at the time of 
hearing were less than on the date of injury. She is therefore entitled to permanent 
partial disability (PPD) benefits based on an industrial disability analysis under the plain 
text of the statute. 
“Under section 85.34, the classification of a workers’ compensation claimant's 
injury as either scheduled or unscheduled determines the extent of the claimant's 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits.” Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 
N.W.2d 662, 666 (Iowa 2022). For injuries to body parts not listed in the statutory 
schedule found in paragraphs (a) through (u) of section 85.34(2), compensation is 
based on the extent of industrial disability, which is measured by lost earning capacity. 
Iowa Code 85.34(2)(v); see also Chavez, 972 N.W,.2d at 666–67. The following factors 
are considered when determining the extent of an injured worker’s industrial disability: 
functional disability, age, education, qualifications, work experience, inability to engage 
in similar employment, earnings before and after the injury, motivation to work, personal 
characteristics, and the employer’s inability to accommodate the injured employee’s 
functional limitations. See Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 
2012); see also IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); E.N.T. 
Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 830 (Iowa 1994); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 
784, 792 (Iowa 1976).  When assessing the extent of industrial disability, “‘the focus is 
not solely on what the worker can and cannot do; the focus is on the ability of the 
worker to be gainfully employed.’” Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 157 (Iowa 
1996) (quoting Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 266 (Iowa 
1995)). 
Walbrun was 56 years of age at the time of hearing. She has no postsecondary 
education or specialized training. Her work history primarily involved performing manual 
labor of various types in retail with most of the positions she held requiring her to be on 
her feet, standing and walking. The record shows she is not a strong candidate for 
reeducation or retraining. 
One factor to consider is the worker’s functional impairment. Under the Guides, 
“Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are consensus-
derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical condition and the degree to 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 29 
 
which the impairment decreases an individual’s ability to perform common activities of 
daily living (ADL), excluding work.” Guides, p. 4 (bold-face emphasis in original omitted). 
Walbrun’s work injury to her hip caused her to sustain a six percent impairment to her 
whole body in activities of daily living, excluding work.  
Dr. Sassman’s permanent work restrictions have been adopted. They consist of 
occasional (11–33% of an eight-hour day) standing, walking, and sitting; changing 
positions frequently; limiting use of stairs and always use a handrail for safety; and 
limiting her use of ladders to a rare basis. These restrictions modestly limit the types of 
job duties Walbrun can perform and, by extension, the number of jobs she could obtain. 
The defendant-employer’s ability to maintain a claimant’s employment after she 
has reached MMI is a factor that is given significant weight in cases before the 
commissioner. In this case, Nordstrom has accommodated Walbrun’s self-imposed 
restriction and allowed her to work a reduced schedule. Walbrun’s ongoing 
accommodated employment at Nordstrom prevents this case from being a more 
significant industrial disability. 
Section 85.34(2)(v) requires consideration of the number of years the injured 
employee was reasonably expected to continue working at the time of injury. The 
statute leaves unsaid how this impacts a disability determination. Walbrun was 56 years 
of age at the time of hearing and there is an insufficient basis in the record from which 
to conclude the injury and her resulting functional limitations have impacted how long 
she will continue to work. 
Walbrun has met her burden of proof with respect to industrial disability. The 
evidence shows the work injury has caused her to sustain a 30 percent industrial 
disability. Five hundred multiplied by 30 percent is 150 weeks. Under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(u), Walbrun is entitled to 150 weeks of PPD benefits for the lost earning 
capacity she has sustained due to the work injury to her hip. 
E . 
R a t e .  
Walbrun was married on the date of injury and entitled to four exemptions. Her 
average weekly wages were $734.04. Using the agency ratebook spreadsheet in effect 
on the date of injury, Walbrun’s workers’ compensation rate is $513.06 per week. 
F .  
R e i m b u r s e m en t .  
For all compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer 
must “furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1). Walbrun has prayed for reimbursement of medical 
expenses relating to care for her injured hip as well as transportation expenses relating 
to that care in the form of medical mileage under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—
8.1. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 30 
 
1 .  
C a r e .  
The threshold issue is causation, which is identified as disputed in Section 8(d) of 
the Hearing Report. As found above, Walbrun has satisfied her burden of proof on the 
question of causation. The weight of the evidence shows her right hip injury arose out of 
and in the course of her employment with Nordstrom. Moreover, it is more likely than 
not the work injury caused permanent disability. Walbrun’s right hip injury is 
compensable and Nordstrom must hold her harmless for the cost of reasonable medical 
care under section 85.27. 
The parties identify as disputed in Section 8(b) of the hearing report whether the 
treatment for which Walbrun is seeking reimbursement was reasonable and necessary. 
They also stipulate that, “Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to 
the reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed expenses and 
defendants are not offering contrary evidence.” Dr. Sassman filled this void with an 
uncontroverted opinion that the fees charged for Walbrun’s hip care were reasonable in 
her expert opinion. Consequently, the weight of the evidence shows the care Walbrun 
received for her injured right hip was reasonable and necessary, since her ongoing and 
worsening hip symptoms are what prompted her to seek care. 
Lastly, there is Section (8)(f) of the hearing report, in which the parties indicate 
that whether Nordstrom authorized the requested expenses is in dispute. However, 
Nordstrom have denied liability by disputing whether Walbrun’s right hip injury arose out 
of and in the course of her employment. Given the fuzzy timeline based on the limited 
evidence regarding Nordstrom’ investigation and any formal letter informing Walbrun 
that they were denying liability for her right hip injury, this decision will assume 
arguendo that they have asserted an authorization defense. 
“Nothing in the statute prevents an employee from obtaining unauthorized care” 
and “reimbursement for expenses incurred in seeking unauthorized care upon an 
adjudication of compensability.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 
759, 773 (citing Bell Bros. Heating & Air Condition v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 205–06 
(Iowa 2010) and R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 197 (Iowa 2003)). 
The commissioner has the authority order the employer to pay for unauthorized care. Id. 
(citing W. Side Transp. v. Cordell, 601 N.W.2d 691, 693 (Iowa 1999)). To recover 
expenses incurred in seeking unauthorized care, the employee must prove, by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the care was:  
1) Reasonable; and 
2) Beneficial. Id. (citing Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 206).  
The determination of whether unauthorized care was reasonable and beneficial 
is based on the totality of the circumstances. Id. “[T]he reasonableness of unauthorized 
treatment can normally only be fully evaluated in light of the effectiveness of the 
treatment.” Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 206 (citing Linn Care Ctr. v. Cannon, 704 P.2d 
539, 540 (1985)). “[U]nauthorized medical care is beneficial if it provides a more 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 31 
 
favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care authorized 
by the employer.” Id. 
Here, Walbrun’s course of care for her right hip injury following her fall at 
Nordstrom is reasonable. After Dr. Dlouhy at UIHC opined her symptoms could be 
related to a hip condition, she obtained a referral to an orthopedic specialist closer to 
home in Dr. Lindsey, who accurately diagnosed her condition before referring her to Dr. 
Spiker, a surgeon with greater experience successfully treating such injuries. Dr. Spiker 
performed surgery that necessitated extensive rehabilitation that had a beneficial effect 
on her symptoms. The weight of the evidence shows the care Walbrun received for her 
right hip injury was reasonable, necessary, and beneficial. Nordstrom must therefore 
hold her harmless for it under section 85.27. 
2 .  
M e d i c a l  M i l e a g e .  
In addition to medical services, Iowa Code section 85.27(1)(a) requires an 
employer the furnish “reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” In this case, Walbrun has proven she sustained a work injury to her right hip 
and entitlement to medical services identified in Claimant’s Exhibit 2. It is axiomatic 
under the statute that she is therefore also entitled to reimbursement for the 
transportation expenses incurred for such services, which takes the form of medical 
mileage under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—8.1. 
G .  
I M E  C o s t s .  
Iowa Code section 85.39 governs examinations of injured employees to 
determine the extent of permanent impairment or disability caused by a work injury. Mid 
American Const. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 847–48 (Iowa 2024). Under subsection 
1, the employee must attend an examination by a physician of the employer’s choice or 
be disqualified from benefits for the period of refusal. An opinion on causation or the 
extent of permanent impairment or disability by a doctor retained by the employer 
triggers the injured employee’s right to an IME under subsection 2. 
“In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the employer 
and the employee.” Id. 2 N.W.3d at 848. “The statutory process balances the competing 
interests of the employer and employee and permits the employee to obtain an 
independent medical examination at the employer's expense.” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). Subsection 2 entitles the 
employee to receive an examination if the employee believes the evaluation made by 
the employer's physician was too low. Iowa Code § 85.39(2); Young, 867 N.W.2d at 
844. The employee's own examination “is known as an IME because the examination is 
independent of the examination done by the physician selected by the employer.” 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 843–44. 
Subsection 2 further provides, “A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination … shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to 
perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 32 
 
Under the Iowa Supreme Court’s holding in Sandlin, “The reasonableness of the fees 
will be analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically charge to perform the 
impairment rating examination—which may include ‘the costs of reviewing medical 
records, conducting a physical examination, opining on causation, assessing permanent 
impairment, assigning restrictions, and addressing further treatment recommendations.’” 
2 N.W.3d at 851–52 (quoting Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm'r No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022)).  
This analysis under the statute “effectively necessitates fact-finding by the 
commissioner on the fees typically charged in the local area where the examination is 
performed. Parties may offer evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to 
support or challenge the fee charged in a particular case.” Id. at 849. The court 
concluded “‘many IMEs come before the agency, which allows the [commissioner] to 
use agency experience and expertise to conclude that [the physician's] charges are in 
line with those of an occupational medicine doctor with a practice in the ... [local] area 
performing an evaluation of permanent impairment in accordance with the [AMA] 
Guides.’” Id. (quoting Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm'r No. 21003118.03, 2023 WL 
7128682, at *32 (Arb. Oct. 20, 2023)). 
The introductory chapter of the Guides states the following with respect to the 
process it details for evaluating permanent impairment or disability: 
Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides 
as comprehensive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing 
the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed 
in Chapter 2. A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable 
information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a 
discussion about the person’s abilities and limitations, including the ability 
to perform common activities listed in Table 1-2. Combining the medical 
and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about 
essential work activities, if requested, is a basis for improved 
understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the 
individual’s work ability. 
Guides, § 1.12, p. 15. 
Chapter 2, “Practical Application of the Guides,” provides the following with 
respect to the examiners’ roles and responsibilities: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 33 
 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. Moreover, the Guides state, “A clear, accurate, and complete report is 
essential to support a rating of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
To that end, the Guides lay out a list of elements that “should be included in all 
impairment evaluation reports. Id. (emphasis in original). The first is a narrative history 
of medical condition(s) consisting of 
the onset and course of the condition, symptoms, findings on previous 
examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse 
effects. Include information that may be relevant to onset, such as an 
occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any 
relevant investigations. Include detailed list of prior evaluations in the 
clinical data section. 
Id., § 2.6a.1, p. 21. 
In addition, the Guides direct a physician to “[a]ssess current clinical status, 
including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of 
contemplate treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.” Id., § 2.6a.3, p. 
21. They also direct inclusion of discussion of diagnostic study results and outstanding 
pertinent diagnostic studies, whether the injured employee is at MMI, and diagnoses 
and impairments. Id., §§ 2.6a.4–2.6a.6, pp. 21–22. Moreover, the Guides state a report 
should discuss impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and limitations; 
calculation of the impairment rating; and discussion of how the impairment rating was 
calculated. Id., §§ 2.6a.8, 2.6b, 2.6c. p. 22. 
The Guides also state that other elements may be included in an impairment 
evaluation that include “a work history with detailed, chronological description of work 
activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, 
any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity and 
duration of exposure and activities, and any protective measures” as well as “discussion 
of causation and apportionment.” Id., §§ 2.6a.4, 2.6a.6, pp. 21–22. As discussed above, 
an Iowa Court of Appeals panel has opined that causation is effectively a zero percent 
impairment rating and therefore opinions on causation are reimbursable and the agency 
has followed this holding.  
The Guides provide a “Sample Report for Permanent Medical Impairment” for 
physicians to follow to help ensure they adhere to the process in the Guides. Id., pp. 
23–24. The sample includes a section entitled “Identifiers” with information about the 
injured employee and examination. Id., p. 23. The next section is entitled, “Introduction,” 
and consists of, “Purpose (impairment or IME evaluation, personal injury, workers’ 
compensation) and procedures (who performed the exam, patient consent, location of 
examination.” Id. Following that is the “Narrative history,” which includes, “Chief 
complaints, history of injury or illness, occupational history, past medical history, family 
history, social history, [and] review of symptoms.” Id. After that is the section entitled, 
“Medical record review,” which is described as, “Chronology of medical evaluation, 
diagnostic studies, and treatment for the injury or illness.” Id.  

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 34 
 
Next is a section detailing the physician’s physical examination. Id. After that, a 
section discussing diagnostic studies. Id., p. 24. Then the section, “Diagnoses and 
Impairments,” with the note, “If requested, discuss work readiness, causation, 
apportionment, restrictions, accommodations, assistive devices.” Id.  
The report then has a section entitled, “Impairment Rating Criteria,” which 
includes, “MMI residual function, limitations of activities of daily living, [and] prognosis.” 
Id. This is following by the “Impairment Rating and Rationale,” which includes the body 
part or system being rated, the chapter number of the Guides used, the table number of 
the Guides used, the percentage impairment of the whole person, and “[d]iscussion of 
rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination.” Id. 
The report template concludes with a section entitled, “Recommendations,” 
which is for, “Further diagnostic or therapeutic follow-up care.” Id. Then there is a 
section labeled, “Work ability, work restrictions.” Id. This final section includes the 
explanatory note, “If requested, review abilities and limitations in reference to essential 
job activities.” Id. 
Unsurprisingly, every section of the “Sample Report for Permanent Medical 
Impairment” in the Guides is relevant to the determination of permanent disability or 
impairment in workers’ compensation cases before the agency. As discussed above, 
the rationale for directing a physician to write a report contained in the Guides is 
accurate: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. “A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating 
of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
The Guides reflect what agency experience and expertise reinforces: The IME 
report is important in the determination of an employee’s entitlement to workers’ 
compensation benefits, especially in contested cases before the agency. The AMA has 
established criteria in the Guides so that doctors are providing the information injured 
workers, employers, insurance carriers, and tribunals such as the agency need to 
equitably determine an individual’s entitlement to workers’ compensation benefits based 
on the injury they sustained and the disability the injured has caused. Presumably, this 
is why the legislature mandated use of the Guides when determining permanent 
impairment. Consequently, this mandate cannot be ignored when determining what is 
reimbursable as a reasonable cost under section 85.39(2). The costs that stem from a 
physician following the Guides in accordance with the requirement in section 85.34(2)(x) 
when performing an IME under section 85.39(2) are therefore reasonable. 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 35 
 
The threshold question under section 85.39 when assessing an injured 
employee’s entitlement to reimbursement for an IME is compensability. Under section 
85.39(2), Nordstrom is only liable for an IME relating to a compensable injury. As found 
above, Walbrun’s hip injury is compensable under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Act, so this requirement is satisfied. 
A worker’s right to an IME under section 85.39 for a compensable work injury is 
only triggered when a doctor chosen by the employer opines on causation or 
permanency. See Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 851 (citing Kern v. Fenchel, Doster, & Buck, No. 
20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603, at *4 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021) for the proposition 
“there can be no disability determination arising out a disability evaluation without a 
determination there was causation”). The worker is entitled to an IME if the worker 
believes the opinion is too low. For purposes of IME reimbursement, an opinion of “no 
causation” such as that issued by Dr. Fields is the functional equivalent to an opinion of 
no permanent disability. See Kern, 2021 WL 3890603, at *4 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 
2021) (holding “the clear effect of [a] no-causation determination was a finding of no 
compensable permanent disability”). Walbrun arranged for the IME by Dr. Sassman in 
response to the report on causation and permanency issued by Dr. Fields. Therefore, 
this statutory requirement is also met. 
In addition to the IME fee charged by the physician of an injured employee’s 
choosing, section 85.39(2) entitles the employee to reimbursement for “the reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.” In the current case, 
Walbrun used A1 Taxi and Delivery to get from her home in the Dubuque area to Dr. 
Sassman’s office in Boone, which cost $950.00. Nordstrom have not disputed the 
reasonableness of this transportation cost in their post-hearing brief, so the undersigned 
assumes that it is not in dispute if the IME by Dr. Sassman is reimbursable. The weight 
of the evidence shows Walbrun is entitled to reimbursement for the transportation to 
and from Dr. Sassman’s in-person examination under Iowa Code section 85.39(2) and 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—8.1. 
Here, Dr. Sassman followed the framework set forth in the Guides for evaluating 
permanent impairment of the hip during her IME of Walbrun. In addition, Dr. Sassman 
opined as to the reasonableness of the costs relating to the IME based on her following 
the Guides, education, experience, and location. This evidence establishes the costs for 
Dr. Sassman’s IME of Walbrun. Walbrun is entitled to full reimbursement of $5,890.00 
for the IME by Dr. Sassman and $950.00 for the transportation costs relating to it under 
section 85.39(2). 
H . 
Ta x a t i o n  o f  C o s t s .  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commission.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all costs’ 
language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to those 
allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 660 (Iowa 
2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are strictly 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 36 
 
construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Because Walbrun prevailed on the disputed issues of causation and 
permanency, the following costs are taxed against Nordstrom under Iowa Code section 
and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.33(7), $103.00 for the filing fee, including the 
convenience fee incurred using the payment gateway for the Workers’ Compensation 
Electronic System (WCES). 
VI.  
OR D ER . 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Nordstrom shall pay to Walbrun: 
a) 150 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five 
hundred thirteen and 06/100 dollars ($513.06) per week from the 
commencement date of November 19, 2023. 
b) 24.857 weeks of HP benefits at the rate of five hundred thirteen and 
06/100 dollars ($513.06) per week. 
c) TPD benefits in the amount of one thousand seven hundred fifty-nine 
and 39/100 dollars ($1,759.39). 
2) Nordstrom shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) Nordstrom shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) Nordstrom shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
5) Nordstrom shall pay for the medical benefits and reasonable transportation 
expenses relating to care for her injured right hip. 
6) Nordstrom shall pay to Walbrun five thousand eight hundred ninety and 
00/100 dollars ($5,890.00) for the reasonable costs of the IME performed by 
Dr. Sassman and nine hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($950.00) for the 
transportation costs relating to it. 
7) Nordstrom shall pay to Walbrun as a taxed cost one hundred three and 
00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee. 
 
 

WALBRUN V. NORDSTROM, INC. 
Page 37 
 
Signed and filed this 21st day of January, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Zeke McCartney, Attorney for Claimant 
Thomas D. Wolle, Attorney for Defendant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
