Case Number: 22011730.01
Case Title:  OKANOVIC, ESAD V. TYSON FOODS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Commissioner
Source:      Okanovic Esad - 22011730.01a.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
ESAD OKANOVIC, 
  :                     File No. 22011730.01 
 
 
  :  
 
    
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
            A P P E A L 
 
 
  :  
 
            
vs. 
 
  :                         D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :                         
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
  :                         
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :      Head Notes: 1402.30, 1403.30, 2209, 
 
 
  :                           2401, 2501, 2502, 2803, 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
5-999 
 
 
  : 
 
 
Defendant appeals from a June 10, 2025 arbitration decision. Claimant responds 
to the appeal and urges the arbitration decision be affirmed in its entirety. The presiding 
deputy commissioner held an arbitration hearing in this case on November 12, 2024, 
and the case was fully submitted before the deputy on December 16, 2024. 
 
 
In the arbitration decision, the deputy commissioner concluded that claimant, 
Esad Okanovic, proved he sustained a cumulative injury to his neck, bilateral shoulders, 
and bilateral carpal tunnel as a result of his work activities at the employer, Tyson 
Foods, Inc. The deputy commissioner further determined that the employer failed to 
carry its burden of proof to establish a notice defense. As a result, the deputy 
commissioner found that claimant proved a running healing period and awarded healing 
period benefits from June 15, 2022 through the date of the hearing and continuing until 
claimant achieved one of the elements outlined in Iowa Code section 85.34(1). The 
deputy commissioner further awarded claimant past medical expenses. Finally, the 
deputy commissioner ordered defendant to reimburse claimant’s independent medical 
evaluation fees and mileage and reimburse claimant’s costs. 
 
 
On appeal, defendant challenges the deputy’s findings and conclusions that he 
sustained injuries to his neck, bilateral shoulders, and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, 
which arose out of and in the course of his employment. Tyson contends that the deputy 
erroneously transferred the burden of proof to the employer on whether claimant’s 
injuries arose out of and in the course of employment. Tyson further asserts the deputy 
commissioner erred in his findings and conclusions pertaining to their notice defense. 
Defendant contends that Mr. Okanovic knew or reasonably should have known that he 
sustained an injury and that it was work related more than 90 days before he reported 
the injury to the employer. Defendant next challenges the award of claimant’s past 
medical expenses. Finally, defendant challenges the deputy commissioner’s order that it 
reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation expenses. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Dec-22  09:25:07     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC.  
Page 2 
 
 
Claimant responds to the appeal and urges the arbitration decision be affirmed in 
its entirety. 
 
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.321 and section 17A.15(3), I performed a de 
novo review of the evidentiary record and the detailed arguments of the parties. Those 
portions of the arbitration decision pertaining to issues not raised on appeal are adopted 
as part of this appeal decision. With respect to the issues properly raised on appeal, I 
reach the same analysis, findings, and conclusions as those reached by the deputy 
commissioner. Pursuant to Iowa Code sections 17A.5 and 10A.321, I affirm and adopt 
as the final agency decision those portions of the arbitration decision filed on June 10, 
2025, which relate to the issues properly raised on intra-agency appeal with the 
following additional analysis. 
 
 
Arising Out of and in the Course of Employment 
 
 
I concur with the deputy commissioner’s weighing of the evidence in this case. I 
similarly accept the opinions of Dr. Crites as the most credible and convincing medical 
opinions in this record. Defendant specifically contends that the deputy commissioner 
erroneously shifted the burden of proof to defendant because the deputy noted in his 
arbitration decision, “[t]he defendant did not present a specific theory of how Mr. 
Okanovic developed these conditions, but rather simply argue [sic] that Mr. Okanovic 
cannot prove that his primarily degenerative conditions are causally connected to his 
work activities utilizing the criteria prescribed by the AMA Guides. I do not find this 
argument compelling....” (Arbitration Decision, page 9) (Defendant’s Appeal Brief, p. 10) 
 
 
I do not read the deputy’s decision to suggest that he inappropriately transferred 
the burden of proof to defendant when he made the above observation. Rather, it 
appears that the deputy commissioner was noting that claimant espoused a specific 
theory as to how his injuries occurred and noted that defendant did not put forward a 
different theory. Regardless of how the arbitration decision is read, I now reaffirm that 
claimant bears the burden of proof to establish that his injures arose out of and in the 
course of employment. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
 
 
Requiring claimant to meet that burden of proof, I reiterate that I accept the 
opinions of Dr. Crites over those espoused by Dr. Mooney. I specifically find that 
claimant has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that all of his alleged injuries 
arose out of and in the course of his employment with Tyson Foods, Inc. 
 
 
Defendant next argues that it was erroneous to accept the opinions of Dr. Crites 
because he offered a flawed impairment rating under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation 
of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. Of course, it was Dr. Crites’ causation opinion 
that was ultimately accepted and the issue of his permanent impairment rating was not 
determined in the arbitration decision. While Dr. Crites’ use and application of the AMA 
Guides could be an issue detracting from his credibility, in this instance, I find his 
causation opinion to be convincing and accept it. Therefore, I reject defendant’s second 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC.  
Page 3 
 
argument and affirm the deputy commissioner’s findings and conclusions that claimant 
sustained cumulative injuries that arose out of and in the course of his employment. 
 
 
Notice Defense 
 
 
Lack of timely notice is an affirmative defense pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.23. Defendant asserts that the deputy commissioner erred in applying the discovery 
rule when considering their notice defense. Defendant asserts that after Tweeten v. 
Tweeten, 99 N.W.2d 270 (Iowa 2023), the date of injury for purposes of giving notice of 
the injury is the date when the employee knew or should have known the injury was 
work-related. 
 
 
I specifically find that claimant knew or should have known that his injuries were 
present and that they may be work related by November 2021. By that date, claimant 
acknowledged experiencing symptoms in his shoulders, arms, and hands. (Defendant’s 
Exhibit A, p. 3 (transcript p. 11)) 
 
 
However, I also specifically find that claimant reported his condition to Tyson and 
Tyson took claimant off his normal job as a result of his report of his condition in that 
same November 2021 timeframe. (Hearing Tr., pp. 25-26, 72) In fact, Tyson took 
claimant off his normal job duties three or four times after he reported his symptoms. 
Tyson’s actions demonstrate that it also knew or should have known that claimant was 
reporting a potential work injury. Tyson had actual knowledge of the reported claim, or it 
would not have removed claimant from his job duties. Alternatively, I find that claimant 
specifically reported his symptoms and their relation to his job duties or Tyson would not 
have removed him, even temporarily, from that position. In other words, Tyson likely 
had actual knowledge of the injury, but most certainly had notice from claimant of the 
injury. Tyson’s actions of removing claimant from his typical job duties demonstrated 
that it knew those symptoms may be caused or aggravated by his job duties. Iowa Code 
section 85.23. 
 
 
I also note that Tyson offered no affirmative evidence of what claimant reported, 
when he reported it, or other evidence to affirmatively prove their asserted notice 
defense. Tyson bore the burden of proof on the notice defense. I specifically find that 
Tyson did not affirmatively prove by a preponderance of the evidence that claimant 
failed to give timely notice pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.23. Therefore, I affirm the 
deputy commissioner’s rejection of the notice defense. 
 
 
Medical Expenses 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish medical care to treat 
work-related injuries. Having concluded that claimant proved he sustained injuries to his 
neck, bilateral shoulders, and bilateral carpal tunnel, I conclude the deputy 
commissioner appropriately awarded the claimant’s past medical expenses. No 
challenge to specific bills was made, other than on causation grounds. Therefore, I 
affirm the arbitration decision in this respect. 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC.  
Page 4 
 
 
Independent Medical Evaluation 
 
 
The final challenge asserted by Tyson Foods, Inc. on appeal is the award of 
claimant’s independent medical evaluation. Defendant argues that claimant failed to 
meet the pre-requisites of Iowa Code section 85.39(2). Claimant contends that his 
independent medical evaluation expenses should be awarded because Robert L. 
Gordon, M.D., opined that it “has not been established given the chronology of his 
symptoms and the progressive nature of his symptoms since not working.” (Joint Ex. 1, 
page 10) Claimant contends this is “tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating” 
pursuant to Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W.2d 326 (Iowa App. 2021). 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) provides, in pertinent part: 
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall ... be reimbursed by the employer the 
reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee's own choice. 
 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
Accordingly, as the party that would suffer the loss, claimant must establish the 
prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39(2) to receive reimbursement of Dr. Crites' 
examination fee.  
 
 
The plain language of the statute requires that claimant prove a compensable 
injury and that a physician retained by the employer issue an impairment rating before 
claimant obtains an evaluation of his choosing. My analysis is more straight-forward 
than is argued by either party. On August 2, 2022, defendant’s occupational medicine 
physician, Dr. Gordon, opined, “I did discharge the patient from care today with regards 
to a work-related condition without any permanent restrictions or permanent 
impairment.” (Joint Ex. 1, p. 11)   
 
 
Mr. Okanovic has proven a work-related injury. He has proven that Dr. Gordon 
issued an opinion about permanent impairment on August 2, 2022. Claimant obtained 
his evaluation with Dr. Crites after the August 2, 2022 permanent impairment opinion 
rendered by Dr. Gordon. I conclude claimant has met the pre-requisites of Iowa Code 
section 85.39(2). Therefore, I conclude that claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his 
independent medical evaluation and affirm the arbitration decision in this regard. 
 
ORDER 
 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
 
 
The June 10, 2025 arbitration decision is affirmed in its entirety with the above 
findings of fact, analysis, and conclusions. 

OKANOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC.  
Page 5 
 
 
Defendant shall bear the costs of appeal, including the cost of the hearing 
transcript. 
 
Signed and filed this 22nd day of December, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           INTERIM WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jordan Talsma (via WCES) 
Adnan Mahmutagic (via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 
