Case Number: 21009835.02
Case Title:  GUSE, TABITHA V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Guse Tabitha-21009835.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TABITHA GUSE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
    File No. 21009835.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
QHC MANAGEMENT LLC, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND GENERAL INS. CO.,   : 
 
 
  : 
        Head Note Nos. 1108, 1402.20, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
                                   1402.40 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Tabitha Guse, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from QHC Management LLC, employer, and Accident Fund 
General Insurance Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of a 
stipulated injury sustained on June 13, 2021.  This matter came on for hearing before 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch, on January 11, 2024, via 
videoconference, using Zoom.  The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 
through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5, Defendants’ Exhibits A through E, and the 
testimony of the claimant. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs, the matter being 
fully submitted on January 22, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from March 29, 
2022 through April 26, 2022; 
 
2. Whether the work injury is a cause of permanent disability; 
 
3. If causation is established, the nature and extent of permanent disability; 
4. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if awarded; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Aug-16  15:11:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 2 
 
5. Whether defendants are responsible for medical expenses claimed in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 4; and   
6. A specific taxation of costs.1 
 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s demeanor at the time of evidentiary hearing gave the undersigned no 
reason to doubt her veracity. Generally, claimant deferred to her medical records to 
represent her complaints at any given time; however, she does maintain she repeatedly 
informed her physicians of limitations of her left shoulder which were not addressed. 
Ultimately, I do not find claimant engaged in any attempt to mislead or deceive with her 
testimony. Rather, I believe claimant attempted to accurately reflect her complaints, but 
perhaps was unable to differentiate the source(s) of her symptoms. I do, however, find 
claimant demonstrated a lack of effort in her functional capacity evaluation which 
negates the probative value I should award her testimony regarding her medical 
complaints. Accordingly, I find claimant is a credible witness; however, the probative 
value of her testimony is significantly limited with respect to medical opinions.  
Claimant was 50 years of age at the time of hearing. She resides in Truro, Iowa. 
Claimant is a high school graduate. She is right hand dominant. At the time of her work 
injury, claimant worked as a certified nursing assistant (CNA) at defendant-employer, a 
nursing home facility. She had served in this capacity for defendant-employer for 
approximately four years prior to her injury. Her duties revolved around patient care, 
including assisting elderly residents with activities of daily living. Claimant testified she 
earned $15.00 per hour. (Claimant’s testimony) 
On June 13, 2021, claimant attempted to roll a resident while at work for 
defendant-employer. The resident resisted, which resulted in a spasming sensation of 
claimant’s back. Another nurse traded duties with claimant, allowing claimant to chart 
the remainder of her shift. Claimant testified that she experienced pain of her back and 
neck, particularly in the area where those body parts met. As a result, she decided to 
seek medical treatment with her personal medical provider. (Claimant’s testimony) 
                                                 
1 The issue of claimant’s entitlement to reimbursement of an independent medical examination 
under Iowa Code section 85.39 was resolved by the parties in settlement of another claim. Therefore, 
while raised on the hearing report submitted by the parties, the parties withdrew the issue from 
consideration in this arbitration matter. 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 3 
 
On June 14, 2021, claimant presented to Madison County Medical Associates 
and was examined by Regina Barnett, ARNP. Claimant reported developing back pain 
while moving a resident the prior day. Claimant described the pain as located in the 
upper and lower back regions, with upper back pain radiating to the lower back. (Joint 
Exhibit 1, page 1) Nurse Barnett assessed back pain and back strain. A Toradol 
injection was performed, and prescriptions of cyclobenzaprine and prednisone ordered. 
A two-week restriction against lifting was put in place. (JE1, p. 2) 
Claimant returned to Nurse Barnett for recheck of back pain on June 25, 2021. 
Claimant underwent thoracic x-rays, which were within normal limits. Nurse Barnett 
performed osteopathic manipulation and a Toradol injection. Physical therapy was 
recommended in the event pain did not resolve. (JE1, pp. 3-4) 
Claimant began physical therapy on July 7, 2021. Nicole Smith, PT, noted 
complaints of pain, localized between the shoulder blades and shooting down claimant’s 
back. Complaints were noted as more pronounced on the left side, than right. In 
discussion of functional deficits, PT Smith noted claimant was unable to perform certain 
work tasks, including transfers and pushing, without pain and limitations. PT Smith also 
noted claimant was unable to reach overhead “with her shoulders” to get into cabinets. 
(JE2, p. 13) Cervical extension was noted as resulting in pain into the left scapula and 
neck. Lumbar spine movements were slightly to very restricted. PT Smith indicated 
claimant was “very guarded with all movement” from the cervical to lumbar spine, and 
displayed very limited range of motion of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine. (JE2, 
p. 14) 
Thereafter, claimant continued to follow up with PT Smith for physical therapy 
sessions. On July 12, 2021, claimant reported worsened pain in the shoulder blades, 
which she noticed when stocking gloves in cabinets. PT Smith noted claimant continued 
to be very guarded with movement. PT Smith continued treatment of the cervical, 
thoracic, and lumbar spine. She recommended a TENS unit and indicated she would 
discuss claimant’s slow progress with Nurse Barnett. (JE2, pp. 16-17) On July 14, 2021, 
claimant reported continued pain of the “shoulders/upper back area,” left greater than 
right. (JE2, p. 19) At a visit on July 16, 2021, claimant reported experiencing a “numb 
feeling” about the left lateral scapula. (JE2, p. 21) On that date, PT Smith noted 
continued guarding and very limited cervical and spinal movement. (JE2, p. 22) 
On July 21, 2021, claimant presented to Nurse Barnett. She reported neck pain, 
stiffness, and impaired range of motion, with an onset two days after the work injury. 
Claimant also reported continued upper back pain with radiation to the lower back and 
pain “now up [the] neck area.” (JE1, p. 5) Claimant underwent cervical spine x-rays. 
Cyclobenzaprine was restarted and a topical cream gel was prescribed. Due to lack of 
progress with physical therapy, increased neck pain, and decreased neck range of 
motion, Nurse Barnett referred claimant for orthopedic evaluation. (JE1, p. 6) 
On August 16, 2021, claimant presented to Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons 
and was evaluated by Zachary Ries, M.D., for complaints of neck and back pain. Dr. 
Ries ordered x-rays of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine. Following review, Dr. 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 4 
 
Ries opined the cervical films showed some early degenerative changes, the thoracic 
films were overall benign, and the lumbar films were overall benign, with some 
decreased disc space, notably at L5-S1. Dr. Ries opined claimant’s symptoms could 
reflect musculoskeletal inflammation and/or strain, but he preferred further testing due 
to the ongoing nature and severity of complaints. Accordingly, he ordered MRIs of the 
cervical and lumbar spine. He left claimant’s work restrictions in place. (JE3, pp. 90-91) 
On August 30, 2021, claimant underwent the MRIs ordered by Dr. Ries. (JE4, pp. 
96-99) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Ries on September 22, 2021. Dr. Ries reviewed the 
cervical and lumbar spine MRIs. He noted very mild degenerative changes and overall 
normal studies of the neck and back. Dr. Ries opined claimant was not a surgical 
candidate and issued a referral to pain management. (JE3, p. 93) Claimant was kept off 
work pending pain management evaluation. (JE3, p. 95) 
On October 19, 2021, claimant was examined by pain management physician, 
Jolene Smith, D.O. Following examination and review of MRI results, Dr. Smith 
assessed neck pain, low back pain, muscle spasm, and myalgia. Dr. Smith ordered 
ultrasound-guided trigger point injections of the cervical paraspinal region, rhomboid 
region, and lumbar paraspinal region. In the event the injections failed to provide relief, 
Dr. Smith indicated the only remaining treatment option would be medication based. Dr. 
Smith indicated she expected a full recovery and an ability to return to work. In the 
event claimant believed herself unable to return to work, Dr. Smith indicated a functional 
capacity evaluation might be necessary. (JE5, pp. 100-101) 
Claimant underwent trigger point injections with Dr. Smith on November 15, 
2021. (JE5, pp. 102-103) 
At follow-up with Dr. Smith on January 17, 2022, claimant reported 30 percent 
relief in pain following the initial trigger point injections, but a full return of pain 
thereafter. Claimant reported pain of the right neck, upper, middle, and lower back, with 
right neck numbness, tingling, and weakness. Dr. Smith ordered a trial of tizanidine and 
ordered a functional capacity evaluation. (JE5, pp. 104-105) 
At the referral of Dr. Smith, claimant underwent a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) on February 28, 2022 with Jayna Hoover, PT. PT Hoover classified claimant’s 
effort as invalid and found claimant failed to give maximum voluntary effort, due to 
inconsistent performance during a repeated measures protocol. PT Hoover noted 
claimant failed 5 of 7 validity criteria during XRTS Hand Strength Assessment and there 
was an absence of correlation between lifts of unmarked steel bars and the 
corresponding lifting on the XRTS Lever Arm, with an overall 99 percent change 
demonstrated. Additionally, PT Hoover noted: Breakaway/Cogwheeling during the lifting 
assessment, but not on manual strength testing; frequent and extreme overt behaviors, 
including grimacing, holding breath, and groaning; 3 of 7 pain questionnaires revealed 
high subjective pain reports and behaviors; and positive Waddell testing in 3 of 5 
categories, demonstrating non-physical low back pain. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, pages 1, 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 5 
 
3-4, 6-8, 11) PT Hoover opined claimant failed to give maximum voluntary effort during 
the evaluation and as a result, functional capabilities could not be accurately 
determined. Nevertheless, PT Hoover determined claimant met the material handling 
demands for a medium physical demand vocation. (DEA, p. 1) It was noted that 
claimant demonstrated an ability to lift nearly 21 pounds, despite likely not being based 
on valid effort. (DEA, pp. 2-3) 
Claimant testified that the FCE provider told her that she could quit the evaluation 
in the event she felt pain. Claimant indicated that after 3 to 4 hours of testing, it became 
too painful to continue. She testified the provider never informed claimant that the FCE 
would be considered invalid, should she quit. (Claimant’s testimony) 
Dr. Smith reviewed the FCE results on March 1, 2022. Thereafter, Dr. Smith 
placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and released claimant without 
restrictions. (DEB, p. 1) On March 14, 2022, Dr. Smith completed a questionnaire 
authored by defendants’ counsel. Thereby, Dr. Smith noted claimant’s diagnosis as 
neck pain, for which claimant had been placed at MMI without permanent impairment or 
need for further medical treatment. (DEB, p. 2) 
 Claimant remained off work for approximately 8 months while undergoing 
treatment. Claimant testified that she consistently informed medical providers that while 
her pain was localized in the neck and back region, she was unable to raise her left 
arm. Upon her release from care, claimant returned to work at defendant-employer. 
Claimant testified she continued to experience pain and feared it was unsafe to return to 
work. As a result, she pursued additional medical care under her personal health 
insurance. (Claimant’s testimony) Defendants paid unto claimant temporary total 
disability benefits from August 6, 2021 through April 3, 2022. (DEE) 
On March 28, 2022, claimant presented to urgent care with complaints of 
bilateral neck and low back pain. The worst symptoms were localized to the right 
trapezius. Claimant described her course of treatment and indicated she did not believe 
herself ready to return to work. Naomi Petrich, PA-C, performed a physical examination 
and noted tenderness to palpation of the left and right trapezius, more prominent on the 
right, with mild spasms. She also noted tenderness to palpation of the bilateral lumbar 
paraspinal muscles. PA-C Petrich assessed neck pain and acute bilateral low back 
pain. She issued a prescription for cyclobenzaprine and recommended orthopedic 
evaluation. Claimant declined a referral to physical therapy. PA-C Petrich issued a work 
excuse through March 30, 2022. (JE6, pp. 106-110) 
On March 31, 2022, claimant returned to Nurse Barnett with continued 
complaints of neck pain. Following examination of the neck and shoulders, Nurse 
Barnett ordered left shoulder x-rays. After normal x-rays, Nurse Barnett ordered a left 
shoulder MRI. Claimant was removed from work pending results of the MRI. Nurse 
Barnett opined claimant’s neck pain appeared to be referred from the left shoulder. A 
Toradol injection was performed, and prednisone prescribed. (JE1, pp. 7-10, 12) 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 6 
 
On April 10, 2022, claimant underwent left shoulder MRI. The reading physician 
opined it revealed partial thickness articular sided tearing involving the supraspinatus 
tendon, tendinosis, and signal changes possibly reflecting an underlying SLAP tear. 
(JE7, p. 111) Following review of claimant’s left shoulder MRI, she was referred to an 
orthopedic surgeon for evaluation. (JE1, p. 11) 
Claimant testified defendant-employer asked her to return to work as a CNA. 
However, she felt that was unsafe and sought care with Nurse Barnett, which led to 
work restrictions. As a result, she returned to light duty assignments at defendant-
employer. In this role, claimant did not perform patient care; instead, she charted, 
completed paperwork, and stocked supplies. (Claimant’s testimony) 
 On April 26, 2022, claimant was evaluated by Justin Khoriaty, M.D., of Iowa 
Ortho. Claimant reported experiencing left shoulder and neck pain of a 10-month 
duration. (JE8, p. 112) Following x-rays and examination, Dr. Khoriaty assessed 
adhesive capsulitis of the left shoulder. Dr. Khoriaty performed a cortisone injection of 
the left shoulder and prescribed a course of physical therapy. (JE8, pp. 114-115) 
At the referral of Dr. Khoriaty, claimant returned to PT Smith on May 4, 2022. 
Claimant reported her symptoms began in June 2021 following a work injury. Claimant 
described improved pain following the injection with Dr. Khoriaty. (JE2, p. 26) PT Smith 
noted claimant demonstrated loss of range of motion, decreased functioning, loss of 
strength, and deconditioning. (JE2, p. 28) Thereafter, claimant continued therapy 
sessions and a home exercise program. (JE2, pp. 30-55)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Khoriaty on June 7, 2022. Dr. Khoriaty noted claimant 
had improved her range of motion slightly, but continued to have significant pain and 
was frustrated with her slow progress. Dr. Khoriaty performed a repeat cortisone 
injection and ordered additional physical therapy. (JE8, pp. 116-118) Claimant 
continued therapy sessions with PT Smith from June 8, 2022 through July 15, 2022. 
(JE2, pp. 56-89) 
On July 19, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Khoriaty. Dr. Khoriaty noted claimant 
continued to experience significant pain and dysfunction of the shoulder, having only 
minimal improvement with physical therapy. Dr. Khoriaty explained claimant’s treatment 
options, including additional therapy and anti-inflammatory medications, potential 
hydrodilation, and potential arthroscopic surgery with capsular release and 
manipulation. Claimant expressed a desire to avoid surgery and elected to proceed with 
hydrodilation. Dr. Khoriaty recommended continued physical therapy during the 
treatment course. (JE8, pp. 119-121) 
At the referral of Dr. Khoriaty, on August 10, 2022, claimant underwent 
hydrodilation of the left shoulder joint with John Rayburn, M.D. (JE8, pp. 122-123) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Khoriaty on August 23, 2022. Claimant reported 
improved range of motion following the hydrodilation procedure, but that she had been 
unable to attend physical therapy due to financial constraints. (JE8, p. 124) Dr. Khoriaty 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 7 
 
noted significant improvement in claimant’s range of motion following hydrodilation. He 
expressed a desire for claimant to attend formal physical therapy to work aggressively 
on range of motion. Claimant, however, indicated she was unable to afford the 
attendant co-pay; as a result, Dr. Khoriaty explained a home exercise program. (JE8, p. 
125) Claimant testified that at this time, she had lost her personal health insurance and 
was no longer able to afford the out-of-pocket expense of therapy sessions. (Claimant’s 
testimony) 
On October 25, 2022, claimant returned to Dr. Khoriaty. Claimant reported she 
had been doing well and was improving her range of motion, although it had not yet 
returned to normal. Dr. Khoriaty opined claimant’s range of motion had improved 
significantly, and she had been working diligently on her home exercise program. He 
performed a repeat cortisone injection. (JE8, pp. 127-129)   
Claimant returned to Dr. Khoriaty on January 3, 2023. At that time, Dr. Khoriaty 
noted some improvement in claimant’s range of motion, but continued limitations, pain, 
and dysfunction. (JE8, p. 130) Dr. Khoriaty opined claimant continued to present with 
signs and symptoms consistent with adhesive capsulitis. Dr. Khoriaty again raised the 
option of surgical manipulation under anesthesia and possible arthroscopic capsular 
release. Claimant indicated she preferred to avoid surgery and preferred to attempt 
another hydrodilation. Dr. Khoriaty indicated the approach was reasonable and another 
hydrodilation could be attempted. However, he noted they were “running out” of 
treatment options and in the event the hydrodilation did not resolve symptoms, 
claimant’s options would be to live with her symptoms or undergo surgery. (JE8, p. 131)    
Defendants retained board certified occupational medicine physician, Charles 
Mooney, M.D., to perform an independent medical record review. Dr. Mooney authored 
a report containing his findings and opinions dated January 2, 2023. (DEC, p. 1) Dr. 
Mooney reviewed claimant’s medical records following the June 13, 2021 injury. (DEC, 
pp. 6-11) Dr. Mooney noted claimant initially sought care on June 14, 2021 for 
complaints of back pain, localized to the upper back and radiating into the lower back. 
At follow-up on June 25, 2021, Dr. Mooney noted claimant reported pain in the back, as 
well as the cervical and thoracic regions. He described these complaints as 
“significantly different from her initial presentation.” (DEC, p. 12) Following records 
review, Dr. Mooney opined claimant complained of injury to the upper back and neck as 
a result of the June 13, 2021 injury. He opined claimant later complained of symptoms 
into the left upper extremity and adhesive capsulitis, but Dr. Mooney did not believe the 
shoulder complaints were causally related to the work injury. Rather, Dr. Mooney opined 
claimant’s work injury was limited to the thoracic and cervical spine only. (DEC, pp. 12-
13) Dr. Mooney opined claimant had achieved MMI relative to these conditions, 
effective March 1, 2022. He opined additional treatment was unlikely to result in 
significant improvement of claimant’s complaints or functional abilities and thus, 
declined to recommend additional care. Relying on the FCE, Dr. Mooney recommended 
no activity restrictions. Due to a lack of consistent, objective findings of the cervical or 
thoracic spine, Dr. Mooney opined claimant sustained no ratable permanent 
impairment. (DEC, pp. 13-14) 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 8 
 
Claimant continued to work at defendant-employer on light duty until February 
2023, when the facility closed. Claimant was able to secure new employment as a 
medical assistant for a physician at Madison County Medical Associates. The duties 
were light in nature, including drawing blood, performing injections, taking vitals, and 
computer-based tasks. She continued to perform these duties until October 2023 when 
the physician’s practice was sold. Claimant testified she sought work and was hired by a 
nursing home facility in Norwalk, Iowa. She was initially hired as a CNA; however, when 
the facility learned her CNA license had expired, claimant was placed in a hospitality 
aide position. She describes her duties as easier in nature, tasked with helping patients 
eat and shower, adjusting machines, and moving patients. In the event she is required 
to help a resident stand, claimant utilizes her right side and shoulder; these lifts are 
done with the assistance of another staff member. (Claimant’s testimony)  
Claimant’s counsel sought further opinions from Dr. Khoriaty. (Claimant’s Exhibit 
1, pp. 1-3) In a letter dated November 2, 2023, Dr. Khoriaty indicated claimant 
“intimate[d]” that she initially injured herself turning a patient at work. Dr. Khoriaty noted 
he treated claimant for left shoulder pain, with partial thickness rotator cuff tearing and 
possible labral tear, but a primary concern of frozen shoulder. Following conservative 
care, Dr. Khoriaty indicated he offered arthroscopic capsular release, which claimant 
declined. (CE1, p. 4) With respect to causation of the left shoulder complaints, Dr. 
Khoriaty opined: 
Based on the information at hand it does appear that the patient sustained 
some injury to her upper back and the posterior aspect of her shoulder 
girdle, which would not be uncommon with a lifting or pulling injury as she 
was attempting to turn the patient. It appeared that this pain was 
significant, limiting range of motion and sending off a cascading effect of a 
frozen shoulder on her left side. It appears that the patient was treated for 
an upper back injury, but did not have her left shoulder initially examined. 
Stiffness of the glenohumeral joint, or shoulder joint, can lead to excessive 
use of the muscles of the upper back and torso, as well as the seventeen 
muscles that attach to the shoulder blade. This can cause significant pain 
and dysfunction in the posterior aspect of the shoulder girdle and upper 
back due to compensation of these muscles for the lack of range of motion 
of the shoulder. It would be my opinion that her injury on June 13, 2021, 
more likely than not, set off the events that led to her eventual frozen 
shoulder.  
(CE1, p. 4) 
 
At the referral of claimant’s counsel, on November 15, 2023, claimant appeared 
for an independent medical examination with board certified physical medicine and 
rehabilitation physician, Jacqueline Stoken, D.O. (CE2, p. 6; CE3, p. 21) Dr. Stoken 
performed a records review and interviewed claimant regarding her complaints. (CE2, 
pp. 6-7, 9-14) Relevantly, claimant complained of: neck pain at a consistent level 1 on a 
10-point scale; aching back pain at a consistent pain level 3; and aching left shoulder 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 9 
 
pain at a consistent pain level 1. (CE2, p. 14) Dr. Stoken performed a physical 
examination of the cervical and lumbar regions, as well as the left shoulder. (CE2, p. 15) 
 
Dr. Stoken opined the following diagnoses: status post work injury on June 13, 
2021 with acute neck, upper back, and left shoulder strain/pain; left shoulder adhesive 
capsulitis secondary to the work injury; and chronic pain of the left shoulder and neck. 
Dr. Stoken opined claimant’s left shoulder condition was causally related to the work 
injury on June 13, 2021, noting claimant did not suffer with the condition and was able 
to work full duty without restrictions prior to the work injury. (CE2, p. 16) Dr. Stoken 
opined claimant sustained permanent impairment as a result of the work injury. Due to 
asymmetric range of motion and muscle spasms, Dr. Stoken opined claimant fell within 
DRE Lumbar Category II and warranted a 5 percent whole person impairment rating. 
For the left shoulder, Dr. Stoken found 11 percent upper extremity or 7 percent whole 
person impairment attributable to goniometer-measured deficits in range of motion. She 
found no cervical impairment due to full range of motion and lack of muscle spasms. In 
total, she found a combined 12 percent whole person impairment. (CE2, p. 17) She 
opined claimant would more likely than not develop posttraumatic arthritis of the left 
shoulder, which would be permanent and progress over time. (CE2, p. 18) Dr. Stoken 
opined reasonable future care would include pain management, potentially including 
physician visits, medication, injections, and surgery to restore range of motion. (CE2, p. 
17) 
Defendants referred claimant to board certified thoracic and general surgeon, 
Paul Conte, M.D., for an independent medical examination. The examination took place 
on November 16, 2023 and Dr. Conte’s report followed on December 5, 2023. (DED, 
pp. 1, 8) Dr. Conte performed a records review and patient interview. (DED, pp. 1-3) On 
physical examination, Dr. Conte noted full range of motion of the cervical spine, as well 
as normal motion of the thoracic and lumbar spine, without deformity. Dr. Conte also 
measured claimant’s range of motion of the left and right shoulders. (DED, p. 4)  
With respect to questions of causation, Dr. Conte opined claimant’s work injury 
was limited to claimant’s neck, upper back, and lower back. He found “no evidence” of 
left shoulder injury. In forming his opinion, Dr. Conte noted complaints of neck, upper 
back, and lower back pain, but no contemporaneous complaints of shoulder pain, 
weakness or tingling. (DED, p. 5) Dr. Conte disagreed with Dr. Khoriaty’s opinion 
relating claimant’s left shoulder condition to the June 13, 2021 work injury. In support of 
his conclusion, Dr. Conte noted claimant related no shoulder injury or pain at the time of 
the injury and there was no history of overreaching or pulling/pushing with sudden onset 
of pain, a normative complaint in patients with shoulder injuries. Dr. Conte opined 
claimant’s symptoms had been more consistent with degenerative changes of the 
shoulder and highlighted impaired motion of claimant’s bilateral shoulders on 
examination. (DED, p. 6) Dr. Conte further explained:  
Without any evidence of an injury to the left shoulder, her diagnosis of 
work related “secondary left frozen shoulder,” would simply be primary 
frozen shoulder and unrelated to any work-related injury. The MRI that 
was done of her shoulder did not show any evidence of inflammation 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 10 
 
about her shoulder, just degenerative change. She had no left shoulder 
injury that was attributable to any work-related incident with any degree of 
certainty, and it is more likely than not based upon primary degenerative 
condition of her shoulders manifest both in the right and left, the left being 
her non-dominant side. This occurrence on the non-dominant shoulder 
makes it more likely primary adhesive capsulitis or primary frozen 
shoulder on the left which is a medical condition unrelated to work injury 
and would explain its slow resolution. 
(DED, pp. 6-7)  
Dr. Conte noted claimant no longer expressed complaints regarding her neck, 
upper back, or lower back, with imaging of the regions demonstrating normal results, 
with the exception of degenerative changes expected of a patient of claimant’s age. Dr. 
Conte opined claimant had achieved MMI relative to the work injury, consistent with Dr. 
Smith’s opinion. (DED, pp. 5-6) He declined to recommend permanent restrictions. Due 
to claimant’s lack of symptomatology and normal range of motion of the cervical, 
thoracic, and lumbar spine, Dr. Conte opined claimant had not sustained permanent 
impairment. (DED, p. 6)      
At the time of evidentiary hearing, claimant continued to work in the hospitality 
aide position she obtained in October 2023. She earns $23.00 per hour, the highest 
wage of claimant’s working career. Claimant testified her primary complaints revolve 
around her left shoulder. Claimant testified she continues to experience constant level 1 
pain on a 10-point scale. Her pain can flare with activity. Her significant other performs 
the heavy tasks and chores at home. She self-treats with use of over-the-counter 
medication. Claimant testified her back and neck have not truly resolved, despite 
improvement with treatment, as she feels the back, neck and left shoulder are all 
connected and continue to hurt. Claimant testified that should she prevail at hearing, 
she would like to return to Dr. Khoriaty for further care in hopes of resolving her 
symptoms. She would like to begin with another injection, but is willing to proceed with 
surgery if it is unsuccessful. She does not currently work under any permanent 
restrictions. She testified she continues to push through, despite symptoms, as she 
does not want to be precluded from working by the imposition of restrictions. (Claimant’s 
testimony) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to temporary 
disability benefits from March 29, 2022 through April 26, 2022. 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 11 
 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Claimant claims and defendants admit claimant sustained an injury to her upper 
back and neck region as a result of the injury on June 13, 2021. Claimant also asserts 
she suffered an injury to her left shoulder as a result of the work injury; defendants 
dispute claimant’s contention. The period of temporary disability benefits sought by 
claimant corresponds to a period claimant was removed from work during treatment of 
the left shoulder condition. Accordingly, claimant must establish that the left shoulder 
condition is causally related to the work injury of June 13, 2021. 
In support of her claim, claimant relies upon the opinions of Drs. Stoken and 
Khoriaty. Following review of Dr. Stoken’s report, I find her opinions on causation to be 
of limited value. Specifically, I find Dr. Stoken’s opinions to be conclusory in nature and 
lacking in explanation, simply stating she believed claimant’s condition was work related 
because claimant did not have the condition and was able to work without restrictions 
prior to the work injury. Such an explanation does not address the passage of time 
between the work injury and claimant’s complaints of shoulder pain, nor the imaging 
results.  
I find Dr. Khoriaty’s opinion more detailed and helpful than Dr. Stoken’s in 
consideration of the issue of causation. Dr. Khoriaty opined it appeared claimant injured 
her upper back and shoulder girdle in the work incident, which limited range of motion 
and caused a cascading effect of events which led to claimant’s frozen shoulder. Dr. 
Khoriaty did not, however, address whether the changes viewed on claimant’s left 
shoulder MRI were attributable to the work injury. Dr. Khoriaty acted as claimant’s 
treating orthopedic provider and his opinion is reasonable and logical. However, like Dr. 
Stoken, Dr. Khoriaty does not specifically address claimant’s lack of shoulder 
complaints and care for 9 months post-injury. Nor does Dr. Khoriaty opine as to the 
cause of the pathology seen on claimant’s MRI results. Finally, Dr. Khoriaty’s opinion 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 12 
 
relies heavily upon claimant’s reported history and the undersigned awards reduced 
weight to claimant’s reports of her medical complaints as compared to those noted in 
the contemporaneous records.   
Defendants rely upon the opinions of Drs. Mooney and Conte in the denial of 
claimant’s left shoulder claim. Following review of Dr. Mooney’s report, I find his opinion 
to add little probative assistance in consideration of this matter. Dr. Mooney’s report is 
conclusory in nature, pointing primarily to claimant’s varied complaints over time. He did 
not explain why the passage of time prior to development of claimant’s left shoulder 
symptoms should render her claim invalid, nor address with specificity the role of 
claimant’s MRI findings in his conclusions.  
I find Dr. Conte’s opinions to be more convincing, thorough, and helpful than 
those of Dr. Mooney. Dr. Conte is a thoracic and general surgeon who examined 
claimant and performed a records review. Dr. Conte opined there was evidence 
claimant sustained an injury to her neck, upper back, and lower back; however, he 
found no evidence of left shoulder injury. He highlighted a lack of contemporaneous 
complaints of shoulder pain, weakness, or tingling, and a lack of reports of specific 
injury to the shoulder. He also noted a lack of history of a mechanism of injury with a 
sudden onset of shoulder pain, as he explained would be expected of one who 
sustained a shoulder injury. Dr. Conte opined claimant’s presentation and symptoms 
were more consistent with degeneration of the shoulders. He supported this opinion by 
explaining claimant showed impaired motion of the bilateral shoulders on examination, 
developed the condition on her non-dominant side, and her left shoulder MRI showed 
degenerative changes without evidence of inflammation. As Dr. Conte found insufficient 
evidence to determine claimant sustained injury to the shoulder, he opined claimant’s 
diagnosis was more consistent with primary adhesive capsulitis as opposed to 
developing secondary to the work injury.  
In this battle of the experts, I find the opinions of Drs. Khoriaty and Conte are 
entitled to greater weight than those of Drs. Stoken and Mooney on the matter of 
causation of claimant’s left shoulder condition. Given Dr. Khoriaty and Dr. Conte offered 
contrary opinions with respect to causation, I must determine which physician’s opinion 
should be entitled to greater weight. Dr. Khoriaty did provide treatment of the left 
shoulder condition; however, he did not evaluate claimant until approximately 10 
months following the work injury. While he opined it appeared claimant suffered an 
injury to her upper back and shoulder girdle, which set off a chain of events resulting in 
frozen shoulder, he did not point to any specific evidence or contemporaneous example 
identifying an injury to the shoulder girdle itself. In reaching his conclusion, Dr. Khoriaty 
appears to have relied significantly upon claimant’s reports to him directly, as opposed 
to specific notations within the medical records. Dr. Khoriaty’s opinion is both plausible 
and logical; however, I do not find it clearly supported in the evidentiary record.  
Dr. Khoriaty does not address the relevance of the degenerative findings on 
claimant’s left shoulder MRI, nor does he address the lack of noted complaints of left 
shoulder symptoms in the medical records. While claimant’s physical therapy notes do 
include some reference to limitations of the shoulders and scapular regions, claimant’s 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 13 
 
treatment providers did not provide care to claimant’s shoulder, despite presumed 
review of the records. I am left to presume that the noted complaints are consistent with 
the treated diagnoses of upper back and neck injury. None of claimant’s initial treatment 
providers, Nurse Barnett, Dr. Ries, or Dr. Smith, assessed any left shoulder pathology 
during the 9-month period immediately following claimant’s work injury. It was Nurse 
Barnett who provided claimant’s initial treatment following the work injury and then 
subsequently, began claimant’s course of left shoulder evaluation. Presumably, Nurse 
Barnett would have ordered left shoulder care earlier, had she found it warranted. Dr. 
Khoriaty’s failure to explain this lack of contemporaneous mention of or diagnosis of left 
shoulder injury raises question with respect to his conclusion that claimant sustained a 
left shoulder girdle injury along with an upper back injury.  
Ultimately, I award greatest weight to the opinions of Dr. Conte. While Dr. Conte 
did not treat claimant, his report provided the most extensive explanation of the whole of 
claimant’s care and condition. In a battle of the experts, the completeness and 
thoroughness of the report(s) allows the reader to better evaluate and consider the 
totality of the case. Dr. Conte addressed claimant’s degenerative findings on left 
shoulder MRI, bilateral shoulder limitations, lack of contemporaneous record of 
symptoms which one would anticipate if a shoulder injury had been sustained, and the 
lack of history of expected injury and onset of symptoms. Dr. Conte ultimately opined 
claimant’s left shoulder condition was consistent with a degenerative condition, which I 
find logical given claimant’s objective findings and the fact claimant had been off work, 
without shoulder treatment, for approximately 10 months at the time left shoulder care 
commenced. 
 While it is plausible claimant sustained an injury to the left shoulder region which 
progressed over time to result in adhesive capsulitis, I cannot find claimant met her 
burden of proof on that issue. Claimant’s reported symptoms have varied over time. The 
FCE undergone by claimant was found invalid due to inconsistent performance, invalid 
effort, failed validity criteria, lack of correlation on testing, high subjective pain 
complaints, and overt pain behaviors. While claimant testified she was advised she 
could quit the examination should she experience pain, no provider has opined claimant 
failed the FCE due to an untreated shoulder condition that was capable of explaining 
the objective results. 
Based upon review of the entirety of the record and given consideration of the 
opinions of the medical experts, I find claimant has not carried her burden of proving by 
a preponderance of the evidence that the left shoulder condition is causally related to 
the stipulated work injury of June 13, 2021. As the claimed temporary disability period 
corresponds to a period claimant was removed from work due to the left shoulder 
condition, claimant is not entitled to temporary disability benefits from March 29, 2022 
through April 26, 2022. 
  The next issue for determination is whether the work injury is a cause of 
permanent disability. 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 14 
 
As set forth supra, claimant failed to establish she suffered a work-related injury 
to her left shoulder. Accordingly, consideration of this issue is limited to whether the 
stipulated injury to claimant’s back and neck is a cause of permanent disability. Dr. 
Stoken opined claimant sustained a permanent impairment of 5 percent whole person, 
due to asymmetric range of motion and muscle spasms which warranted ratable 
impairment within DRE Lumbar Category II. Dr. Smith opined claimant sustained no 
ratable permanent impairment for neck pain. Dr. Mooney opined claimant sustained no 
cervical or thoracic spine impairment, due to lack of objective findings. Dr. Conte opined 
claimant sustained no ratable impairment to the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar spine, 
based upon a lack of symptomatology and normal range of motion. No physician has 
imposed permanent restrictions.  
As no physician opined claimant sustained permanent impairment to the cervical 
or thoracic spine, any impairment would be limited to the lumbar spine. Dr. Stoken 
examined claimant on November 15, 2023 and found asymmetric range of motion and 
muscle spasms. Dr. Conte examined claimant the following day and found normal range 
of motion, without expressed complaints of back symptomatology. How should one 
reconcile asymmetric range of motion one day, followed by normal range of motion the 
following day? Ultimately, I find the question turns on review of the physician’s opinions 
within the totality of claimant’s care. Review of the medical records in evidence reveals 
the majority of claimant’s complaints and care were localized to the cervical and 
thoracic spinal regions. Generally speaking, references to the lower back and lumbar 
spine were limited in nature or made in the context of radiating pain from the upper back 
region. I also consider that claimant’s FCE revealed positive Waddell testing in 3 of 5 
categories, demonstrating non-physical low back pain. Finally, I consider the specialties 
of the opining physicians, Drs. Stoken and Conte. Dr. Stoken is a physiatrist, while Dr. 
Conte is a thoracic and general surgeon. Ultimately, I do not find Dr. Stoken’s 
impairment rating credible and find it falls outside of that which is to be expected given 
claimant’s history in this case. I award greater weight to the opinion of Dr. Conte and, as 
such, find claimant did not carry her burden to establish she sustained permanent 
impairment to her lumbar spine. 
Having found claimant failed to carry her burden of proof with respect to 
permanent disability to any claimed body part, claimant is not entitled to permanent 
disability benefits. Further consideration of the issues of nature and extent of permanent 
disability, and the commencement date for such benefits, is therefore moot. 
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
medical expenses claimed in Claimant’s Exhibit 4. The medical expenses claimed in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 4 were incurred in treatment of claimant’s left shoulder condition. 
Having found claimant failed to carry her burden of establishing the left shoulder 
condition as work-related, defendants are not responsible for the expenses listed in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 4. 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 10A.328 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of the costs 
of: filing fee and convenience charge ($100.30); certified mail service fee ($7.95); and 

GUSE V. QHC MANAGEMENT LLC 
Page 15 
 
practitioner’s report of Dr. Khoriaty dated November 2, 2023 ($650.00). (CE5, pp. 37-
38) While claimant did sustain an admitted work-related injury on June 13, 2021, 
claimant did not prevail on any issue presented for determination in this arbitration 
matter. Accordingly, I decline to tax the requested costs to defendants. Each party shall 
bear its own costs.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings.  
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Each party shall bear its own costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
Signed and filed this __16th _ day of August, 2024. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Jerry Jackson (via WCES) 
 
Andrew Portis (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
