Case Number: 1642343.01
Case Title:  PHILLIPS JR, CARLTON V. CRST INTERNATIONAL
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Phillips Jr. Carlton-1642343.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CARLTON PHILLIPS, JR., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  File No. 1642343.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
CRST EXPEDITED, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :              Head Note No.:  1801, 1803, 2500,       
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
                       2502, 2700, 1700 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Carlton Phillips, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against CRST Expedited, Inc., a self-insured employer, 
defendant.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on April 15, 2021, via CourtCall. The record was kept open until April 
23, 2021, to allow additional briefing on the evidentiary issues and the case was 
considered fully submitted on May 12, 2021, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, Defendant’s 
exhibits A, C-F, H-K, and N, along with the testimony of claimant, Deb Mentzer, and 
Sara Palmer.    
ISSUES  
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from September 20, 2019, to 
the present;  
 
2. The extent of permanent disability; 
3. The commencement date of PPD; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME pursuant to 85.39; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate care;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Sep-02  14:16:08     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 2 
 
7. Entitlement to credit; 
8. The assessment of costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing. On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed 
in this decision. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The parties stipulate claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course 
of his employment on January 11, 2018. They further agree that the injury was the 
cause of some temporary disability during a period of recovery, however dispute the 
extent of claimant's entitlement to temporary benefits. 
 
The parties agree that if a permanent disability is found, it is industrial in nature.  
 
At the time of the accepted injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were $590.43 
per week. The claimant was single and entitled to one exemption. Based on the 
foregoing, the weekly benefit rate is $368.17. 
 
Defendant waives all affirmative defenses.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Carlton Phillips, was a 41-year-old person at the time of the hearing. 
Claimant graduated from high school in 1997. He attended trade and community college 
receiving certificates in the electrical trade and Microsoft Office. (CE 6:31) His work 
history includes fast food service, temporary work at various factories, shuttle driver, 
chicken processing plant work, installer for cable and satellite services, barber services, 
warehouse and assembly, banquet and hotel work, and truck driving.  
Past medical issues of note include a right ankle injury suffered during high 
school sports and gun shots in the right hand, left arm and left thigh as a teenager.  
Claimant is not currently employed but is seeking new employment. He renewed 
his CDL in 2019 and underwent a driver examination in which he was cleared to 
perform over-the-road trucking.  
 
On or about January 11, 2018, claimant was occupying the sleeper berth of a semi 
tractor-trailer when the driver ran into an overpass.  
 
He was seen on the same date by Kaitlyn Jennings, PA-C, at Trinity Health of New 
England. (JE 1:1) He reported head, neck, and back pain and was uncertain whether he 
lost consciousness. Id. A CT of the cervical spine and the head were conducted which 

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 3 
 
showed no evidence of fracture, subluxation, or intracranial traumatic injury. (JE 1:5) He 
was administered Toradol and discharged with pain prescriptions. (JE 1:6)  
 
He was then seen again on January 13, 2018, at Health Partners in Minnesota by 
Emily A. Arcand, PA-C. (JE 2:7) He reported neck pain, upper back, lower back, knee 
and wrist pain and denied taking any medication for pain. (JE 2:7) X-rays were taken of 
the wrist and knee which showed no fractures, dislocations, or joint effusions. (JE 2:9) 
He exhibited tenderness to the left wrist with full range of motion, tenderness to the left 
knee over the medial aspect with full range of motion, and tenderness in the cervical 
paraspinal and lumbar paraspinal regions. (JE 2:10) He was diagnosed with muscle and 
tendon strain and referred for physical therapy. (JE 3.1:11)  
 
On January 31, 2018, claimant was seen at HealthWorks Medical Group. (JE 
3.1:12) He reported cervical, thoracic and lumbar pain, left knee pain, and left wrist pain. 
(JE 3.1:12) There were spasms of the paravertebral musculature and tenderness along 
bilateral trapezius muscles as well as the thoracolumbar spine and paravertebral 
musculature. (JE 3.1:14) His left patella was tender and so was the extensor surface of 
the left wrist. (JE 3.1:14) Diagnoses included left knee pain, left wrist pain, strain of the 
lumbar region, strain of muscle and tendon of back wall of thorax. (JE 3.1:15) The 
conclusion was that the MVA was more likely than not the cause of the pain symptoms. 
Id. Claimant was issued a wrist brace, a heat therapy band for the back, ThermaCare 
for the lower back, hip, neck, wrist and shoulder. (JE 3.1:16) He was allowed to return to 
work with restrictions of no lifting more than 15 pounds, no forceful pushing or pulling, 
no bending or stooping, no kneeling or squatting, no climbing stairs or ladders, no 
driving a company vehicle. He also needed to be able to alternate sitting and standing 
periodically. (JE 3.1:17) Claimant was referred to physical therapy for two times per 
week for three weeks. Id.  
 
On February 5, 2018, claimant returned to HealthWorks Medical Group for a follow 
up. (JE 3.1:18) Claimant reported the same pain in the left knee, left wrist, upper and 
lower back. (JE 3.1:18) He exhibited swelling from muscle spasms in the thoracolumbar 
spine as well as spasms in the thoracolumbar and paravertebral musculature with 
limited range of motion in the back. (JE 3.1:20)  His straight leg raising test was positive 
bilaterally. Id. Despite having somewhat worsened conditions, Nurse Practitioner 
Colleen Caspers signed off on a full return to work with no restrictions and instructed 
claimant to follow up with physical therapy for two more weeks. (JE 3.1:21-22, 3.2:46)  
 
Claimant returned to HealthWorks Medical Group on February 14, 2018, with 
reports of posterior cervical pain, neck pain, restrictions in the range of motion of his 
neck, pain in the back, limited back motion, pain in the wrist with motion, and knee pain. 
(JE 3.1:23) He exhibited tenderness in the neck, mid to low back, knee, and left wrist 
with restricted range of motion of the neck, mid to low back, and the left wrist.  (JE 
3.1:26) More physical therapy was ordered and claimant was instructed to continue with 
naproxen and cyclobenzaprine. (JE 3.1:28)  

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 4 
 
On February 14, 2018, Dr. Vlahos took claimant off work completely. (JE 3.2:47)  
 
Claimant returned to Healthworks Medical Group on February 27, 2018 with 
continued complaints of pain. (JE 3.1:30) Claimant was instructed to continue with 
physical therapy and his naproxen and cyclobenzaprine. Id. Dr. Vlahos continued to 
keep claimant off work. (JE 3.1:33)  
On March 8, 2018, claimant was seen by Dr. Vlahos. (JE 3.1:34) He complained of 
low back pain, moderately severe and characterized as sharp and dull. Id. He also 
complained of radiation of back pain into the left shin, limited back motion, neck pain 
and weakness with motion, and faint weakness and pain in the left wrist. (JE 3.1:34-35) 
For the left knee, claimant denied pain, weakness, numbness, tingling or restriction in 
range of motion. (JE 3.1:34) He had a normal gait and normal posture with tenderness 
and spasms in the neck, tenderness in the low back with restricted motion in both the 
neck and low back. (JE 3.1:36) The left knee was normal, and the wrist was stable.  (JE 
3.1:36) An MRI was requested for the back while physical therapy was prescribed for 
the low back and neck symptoms. (JE 3.1:38) Claimant testified at hearing that his left 
wrist and left knee had improved.  
Dr. Vlahos kept claimant off work until March 8, 2018, with restrictions of no lifting 
more than 10 pounds floor to waist and no lifting more than 5 pounds from waist to 
shoulder. He was to avoid forceful pushing, pulling, bending, stooping, climbing stairs or 
ladders. (JE 3.1:38)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Vlahos on March 15, 2018, with persistent back pain and 
improving neck pain. (JE 3.1:40) Dr. Vlahos approved claimant’s return to work with the 
previously articulated restrictions and continued claimant on PT. (JE 3.1:43)   
 
The MRI had not been approved. Ms. Mentzer testified on behalf of the 
defendant that the medical providers do not need approval for testing or treatment. Ms. 
Mentzer did not dispute that the MRI was recommended, but rather that it was 
claimant's duty to follow up with Dr. Vlahos. Ms. Mentzer conceded that she did not 
inform the claimant he was able to return to Dr. Vlahos at any time. Sara Palmer 
testified that she attempted to reach claimant on March 15, 2018 but that she was not 
able to contact him.  A letter was sent to him informing him of a transitional position at 
Salvation Army. Claimant testified that the offered $7.00 an hour wage was not a livable 
wage for him. Instead he returned to the trucking field as an independent contractor 
doing over-the-road truck driving for Hirschbach on March 19, 2018. (Trans p. 67)  
  
Claimant testified that he was physically not able to perform all the essential 
duties and was let go on or around September 20, 2019. He then attempted to work for 
J.B. Hunt, but testified that he was not able to work due to the physical condition of his 
body. (DE A:18; E:18) However, at hearing and during his deposition, he admitted he 
was let go due to a refusal of work, among other issues.  

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
While he has state health Insurance, he does not have sufficient funds to pay 
medical co-pays and has not sought out treatment on his own.  
On January 15, 2021, Dr. Vlahos filled out a checklist letter agreeing that 
claimant suffered a work-related injury to his neck, left knee, and left wrist. (CE 1:4-6) 
She further opined that he sustained a 10 percent permanent impairment as a result of 
the neck injury and recommended permanent restrictions of no lifting over 30 pounds 
floor to waist and waist to shoulder. (CE 1:5) While Dr. Vlahos agreed claimant was at 
MMI, she did not provide a date at which claimant reached MMI for the neck, but set 
March 8, 2018, as the MMI date for the left wrist and left knee. (CE 1:5-6) Dr. Vlahos did 
not find any permanent impairment to the left wrist or left knee and recommended no 
restrictions. (CE 1:6-7)  
On April 12, 2021, Dr. Vlahos acknowledged that she has not examined or 
treated claimant since April 2018 and as such would not be able to render a medical 
opinion as to any permanent injury that may exist today and would not be able to issue 
an opinion regarding permanent restrictions or impairment. (DE C:8)  
On September 30, 2020, Richard L. Kreiter, M.D., conducted an IME and 
concluded that claimant’s low back pain appeared to be more sacroiliac joint and gluteal 
discomfort without significant sciatica. (CE 2:8)  The left knee was “date of injury 
complaint” and he had no prior history of knee pathology prior to the injury date of 
January 11, 2018. (CE 2:8) Dr. Kreiter documented patellofemoral findings, the feeling 
of instability and giving away of the knee on occasion. (CE 2:8) The upper left extremity 
complaints of numbness, tingling, and grip weakness appeared to be more from a 
cubital tunnel or ulnar nerve issue rather than symptoms of a cervical disc condition. 
(CE 2:8) Dr. Kreiter found the neck symptoms to be more myofascial in nature with 
trapezius pain, scapular discomfort and tension headaches with no obvious 
radiculopathy. (CE 2:8)  
In a checklist letter signed January 18, 2021, Dr. Kreiter agreed claimant suffered 
a work-related injury to the neck, low back, left knee, and left wrist. (CE 2:14-17) He did 
not believe that claimant was at MMI for the low back, neck or left wrist, but assigned a 
5 percent whole person impairment for the neck and low back and 3 percent for the left 
knee.  (CE 2:14-17)   He opined that claimant reached MMI for the left knee around 
June 2018. (CE 2:16)  
Dr. Kreiter charged $1,000.00 for the examination and $250.00 for additional 
correspondence. (CE 4:22) Defendants have paid benefits through April 19, 2018.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 6 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).   
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between 
the injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a 
rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
Claimant seeks a finding that he is entitled to additional temporary benefits 
beyond which he has already been paid. The last date of payment for benefits was April 
19, 2018. Defendant argues that claimant failed to participate in modified duty offered to 
him on March 12, 2018, abandoned medical care and failed to comply with a doctor’s 
orders to return for recheck, sought and obtained full duty unrestricted employment with 
another employer on March 19, 2018, and for those reasons claimant is not entitled to 
additional temporary benefits.  
While defendant may characterize claimant’s post injury movements as 
intentionally avoiding communication with the employer, it appears to be just a lack of 
understanding. Claimant was offered a position at Salvation Army. He understood the 
hourly wage to be $7.00 per hour.  A $7.00 an hour paycheck was not sufficient in his 
view to support himself. However, he did return to work on March 19, 2018, with a new 
trucking company. Based on the statute, his healing period benefits ended when he 
returned to substantially similar work.   
Claimant's release to return to work on March 15, 2018, by Dr. Vlahos came with 
significant work restrictions. Defendant offered "transitional" work at Salvation Army at a 
reduced wage. Dr. Kreiter did not find claimant to be at MMI for his left knee or wrist 
until June 2018. Dr. Vlahos found claimant to be at MMI for the left wrist and left knee 
as of March 8, 2018, but did not set a date for MMI for the neck and low back. Thus 

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 7 
 
none of the elements of Iowa Code § 85.34(1) were met prior to claimant's return to 
work on March 19, 2018.  
He worked for the trucking company for approximately a year and a half, ending 
his employment sometime in August or September 2019, when he was let go. He stated 
the reason was he was not able to perform all the essential functions of his position due 
to his deteriorating physical condition. There is no medical testimony that connects his 
leaving employment in August 2019 to his work-related injuries and thus, it is found that 
there are no intermittent healing period benefits at this time, but instead, claimant 
returned to substantially similar work on March 19, 2018. The appropriate date of 
commencement for PPD benefits would be March 19, 2018.  
The parties agree that claimant sustained an Injury but disagree as to the extent.  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Defendant argues that the claimant's injury was temporary and has since 
resolved. They argue that Dr. Kreiter's opinion is the only one that supports the 
allegation that claimant has sustained a permanent injury. Presumably they discount the 
opinions of Dr. Vlahos given that she has not seen claimant since his last appointment 
in April 2018. Defendant asked the undersigned to take judicial notice of the many 
instances in which Dr. Kreiter has testified before the Agency almost exclusively on 
behalf of the claimant. Further, defendant takes issue with Dr. Kreiter's assumption that 
claimant only temporarily returned to work after the injury.  
Dr. Vlahos was unable to opine as to claimant's current condition, but at the time 
of the release in April 2018, claimant was not at MMI and still suffered neck and low 
back pain. His left wrist and left knee pain had resolved. This is consistent with Dr. 
Kreiter's findings that claimant has unresolved pain in the neck and low back that have 
not been fully worked up or treated. Whether Dr. Vlahos had the authority to schedule 
an MRI or whether claimant needed specific authorization is not necessary to resolve. 
Under both sets of facts, claimant needed additional diagnostic studies and according to 
both Dr. Vlahos and Dr. Kreiter, additional treatment. While claimant did return to work 

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 8 
 
following his injury with another trucking company and did renew his CDL, these acts 
show that claimant was motivated to return to work despite his disability. 
Dr. Kreiter found claimant to have sustained a 5 percent impairment for the neck, 
a 5 percent impairment for the low back and a 3 percent impairment to the left knee for 
a combined value of 13 percent whole person impairment. This is consistent with Dr. 
Vlahos' 2018 findings that claimant sustained a 10 percent whole person impairment. 
The main difference is that in 2020, Dr. Kreiter found a 3 percent permanent impairment 
to the left knee. He documented a few left knee symptoms such as patellofemoral 
findings, the feeling of instability and the giving away of the knee on occasion.  
While Dr. Kreiter has opined on behalf of claimants in workers' compensation 
matters several times in the past, his opinion is buttressed by that of Dr. Vlahos and 
contemporaneous medical records. Claimant did work for another trucking company for 
a little over a year before the employment was terminated for various reasons including 
accidents and possibly another job. However, claimant is currently not employed.  
Based on all of the foregoing, the evidence supports adopting Dr. Kreiter's 
opinions and restrictions. It is found claimant has sustained a 13 percent whole person 
impairment. 
Defendant testified that claimant may obtain the care recommended by Dr. 
Vlahos and indeed needed no further authorization. Claimant seeks an award of 
alternate care. However, it does not appear that the elements of an alternate care claim 
are met.  
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
There is no evidence showing that the claimant expressed dissatisfaction 
with the care offered, either orally or in writing. The correspondence between the parties 
in exhibit 7 pertain to an IME rather than the care recommended by Dr. Vlahos. Thus, 
claimant's request for a finding of alternative care is denied at this time.  
 
Claimant is entitled to ongoing medical care related to his low back, neck, 
and left knee.  

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement for an IME in this case, however, the 
triggering elements such as a low or zero impairment rating from a physician retained 
by the defendant has not been met. Therefore, claimant is not entitled to an IME under 
Iowa Code section 85.39.  
 
Defendant seeks a credit of benefits paid. It was found previously that 
entitlement to temporary benefits ended on March 19, 2018, when claimant returned to 
work. No additional temporary benefits have been ordered. Thus defendant would be 
entitled to a credit of benefits paid from March 19, 2018, through April 19, 2018, the 
date of the last benefit payment made by defendant.  
 
Claimant also requests an assessment of costs. 876 IAC 5.33 allows for the 
assessment of costs at the discretion of the deputy. Given that claimant has prevailed in 
this matter, the assessment of costs against defendant is appropriate except for the 
examination of Dr. Kreiter. Only reports are permissible under 876 IAC 4.33.  
 
Claimant also seeks penalty benefits. It is undisputed that claimant’s benefits 
were terminated on or about April 19, 2018. At that time, the medical records from Dr. 
Vlahos indicated claimant was not at MMI and needed additional testing and treatment. 
However, claimant was noncommunicative and had taken a new position with another 
trucking company.  
 
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, section 86.13 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 
N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  
Delay attributable to the time required to perform a reasonable investigation is 
not unreasonable.  Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 
(Iowa 1995).   
It also is not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer's liability fairly debatable.  An issue of law is fairly debatable if 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 
(Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which 
would support a finding favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 
N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).  

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 10 
 
An employer's bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was "fairly debatable."  Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to fifty percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer's past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
In this case, the lack of communication falls upon the shoulders of the defendant. 
Pursuant to the statute, defendant had an ongoing obligation to investigate the 
claimant's alleged work claim as well as communicate with the claimant. Once claimant 
obtained new employment, it appears that defendant took no further action on behalf of 
the claimant. An injured party's return to work does not void the employer's ongoing 
duty to investigate and communicate. The lack of investigation abrogates against the 
defense of a good faith basis and becomes a bare assertion without facts. 
Thus, it is found that claimant is entitled to penalty benefits. The length of the 
delay begins with the termination of benefits on April 19, 2018 and continues to this day. 
At the time, defendant knew claimant had obtained new employment with a trucking 
firm, had turned down a temporary position with the Salvation Army, and that there was 
ongoing treatment recommended, but that claimant was not following up with the 
authorized treating physician. Further, the defendant attempted to make contact with the 
claimant but was unsuccessful. It should be noted that claimant was represented by 
counsel as early as January 23, 2018. (See e.g. CE 8:46) Based on these factors, it is 
determined claimant is entitled to a 10 percent penalty benefit of all benefits owed that 
are late.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, it is ordered: 
That defendant is to pay unto claimant sixty-five (65) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of  three hundred sixty-eight and 17/100 dollars ($368.17) 
per week from March 19, 2018. 
That defendant is entitled to a credit of benefits paid after March 18, 2018, up to 
April 19, 2018, against the above ordered permanent partial disability benefits.  
That claimant is entitled to ongoing and future medical care for his work-related 
injuries.   
That defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 

PHILLIPS, JR. V. CRST EXPEDITED, INC. 
Page 11 
 
That defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.   
 
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33 
except for the examination performed by Dr. Kreiter.  
That claimant is entitled to ten (10) percent penalty benefits of all late paid 
benefits.   
Signed and filed this _____2nd ___ day of September, 2021. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Mark King (via WCES) 
Chris Scheldrup (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
