Case Number: 19001835.01
Case Title:  FORIC, NESIBA V. SAM'S CLUB
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Foric Nesiba-19001835.01d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NESIBA FORIC, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                  File No. 19001835.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SAM’S CLUB, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE CO.,   :       Head Note Nos.:  1800, 1801, 1802,  
 
 
  : 
 
 
      1804, 2502 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Nesiba Foric, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits from Sam’s Club, employer, and New Hampshire Company, 
insure, both as defendants, for a disputed work injury.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on July 20, 2020 via Court Call. The case was considered fully 
submitted on August 10, 2020, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The evidence consisted of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4 and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-C along with the testimony of the claimant.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from July 1, 2019 to May 
21, 2020. 
2. Whether claimant has sustained a permanent disability, and if so, whether 
that disability is scheduled or industrial; 
3. The extent of said disability;  
4. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded; 
5. Whether claimant has sustained a permanent disability, and if so, the extent 
of said disability;  
6. Whether claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination (IME);  
7. The assessment of costs. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-04  15:14:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 2 
 
 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties agree the claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the 
course of her employment on March 10, 2019. The parties further agree the claimant 
suffered a period of temporary disability but disagree as to the extent of entitlement to 
temporary benefits. 
At the time of the injury, the parties agreed that the claimant’s average weekly 
wage was $480.00 per week, she was married and entitled to two exemptions. Based 
on the foregoing the weekly benefit rate is $334.06. 
The defendants waive all affirmative defenses. There are no credits in dispute. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
At the time of the hearing, claimant was a 60 year old person. She immigrated to 
the United States in 1997. She does not read or write English and has some limited 
ability to speak the language. At all relevant times, claimant was married.  
Her educational background includes four years of school. Her work history 
includes housekeeping for hotels and work at a manufacturing plant building thresholds 
for cars and trucks. (CE 2:3) At the time of her injury, claimant was working as a 
merchandise reception/stockist for defendant employer. The job required bending, 
lifting, carrying and stooping as she unpacked boxes and placed merchandise on 
shelves.  She worked approximately 40 hours per week. 
On March 10, 2019, claimant was on the defendant employer’s premises in the 
parking lot when she slipped on ice and fell. She did not seek immediate medical 
attention nor report the incident to her supervisor. She went home, took Tylenol and 
rested for a few days until she returned to work again on Tuesday when she reported 
her injury. 
On March 14, 2019, she was seen by David Berg, D.O. (JE 1) Examination 
revealed tenderness in the SI joints bilaterally, bilateral positive Fabere’s disease, 
negative straight leg test, mild bilateral low back pain with iliopsoas testing but no 
evidence of trauma. (JE 1) Diagnostic x-ray showed multilevel degenerative disease 
with no history of fracture or sacroiliac joint pathology. (JE 1:1) Claimant was diagnosed 
with bilateral SI joint dysfunction, prescribed Voltaren, and returned to work with a 5 
pound lifting restriction. Id. Due to the lifting restriction, claimant was placed on light 
duty. Defendant employer provided a light duty position that required no more than 5 
pounds in lifting and no repetitive twisting or bending. (DE B:1) This was defined as a 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 3 
 
 
temporary position with duties including test scanning price changes, floor scrubber, 
and folding and organizing clothes. (DE B:1) Claimant accepted this position. Id.  
Her symptoms continued and on March 21, 2019, she returned to Dr. Berg but 
this time with some complaints of paresthesias in her right lower extremity. (JE1:3)  She 
reported she was working within her restrictions but that being on her feet for a 
prolonged period of time resulted in increased back pain and right lower extremity 
issues. Sneezing or coughing also contributed to increased back pain. (JE 1:3) She 
rated her pain as an 8 on a 10 scale. Id.  Dr. Burke ordered an MRI which was 
completed on April 4, 2019. The MRI showed diffuse degenerative changes specifically 
spondylosis in the lumbar spine. (JE 2) 
On April 9, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Berg who offered a bilateral sacroiliac 
joint injection which the claimant refused. (JE 1:5 to 6) She was taking Cataflam twice a 
day which was resolving her pain. (JE 1:5)  Claimant started a course of physical 
therapy which was hampered by claimant’s pain complaints and the therapist noted that 
an SI injection or additional imaging might be helpful. (JE 3:26)  Her physical therapy 
course was completed on May 3, 2019, with no abatement of her pain. (JE 3)  
She was returned to Dr. Berg on May 6, 2019 who repeated his offer of a 
sacroiliac joint injection. (JE 1:7 – 8)  Again, claimant refused and requested a referral 
to pain management. She was returned to work with restrictions and was provided the 
pain management referral. 
In the middle of May 2019, claimant was diagnosed with lymphoma. (JE 4:30) 
She had noticed a lump on the right side of her neck three months prior. (JE 4:30)  She 
started a course of chemotherapy and took a leave of absence from work. (JE 1; JE 4) 
Subsequently, claimant did not return to work but instead applied for Social Security 
Disability. She was determined to be disabled as of May 2019 upon her diagnosis of 
lymphoma. 
On July 9, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Berg wherein they discussed recent 
sacroiliac joint injections which claimant had undergone on May 29, 2019, with Dr. 
Ransdell (JE 1:9 to 10) The injections had provided only temporary relief for a couple of 
days. Id. She exhibited bilateral SI joint tenderness and tenderness in the lumbar 
paraspinal muscles. Id. Range of motion was restricted in all planes secondary to pain. 
Id. Dr. Berg expressed concern that the continued low back pain could be the result of 
metastasized cancer. Id.  Dr. Berg prescribed claimant hydrocodone and encouraged 
her to bring information from her oncologist to help him make a differential diagnosis 
regarding the origin of claimant’s pain. (JE 1:9)  Dr. Berg took claimant off of work and 
claimant has not returned to work since this date. (JE 1:10)  Claimant began to receive 
weekly benefits from the defendant employer on July 9, 2019. She testified that she was 
not offered work consistent with the restrictions set forth by Dr. Berg on July 9, 2019. 
 
 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 4 
 
 
On July 23, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Berg with complaints of tenderness in 
both sacroiliac joints, left slightly worse than the right and tenderness consistent with 
ankylosing spondylitis. (JE 1:11) Claimant relayed that the oncologist had found no 
cancer in her bones or pelvis. Claimant requested a repeat sacroiliac joint injection but 
that the oncologist told her that she should not have any joint injections until 22 days 
following her last chemotherapy treatment. (JE 1:11) Dr. Berg refilled her Voltaren as 
claimant maintained this alleviated some pain. He also renewed a prescription for 
hydrocodone. He wrote out new work restrictions, returning her to work but limiting her 
to sedentary work only.  (JE 1:11-12) Defendant employer did not offer sedentary work 
at this time.  
On August 14, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Berg.  (JE 1:13) She relayed that 
her bone scan was normal and thus the cancer was not responsible for her back pain. 
(JE 1:13) Dr. Berg maintained claimant’s prescriptions and noted that she was working 
light duty up until the point of her May 2019 lymphoma diagnosis. Dr. Berg opined that 
claimant was likely not working due to the effects of chemotherapy. Finally he opined 
that solely based upon the condition of her back, she could be working light duty and 
returned claimant to work with a 10-pound lifting restriction and sedentary work with 
sitting and standing as needed. (JE 1:13 – 14) 
Claimant did not remember having this conversation with Dr. Berg. 
During a chemotherapy visit, the practitioner noted that claimant’s back pain was 
worse after sitting for long periods of time and improved with movement. (JE 4:36)  
On October 23, 2019, claimant was seen again by Dr. Berg. (JE 1:15) During this 
visit it was noted the claimant had chemotherapy scheduled through December which 
would make it difficult to treat any back complaints. (JE 1:15 – 16)  She was instructed 
to return in three months after she completed her chemotherapy. 
On October 28, 2019, claimant was seen by David Boarini, M.D., for second 
opinion on her back. (JE 5) Dr. Boarini opined that it was difficult to assess the claimant 
due to exaggerated pain behavior including moving slowly with no focal weakness, no 
abnormal tone, and a negative straight leg raise test.  (JE 5)  He further felt that the MRI 
results did not match the claimant’s subjective symptoms.  Claimant finished her course 
of chemotherapy on December 3, 2019 at which point her cancer was noted to be 
stable. (JE 4:36 to 60) Throughout the chemotherapy treatment, claimant reported 
ongoing back pain. (JE 4:43, 49, 52, 56) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Berg on January 22, 2020, following the completion of 
her chemotherapy.  (JE 1:17 to 18)  During examination, she was in mild to moderate 
acute distress with tenderness over both SI joints and a positive Fabere’s. (JE 1:17) 
Claimant requested repeated SI joint injections and an appointment was made with 
Metro Anesthesia for these. (JE 1:17) Claimant was given a work release with 
restrictions although she has not returned to work. (JE 1:18) On February 19, 2020, she 
reported to Dr. Berg that the SI injections resolved the right SI joint pain but not the left. 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 5 
 
 
(JE 1:1) She was to wait a week to see if the pain in the left resolved. Dr. Berg 
prescribed tramadol and noted that the diclofenac was helpful. (JE 1:19)  
On March 26, 2020, claimant was administered another set of injections but on 
April 15, 2020, reported to Dr. Berg that the injections no longer provided her relief. (JE 
1:23 to 24) At hearing, claimant testified that the injections worsened her pain 
complaints and that pain medication was not helpful. On the contrary, Dr. Berg noted 
that claimant “does quite well with Voltaren.” (JE 1:23)  
On July 7, 2020, claimant underwent another lumbar MRI which showed stable 
diffuse lumbar spondylosis. (JE 2:25.5)  
On May 22, 2020, claimant was seen for an independent medical examination by 
Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Claimant’s Exhibit 4) During this evaluation, claimant continued to 
have constant back pain that radiated down both legs to the level of her feet. (CE 4:15) 
The pain disturbed her sleep and she was able to sit or stand for only ten minutes. (CE 
4:15)  Dr. Bansal placed claimant at maximum medical improvement as of May 22, 2020 
and assigned a 6 percent impairment. (CE 4) Dr. Bansal further assigned restrictions of 
no lifting greater than 20 pounds, and frequent bending or twisting and prolonged sitting 
or standing. (CE 4:18) 
Claimant identified that she understood these restrictions to mean that she could 
work.  However, she testified that she expected to be called back to work, but never 
received any notification from defendant employer. 
Claimant has not returned to work for defendant employer nor has she attempted 
to look for work elsewhere.  Claimant testified defendant employer has not offered light 
duty work either in writing or verbally since July 23, 2018 but that she would accept light 
duty work within her restrictions if it was offered. Claimant testified that she believes that 
she could do work within the restrictions recommended by Dr. Bansal. 
Dr. Bansal’s charges were itemized as follows: $580.00 for the physical 
examination and $2,067.00 for the report. (CE 4:19) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The main question in controversy is what restrictions were caused by her cancer 
and what restrictions were caused by her injury.   
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 6 
 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
In the hearing report, the issue of whether the claimant’s injury was scheduled or 
industrial in nature was raised. The only injury the claimant is presenting in the present 
case is one to her low back.  A low back injury is considered to be an unscheduled injury 
and therefore industrial in nature.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 
808, 813 (Iowa 1994) (noting that chapter 85 divides permanent partial disability into 
scheduled and unscheduled losses and paragraphs a through t are reserved for 
scheduled injuries).   
Defendants argue that because no permanent partial disability is appropriate and 
that even if it was, it should be measured pursuant to a functional impairment rating. 
According to Iowa Code section 85.34(v), injured workers who suffer a non-scheduled 
member injury returns to a job with the same employer at the same or higher rate of 
pay, permanent partial disability shall be compensated based upon the claimant’s 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 7 
 
 
functional impairment rating. The defendants have extrapolated this to mean that if a 
claimant has failed to prove that she returned to a job at a lower rate of pay or was 
terminated from her position, she is entitled to functional impairment only. Defendants 
wish to impose a burden on the claimant to prove the negative of the factors set forth in 
Iowa Code section 85.34(v) The appropriate test here is to view whether the evidence 
supports a finding that claimant returned to a job with the same employer at the same or 
higher rate of pay. Claimant did not. She returned to a light duty position from which she 
was removed on July 9, 2019. Dr. Berg noted that she was removed because of her 
cancer diagnosis but regardless, she did not return to work following this nor was she 
offered a position following July 9, 2019, at the same rate of pay or higher rate of pay. 
Thus, claimant’s disability shall be measured by the industrial disability standard rather 
than functional impairment.  
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Defendants further argue claimant has sustained no industrial disability and that 
she has only the opinions of Dr. Bansal, her IME physician, to say otherwise. However, 
this ignores Dr. Berg’s medical records. Dr. Berg was claimant’s primary treating 
physician for her back complaints. During his treatment of her, he speculated that some 
of her back pain could have been caused by her cancer. However, the medical records 
from her oncologist do not indicate that the cancer had metastasized into her bones. 
The oncology records make reference to chronic back pain which was attributed to 
claimant’s fall on March 10, 2019. The oncology medical records did not attribute the 
back complaints to her cancer or the treatment she was receiving for the cancer.  
Based solely on claimants back injury, Dr. Berg opined she could be working light 
duty with a 10-pound lifting restriction and sedentary work with sitting and standing as 
needed. The temporary position that was offered to her after her initial diagnosis was 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 8 
 
 
within those restrictions. It was a light duty position that required no more than 5 pounds 
in lifting and no repetitive twisting or bending. She did report to Dr. Berg that working 
within these restrictions increased her back pain and right lower extremity issues due to 
prolonged periods of time standing. However, she testified that she believed that she 
could return to work within the restrictions set forth by Dr. Bansal. Dr. Bansal’s 
restrictions included no lifting greater than 20 pounds and no frequent bending or 
twisting or prolonged sitting or standing which were similar to the restrictions 
recommended by Dr. Berg. 
Defendant employer has not provided a permanent and regular position 
consistent with claimant’s work restrictions. The light duty position that claimant was 
working prior to July 9, 2019 required prolonged sitting or standing which exacerbated 
her back pain. 
There was some misunderstanding as to why Dr. Berg took claimant off of work 
on July 9, 2019. She understood that she was taken off of work due to her back pain, 
but Dr. Berg took her off of work because of her cancer diagnosis.  Claimant is currently 
on Social Security Disability, dating back to her initial diagnosis of cancer in May 2019.  
Claimant has limited education, cannot read or write English and cannot speak it 
well enough to conduct a job that would require conversational English. Her past work 
history has been primarily manual, unskilled labor as a hotel housekeeper with a small 
stint at an assembly manufacturing plant.  
While Dr. Berg clearly stated that he put her on leave due to her cancer 
diagnosis, when he later returned her to work restrictions at the sedentary work level. 
His last work related order came on April 15, 2020, with modified work restrictions of 
sedentary work. (See JE 1:24 which extended the current restrictions of October 23, 
2019)  He was informed by the claimant that there was no advancement of the cancer 
into her bones on August 14, 2019. He continued to treat her for the chronic back pain 
and continued to write out return to work restrictions limiting her to sedentary work.  
While claimant testified she would be willing and able to work within Dr. Bansal’s 
work restrictions of no frequent bending or standing and no prolonged sitting or standing 
greater than 30 minutes at a time, there do not appear to be positions available to her 
with her limited grasp of English and her work history.  
Therefore it is found that claimant is totally and permanently disabled. It is 
recognized that this is a large award for a low back injury that resulted from a slip and 
fall on ice. Claimant has had only conservative treatment in the form of physical therapy, 
medications and injections. However, the long lasting pain and discomfort along with 
claimant’s age, education, work restrictions imposed by both the authorized treating 
physician and the IME physician, and work history support the finding.  
 
 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 9 
 
 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME. Defendants resist on the 
basis that there has been no finding that claimant has reached MMI and therefore no 
evaluation of permanent disability has yet to be made. However, MMI is not solely 
dependent on a doctor’s evaluation. It is a factual assessment of whether the evidence 
shows that claimant had an expectation of improvement. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
Iowa App 312 N.W.2d 60 (1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
It is apparent that she had not been improving for some time. During the April 15, 
2020, visit, claimant reported that the repeated injections were providing no relief and 
she did not want further injections. Dr. Berg continued claimant on the same sedentary 
work restrictions that he had imposed months earlier. When Dr. Boarini saw claimant on 
October 28, 2019, he opined there was no surgical option for the claimant and that she 
should be continued on a course of conservative treatment, which she was. Dr. Bansal 
set her MMI date as May 22, 2020, at the time of his evaluation. He provided no 
treatment to her nor did he recommend further treatment. Thus, May 22, 2020, is 
adopted as the MMI date. As of this date, there was no further reasonable expectation 
of improvement of her disabling chronic pain. 
Claimant is entitled to healing period benefits when she has suffered a 
permanent disability. It was found above that claimant is permanently and totally 
disabled as a result of her back injury.  The MMI date is May 22, 2020. When claimant 
was taken off of work on July 9, 2019, due to her cancer diagnosis, she was already 
permanently and totally disabled. She had problems doing any type of work with 
prolonged sitting and standing. When she was given return to work restrictions by Dr. 
Berg, unrelated to her cancer diagnosis, those restrictions put her in the sedentary work 
category.  
Therefore claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from July 1, 2019, 
through May 22, 2020.  
As for the IME, the trigger for entitlement to a reimbursement includes a finding 
of permanent disability or no disability by a physician retained by the defendants. Iowa 
Code section 85.39 (2020).  In this case, Dr. Berg made no finding of permanent 
disability and therefore the criteria for an 85.35 reimbursement was not met.  
Because claimant has prevailed, the discretionary award of costs is granted as 
well. 876 IAC 4.33 

FORIC V. SAM’S CLUB 
Page 10 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED,  
That defendants are to pay unto claimant permanent total disability benefits at a 
rate of three hundred thirty-four and 06/100 dollars ($334.06) commencing May 23, 
2020 and continuing during the period of permanent total disability. 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant healing period benefits at a rate of 
three hundred thirty-four and 06/100 dollars($334.06) commencing July 1, 2019, 
through May 22, 2020. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
That defendants shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33. 
Signed and filed this _4th _ day of November, 2020. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE 
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
Adam Bates (via WCES) 
 
