Case Number: 23001035.01
Case Title:  POUSH, KYLE V. READER TRUCKING LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Poush Kyle-23001035.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KYLE POUSH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
  File No. 23001035.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
READER TRUCKING, LLC, 
  : 
     ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
 
  :                             DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
       Head Note:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Kyle Poush.   
 
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on March 26, 2025. 
Claimant appeared personally and through his attorney, Mindi Vervaecke.  Defendants 
appeared through their attorney, James Ballard.  The proceedings were digitally 
recorded. That recording constitutes the official record of this proceeding.  
 
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023, Order, the undersigned has been 
delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
 
The hearing record consists of: 
 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 1 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A and B 
 Defendants’ Brief 
 
Claimant was the only witness to provide testimony.  Counsel for both parties 
provided argument.  The record closed at the end of the alternate medical care 
telephonic hearing.  
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-31  10:32:47     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
The issues presented for resolution are whether the claimant is entitled to 
alternate medical care in the form of: 
 
 A home aide once weekly to assist with home maintenance, chores, 
groceries and meal prep as recommended by Philip Chen, M.D. 
 Authorization for mental health treatment 
 
Prior to the hearing, defendants filed an answer admitting liability for an injury to 
claimant’s whole body on January 13, 2023.  However, at the start of the hearing 
defendants’ counsel moved to verbally amend their answer to admit liability for the 
physical-whole-body injuries claimant sustained on January 13, 2023, but deny 
claimant’s alleged mental conditions. (Hearing Testimony).  Defense counsel indicated 
defendants have sought a causation opinion from claimant’s authorized provider for the 
alleged mental conditions, but have not yet received a response. (Id.). Accordingly, 
defendants stated they lacked sufficient information to determine whether the alleged 
mental conditions were causally related to the January 13, 2023, injury date at this time. 
(Id.).  Defendants declined to affirmatively accept liability for claimant’s alleged mental 
conditions.  An alternate care decision is therefore not appropriate for the claimant’s 
alleged mental health conditions.  
 
Before any benefits can be ordered, including medical benefits, compensability of 
the claim must be established, either by admission of liability or by adjudication.  The 
summary provisions of Iowa Code section 85.27, as more particularly described in rule 
876 IAC 4.48, are not designed to adjudicate disputed compensability of a claim.   
The Iowa Supreme Court has held:   
We emphasize that the commissioner’s ability to decide the merits of a 
section 85.27(4) alternate medical care claim is limited to situations where 
the compensability of an injury is conceded, but the reasonableness of a 
particular course of treatment for the compensable injury is disputed. . . . 
Thus, the commissioner cannot decide the reasonableness of the alternate 
care claim without also necessarily deciding the ultimate disputed issue in 
the case:  whether or not the medical condition Barnett was suffering at the 
time of the request was a work-related injury.  
. . . . 
Once an employer takes the position in response to a claim for alternate 
medical care that the care sought is for a noncompensatory injury, the 
employer cannot assert an authorization defense in response to a 
subsequent claim by the employee for the expenses of the alternate medical 
care.  
R. R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 197-198 (Iowa 2003). 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 3 
 
Defendants denied liability for claimant’s alleged mental condition.  Given this, 
claimant’s original notice and petition for alternate care for that condition must be 
dismissed and defendants lose their right to control the medical care claimant seeks 
during their period of denial.  Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 2018); 
Bell Bros. Heating  and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010).   
Claimant may obtain reasonable medical care from any provider for this 
treatment, but at claimant’s expense, and seek reimbursement for such care using 
regular claim proceedings before this agency.  Haack v. Von Hoffman Graphics, File 
No. 1268172 (App. July 31, 2002); Kindhart v. Fort Des Moines Hotel, I Iowa Industrial 
Comm’r Decisions No. 3, 611 (App. March 27, 1985).  “[T]he employer has no right to 
choose the medical care when compensability is contested.”  Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 
204.   
The denial of liability and resultant dismissal without prejudice can also limit the 
defendants’ ability to assert a lack-of-authorization defense with respect to care relating 
to the injury alleged by the claimant. 
The authorization defense is applicable when the commissioner has denied 
a claimant’s petition for alternate care on its merits. But it is inapplicable 
where the claimant’s petition for alternate care was denied on procedural 
grounds such that the commissioner could not adjudicate the petition’s 
merits, as is the case when the employer disputes the compensability of the 
injury. 
Brewer-Strong, 913 N.W.2d at 243–44 (citing Barnett, 670 N.W.2d at 197). 
 
However, defendants’ denial of liability at this stage in the proceedings does not 
necessarily forever bar them from asserting an authorization defense in this case for 
care relating to the injuries or conditions alleged in the petition. See Brewer-Strong, 913 
N.W.2d at 244.  Defendants may change their position to accept liability if new opinions 
and/or information provide evidence to justify doing so. Id. And if the defendants change 
their position, the defendants may regain the “authorization defense and the statutory 
rights and obligations to provide and choose appropriate medical care pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27” moving forward, unless they subsequently change their position to 
deny liability once again, or the commissioner grants a subsequent application for 
alternate care by the claimant. Id. at 245; see also, Winnebago Indus., Inc. v. Haverly, 
727 N.W.2d 567, 575 (Iowa 2006) (“There might, in some cases, be a significant 
change in the facts after the admission of liability that could justify a change of position 
by the employer . . . .”). 
 
Claimant’s original notice and petition for alternate medical care is hereby 
dismissed as it pertains to his alleged mental health conditions.  
 
The undersigned will now address claimant’s request for a home aide.  

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 4 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
 
 
Claimant, Kyle Poush, worked as a semi-driver for Reader Trucking, LLC. 
(Hearing Testimony). On January 13, 2023, he fell from the cab of his parked semi-truck 
and injured his spine. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 1).  Poush was in Utah at the time of 
his injury. (Defendants’ Exhibit B, page 2). After the fall, he was taken to Intermountain 
Medical Center. (Id.).  Imaging was completed. (Id.). The imaging showed a fracture of 
C7 with a superior endplate and compression fracture of T1. (Id.).  As a result of the fall, 
Poush is paralyzed. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).  He has trace to no voluntary movement in his lower 
extremities and impaired trunk strength and balance, but maintains fairly good upper 
extremity strength, with just mild weakness in his left hand and some numbness in digits 
4-5. (Id.).   
Defendants have accepted liability for Poush’s spinal cord injury on January 13, 
2023. (Answer). They have directed and covered his medical care since the injury date. 
(Hearing Testimony).   
 
On January 14, 2023, Poush underwent an anterior cervical discectomy and 
fusion surgery at C6-7 and a posterior cervical laminectomy and fusion procedure at 
C5-T2 with Dr. Yoon at Intermountain Medical Center. (Ex. B, p. 2).  After the 
procedure, he received acute rehabilitation care at Intermountain Medical Center. (Id.).  
There is one treatment note from the Intermountain Medical Center in the hearing 
record. (Ex. A, p. 1).  It is authored by Lindsay Wilson-Barlow, Ph.D., and is dated 
February 23, 2023. (Id.).  It states that Poush felt he was doing well, was able to use a 
slide board for transfers in PT and getting himself to therapy independently in his 
wheelchair. (Id.).   
On February 28, 2023, Poush was transferred to Quality Living in Omaha, NE. 
(Ex. B, p. 2). At Quality Living, he received intensive neuro-rehabilitation services which 
were intended to maximize his functional independence. (Id.).  At the hearing, 
defendants introduced a treatment note from Emily Parriott, PA-C, a physician’s 
assistant at Quality Living. (Id.).  The note is dated March 9, 2023. (Id.).  That note 
indicates that Poush had been participating in physical therapy since arriving at Quality 
Living. (Id.).  The note states that Poush was able to independently perform transfers 
from a manual wheelchair. (Id.).  It also states that Poush had minimal lower extremity 
spasms and was independent with CIC about every 4 hours and denied incontinence. 
(Id. at 2-3).  The note indicates he was switching to a nightly bowel program at that time. 
(Id. at 3).  
The next treatment note in the record is from Philip Chen, M.D., a physical 
medicine and rehabilitation doctor at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
(UIHC). (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).  That note is dated January 27, 2025.  (Id.).  It appears that 
Poush’s care was transferred to Dr. Chen upon his discharge from Quality Living. 
(Hearing Testimony).  At the hearing, both parties agreed that Dr. Chen is an authorized 
provider for the January 13, 2023 date of injury. (Id.).  Dr. Chen’s treatment note states 
that Poush is stable overall and doing fairly well. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).  It notes that he has 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 5 
 
both a manual wheelchair and a powerchair, and “remains modified independent for all 
mobility and transportation.” (Id.).  It states that Poush can transfer independently, 
mainly using his manual wheelchair for bathroom transfers. (Id.).  Poush also has a 
modified pick-up with a transfer seat, wheelchair lift and hand controls. (Id.).   
Dr. Chen’s note contains a section addressing Poush’s activities of daily living.  
(Id.).  That section reads as follows, 
ADL’s: He reports being independent with all basic ADLs.  Independent 
with most IADLs, including driving, shopping, most household chores. He 
does have some difficulty with certain chores, particularly with fatigue and 
energy conservation, sometimes it takes days to accomplish a task, such 
as cleaning the dishes and cooking. His neighbor helps him regularly to 
bring in groceries or other items from his truck, which are difficult to lift from 
the truck bed.  Neighbor also helps with making the bed, housecleaning, 
and other household odds and ends.  
(Id.). 
 
Dr. Chen’s treatment note also contains sections for bladder and bowel care. (Cl 
Ex. 1, p. 2.  The bladder section indicates Poush has established care with urology at 
UIHC. (Id.). It states that he is “self cathing intermittently about twice daily,” and has not 
had a UTI since September 2024. (Id.).  The bowel section indicates he is stable overall 
and has been doing a bowel program every other day, which consists of digital 
stimulation and produces good consistent results. (Id.).  Dr. Chen indicated that Poush 
should continue with his home exercise plan and attend follow-up appointments with 
urology as scheduled. (Id. at 3).  He also wrote an order for a household aide. (Id.).  
That order reads “Home aide once weekly to assist with home maintenance, chores, 
groceries, meal prep.”(Id. at 4).   
 
On February 11, 2025, Poush sent an email to Stephanie Giomio. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 5).  
Ms. Giomio is his nurse case manager for the January 13, 2023 injury date. (Id. at 2).  
The email asks about the status of the script Dr. Chen wrote for a “HOME AID [sic] to 
help me at my house.” (Id. at 5).  On February 19, 2025, defendants’ counsel sent 
claimant’s counsel an email in response. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 8).  That email states that Dr. 
Chen’s order is for meal prep, groceries, and cleaning services, and those services are 
not compensable nursing services under Iowa Code section 85.27.  The email also cites 
an arbitration decision issued by this agency, Hamer v. Wisert Precast Concrete, File 
No. 923913 (Arb. Dec, Nov. 4, 1993).  Claimant’s counsel sent a response email on 
February 24, 2025. (Id. at 7).  That email states that the defendants are lucky that 
Poush is so motivated to be independent and a “Weekly home aide is the least they can 
do.” (Id. at 8).  It then cites a different appeal decision from this agency, Paulino v. C-
Tec, File. 5019047 (App. Dec., July 17, 2008).  On February 26, 2025, defendants’ 
counsel sent a reply email indicating their position on providing housekeeping services 
was unchanged. (Id. at 7).   
 
On March 17, 2025, Poush filed his application for alternate medical care, 
requesting that defendants provide a home aide as recommended by Dr. Chen, as well 
as mental health treatment. (Petition).  On March 18, 2025, defendants filed an answer 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 6 
 
admitting liability for a whole-body injury on January 13, 2023.1  The hearing for Poush’s 
petition was held on March 26, 2025. Prior to the start of that hearing, defendants filed a 
pre-hearing brief. (See Defendants’ Brief).  In the brief, defendants argued that the 
home aide services requested by Poush fall outside the scope of Iowa Code section 
85.27. (Id. at 2).  As support for this assertion, defendants cited an Iowa Supreme Court 
decision from 1994, Henry v. Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co., 522 N.W.2d 301(Iowa 
1994), as well as two agency decisions, Hawkinson v. Olsson Associates, File No. 
1026734 and Banks v. Tasler Pallet, Inc., File No. 1168793. (Id. at 2-3).  Defendants 
asserted that those decisions stood for the proposition that homemaking services such 
as cooking and cleaning were not within the scope of nursing services covered by Iowa 
Code section 85.27, and therefore defendants are not liable for covering their cost. (Id. 
at 3).  Defendants stated that Poush is independent for all activities of daily living 
(ADLs), so they should not be required to cover home aide services.  
 
Poush testified at the hearing. (Hearing Testimony).  He stated that the 
appointment with Dr. Chen on January 27, 2025, was a six-month check-up.  (Id.).  He 
also stated that he is receiving treatment from Dr. Kreder, a urologist at UIHC. (Id.).  He 
last saw Dr. Kreder in February 2025 and is not scheduled to return to his office for 
another six months. (Id.).   
 
Poush agreed that he lives independently at his home in Eastern Iowa. (Hearing 
Testimony).  He lives alone. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 2).  After the injury, defendants modified his 
home to make it wheelchair accessible. (Hearing Testimony).  Poush, however, 
indicated that some of the modifications are less than ideal. (Id.).  For example, he 
stated that defendants modified his kitchen sink, but he still cannot get his wheelchair all 
the way underneath the sink when he washes dishes. (Id.).  He has concluded that 
defendants have done their best to modify the sink and “makes due.”  (Id.). He, 
however, testified that it is hard for him to lean forward to wash his dishes by hand. (Id.).   
 
Poush agreed that he can independently perform all his ADLs. (Hearing 
Testimony).  However, because of his injury he must perform all those activities using 
just his arms. (Id.).  He has maintained his arm function, but his abdominal muscles do 
not work.  (Id.).  He indicated he has a hard time breathing and speaking.  (Id.).  He 
stated it takes a lot of effort to speak and to hold his torso upright in his wheelchair. (Id.).   
 
Since being discharged from Quality Life, Poush has been responsible for 
maintaining his own home. (Hearing Testimony).  He has done the dishes and laundry, 
as well as swept, mopped, and took out the garbage. (Id.).  He, however, indicated that 
he is having a hard time keeping up with his housework and sometimes asks his 
neighbors who check in on him for help. (Id.). He has also received assistance from his 
aunt and uncle, who live up the road from his residence. (Id.).  He does not feel right 
asking his neighbors for assistance. (Id.).  
 
Poush testified that he was having bladder issues when he saw Dr. Chen in 
January 2025. (Hearing Testimony).  He stated that he normally has pretty good bladder 
                                                 
1 As previously noted, that answer was verbally amended to specifically deny Poush’s alleged mental 
condition. (Hearing Testimony).   

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 7 
 
control, but for three days in a row his bladder was leaking every ten minutes to every 
hour. (Id.).  This forced him to wash his bed sheets twice a day for three days in a row. 
(Id.).  He ended up calling his neighbor to help him make his bed. (Id.).  Poush testified 
that during this time period he also got sick and got behind on the rest of his household 
chores. (Id.).  He stated it took him several days to get his house back in order. (Id.).  
Poush indicates he fatigues easily, and it is a lot of work to keep himself and his house 
clean. (Id.).   
Poush testified that he weighed 175 lbs. when he was injured in January 2023. 
(Hearing Testimony).  He now weighs 145 lbs. (Id.).  He believes the strain of his 
household chores has contributed to this weight loss. (Id.).2  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted compensability for a workplace 
injury has a right to control the care provided to the injured employee.  Ramirez-Trujillo 
v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016).  The relevant statute provides 
as follows: 
(1) The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85A, shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, 
ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor and shall 
allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for 
such services. The employer shall also furnish reasonable and 
necessary crutches, artificial members and appliances but shall not 
be required to furnish more than one set of permanent prosthetic 
devices.  
 
…. 
 
(4) For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and 
has the right to choose the care. . . . The treatment must be offered 
promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue 
inconvenience to the employee. If the employee has reason to be 
dissatisfied with 
the 
care offered, 
the 
employee 
should 
communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction to the employer, in 
writing if requested, following which the employer and the employee 
may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the injury. If 
the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of 
the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
                                                 
2 Poush also submitted into evidence one page of an independent medical evaluation (IME) report 
authored by David Segal, M.D. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 6).  In that report, Dr. Segal recommends Poush have in-home care to 
assist with his daily needs.  

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 8 
 
Iowa Code § 85.27(1),(4).   
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id.  An 
application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant is 
dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical 
care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather, 
the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably 
suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. See 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment and seeking 
alternate care, claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is 
unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.  Ultimately, 
determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Long, 
528 N.W.2d at 123. 
An employer's right to select the provider of medical treatment for the injured 
worker does not include the right to determine how an injured worker should be 
diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional medical judgment. 
Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 18, 1988).  An 
employer is not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening Decision June 
17, 1986).  When a designated physician refers a patient to another physician, that 
physician acts as the defendant employer's agent. Permission for the referral from 
defendant is not necessary. Kittrell v. Allen Memorial Hospital, Thirty-fourth Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner, 164 (Arb. November 1, 1979) (aff'd by industrial 
commissioner). See also Limoges v. Meier Auto Salvage, I Iowa Industrial 
Commissioner Report 207 (1981). 
Both parties agree that Dr. Chen is an authorized medical provider for Poush’s 
work injury.  On January 27, 2025, Dr. Chen prescribed a “Home aide once weekly to 
assist with home maintenance, chores, groceries, meal prep.” (Cl Ex. 1, p. 4).  
Defendants argue that the services ordered by Dr. Chen are not nursing services and 
they are not compensable under the language of Iowa Code section 85.27.  There is 
support for their assertion.  To begin with, homemaking services are not specifically 
enumerated in the statute. Additionally, in Henry v. Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co., 522 
N.W.2d 301, 304 (Iowa 1994), the Iowa Supreme Court was asked to decide whether 
non-medical homemaking services were compensable as “nursing” services under Iowa 
Code section 85.27.  They held homemaking services are not compensable under the 
statute. Id.    
In Henry, the claimant suffered severe internal and external burns when he came 
in contact with a high voltage power line at work. Id. at 301.  After the injury, the 
claimant required multiple skin grafts and surgeries, and eventually had his legs 
amputated above the knee. Id. However, when his claim was heard two years later, his 
condition had substantially improved. Id. He had returned to full-time work for the 
defendant employer. Id.  He continued to reside in his parents’ house, paying them rent 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 9 
 
for his room and board. Id. The agency found he was able to independently shower and 
shave, and his mother’s aid to him had decreased to occasionally helping him dress by 
buttoning and pinning his clothing, preparing meals when he did not cook himself or eat 
out, laundering his clothing, cleaning his room, and shoveling snow at their house. Id. In 
an itemized list that the claimant’s mother provided, each day included an entry for 
“daily general chores,” which she defined as “making of bed, gathering of soiled 
clothing, cleaning of my bathroom and bedroom, etc.”  The list she provided also 
included preparing two meals each day, as well as time spent repairing his wheelchair, 
van, lift, ramp maintenance and repairs. Id.  The evidence showed the claimant’s 
mother had also paid his sister $50 per week to assist with these activities. Id. Under 
these facts, the Court determined that “‘nursing’ denotes professional services ‘grouped 
with [the services of] physicians and surgeons and not with [the services of] cooks, 
chambermaids, etc., employed in purely ministerial and administrative functions.’” Id. at 
303 (quoting Volk v. City of New York, 259 A.D. 247, 254, 19 N.Y.S.2d 53, 61, rev’s on 
other grounds, 284 N.Y. 279, 30 N.E.2d 596 (1940)).  In making the determination that 
the services claimant’s mother provided were non-compensable household duties the 
court highlighted that performing the services did not require medical training or 
licensure. Id. The Court also noted that while claimant’s mother spent more time on the 
claimed household duties after his injury, the duties themselves were household chores 
that the family performed as a part of their daily life before his injury.  
To the undersigned’s knowledge, the Henry decision is the only published 
appellate case dealing with the compensability of household chores under Iowa Code 
section 85.27.  Claimant did not file a pre-hearing brief in this case, and the only case 
cited to in his exhibits is an agency appeal decision, Paulino v. C-Tec, File. 5019047, 
2008 WL 3165883 (Appeal Dec., July 17, 2008).3 While Commissioner decisions are 
binding on the undersigned, the decision in Paulino is not on-point with the facts being 
presented in this claim, and its holding is inapplicable to this case.  In Paulino, the 
Commissioner ruled that defendants were responsible for covering the cost of the 
claimant’s living expenses while he was residing in a nursing facility due to the work 
injury.  Id.  Poush is not asking for rent coverage or food in this proceeding. The holding 
in Paulino does not apply.  
Despite being thirty years old, Henry remains good law and is binding precedent 
on the undersigned.  While the appellate courts have expanded what is covered under 
85.27 in the ensuing time period, those decisions have mainly focused on the language 
covering medical appliances.  See Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485 
(Iowa 2003) (finding a laptop computer to be a compensable appliance under the 
unique facts of the case);  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996) 
(finding home modification and van conversion reasonable appliances and 
compensable under the statute, as well as nursing services provided by the claimant’s 
wife); Manpower Temporary Services v. Sioson, 529 N.W.2d 259 (Iowa 1995) (holding 
                                                 
3 Paulino later filed a bad faith claim against defendants in district court.  That case was reviewed by the 
8th Circuit Court of Appeals. See Paulino v. Chartis Claims, Inc., 774 F.3d 1161 (2014).  For Paulino’s workers’ 
compensation claim, however, the Commissioner’s intra-agency appeal decision was the final 
decision/determination.  

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 10 
 
the cost of the van and necessary modifications compensable under 85.27).  The 
decisions did not re-address the compensability of homemaking services.  
There are, however, two more recent unpublished appellate decisions dealing 
with somewhat similar requests.  Unpublished appellate decisions are persuasive 
authority but not binding.  Those decisions are Huff v. CRST Expedited Inc., 928 
N.W.2d 153 (Table) (Iowa Court of Appeals 2019) and BTR Dunlop v. Cline, 695 
N.W.2d 504 (Table) (Iowa Court of Appeals 2017).  In BTR Dunlop, the claimant 
sustained a catastrophic spinal cord injury while working for the employer.  Id. The injury 
left him a quadriplegic. Id. After being discharged from the hospital, the claimant was 
cared for at home by his wife, a licensed CNA, and an assortment of nurses and nurses’ 
aides.  Id. Claimant filed a petition in arbitration, not an alternate care action, asking that 
his wife be compensated for the services she had provided him at home since his injury. 
Id.  After a full hearing, a deputy workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
arbitration decision concluding that some of the services provided by claimant’s wife are 
compensable nursing services under Iowa Code section 85.27.  Id.  Specifically, the 
deputy found helping transfer him from his bed to his wheelchair, dressing, putting on 
hose, assisting with his utensil strap, assistance with feeding, dental care, changing 
urine bags, administering medications, cutting up food, checking for choking, getting 
him into bed, changing his hose, dressing his catheter, doing a bowel regimen, 
repositioning him and giving him a sponge bath were compensable activities. Id. The 
deputy determined that house cleaning, preparing meals, and laundry were not 
compensable services. Id. Defendants appealed and the case eventually made its way 
to the Iowa Court of Appeals. Id.  On appeal, the Court made two findings. Those were: 
1) whether an activity is a covered service under Iowa Code section 85.27 is a fact 
question that must be determined by the agency, and 2) that substantial evidence 
supported the agency’s determination that the above enumerated activities were 
reasonable nursing services and compensable under Iowa Code section 85.27 Id. 
The fact pattern presented by Huff v. CRST Expedited Inc., 928 N.W.2d 153 
(Table) (Iowa Court of Appeals 2019), is different. In Huff, the claimant suffered a crush 
injury to his right leg while working for the employer. Huff, 928 N.W.2d *1. That injury 
caused him to need a wheelchair, but he was also still able to stand and walk using 
crutches. Id.  Before he was injured, the claimant lost his house to foreclosure and gave 
his car to his son. Id.  Thus, at the time of his injury the claimant was living in his work-
truck/semi and using his work vehicle and/or taxis for personal transportation. Id.  
Immediately after his injury, claimant moved in with his college-aged son and his 
roommates in on-campus housing. Id. However, eventually his son graduated and 
moved out. Id. The claimant remained, living alone in the apartment, while the university 
attempted to evict him from the premises. Id. At that time, the claimant filed an 
application for alternate medical care requesting defendants provide him with a 
handicapped accessible apartment, a handicapped van or alternate means of 
transportation, and a home healthcare provider to assist him with ADLs. Id. In support of 
his petition, claimant submitted a comprehensive adult assessment from a nurse 
indicating the requested services were reasonably necessary, but no documentation 
from his authorized doctor addressing his need for the requested services. Id. The 
deputy workers’ compensation commissioner dismissed claimant’s application, holding 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 11 
 
he had failed to prove the requested items were reasonably necessary.  Claimant filed a 
second alternate medical care petition requesting the same items, once again 
submitting the comprehensive adult assessment, but no medical documentation from 
his authorized treating physicians. The deputy once again dismissed his petition, finding 
the claimant had not met his burden to prove the requested items were reasonable and 
necessary because none of his current medical providers opined he needed those 
items. Claimant appealed.  The district court reversed the agency’s decision, finding 
evidence from a medical provider is not required to succeed in an alternate care action, 
and that claimant’s requests for a handicapped-accessible apartment, transportation, 
and an in-home aide were allowable appliances or services under Iowa Code section 
85.27.  Defendants appealed. 
On appeal, the Iowa Court of Appeals made two relevant findings.  Huff, 928 
N.W.2d at *3.  First, the Court held that medical evidence is not required to succeed in 
an alternate medical care proceeding.  Id. It stated the absence of medical evidence is 
not a bright-line legal bar to an award of alternate medical care when the effect of 
undeniable injuries is apparent. Id. at 4.  Second, the Court reiterated that whether the 
services claimant requested qualified as compensable appliances or services under 
Iowa Code section 85.27 was a fact question, which needed to be decided by the 
agency. Id.   The Court remanded the case back to the agency.  Id. On remand, the 
agency once again denied claimant’s request for an apartment and a van, but granted 
his request for a home health aide for the limited purpose of helping him clip his 
toenails. Huff v. CRST Expedited, Inc., File No. 5063162, 2019 WL 7759775 (Remand 
Dec., Dec. 13, 2019).   
While not directly on point with the request made in this case, the undersigned 
gleans the following from these appellate decisions: 1) the holding of Henry has not 
been overruled by subsequent decisions, and therefore, household duties such as 
cleaning, cooking and doing laundry generally are not compensable services under 
Iowa Code section 85.27; and 2) whether or not an activity is a covered nursing service 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 is a fact question that must be determined by the 
agency in each case.   
Poush is requesting an aide to help him with household chores.  (Hearing 
Testimony).  Dr. Chen, an authorized provider for his injury, issued an order stating 
Poush needs a “Home aide once weekly to assist with home maintenance, chores, 
groceries, meal prep.” (Cl Ex. 1, p. 4).  It is clear that some of the duties listed in Dr. 
Chen’s order are considered non-compensable homemaking services under Henry and 
BTR Dunlop.  However, during the hearing, Poush provided testimony indicating that 
one of the reasons he needs a home aide is because of bladder control issues caused 
by his paralysis.  (Hearing Testimony).  He stated that his bladder has been leaking, 
forcing him to change and wash his bed sheets multiple times a day. (Id.).  While there 
is evidence in the recording stating that Poush is generally independent with basic 
ADLs, there is nothing in the hearing record refuting his assertion that he has 
occasional bladder issues and accidents.  The decisions in Henry and BTR Dunlop both 
make a distinction between general household activities that every individual must 
engage in prior to their injuries and ADLs that are specifically necessitated by the work 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 12 
 
injury and/or significantly changed because of the work injury.  General household 
chores are not compensable; however, ADLs necessitated by the work injury or made 
significantly more difficult because of the injury have been found compensable.  Prior to 
his work injury, Poush did not require the use of a catheter, nor is there evidence he had 
bladder leaking and/or needed to change and wash his sheets multiple times a day.  
Under these circumstances, I find that his request for a home aide to wash and change 
his sheets is akin to a request for assistance with an ADL after a work injury. It is 
reasonable and a nursing service as contemplated in Iowa Code section 85.27. Poush’s 
request for a home aide to come once weekly to change and wash his sheets is 
granted. The remainder of his requests are denied.  
Poush filed this action as an expedited proceeding under Iowa Code section 
85.27.  That statute provides that the workers’ compensation commissioner shall issue 
a decision within ten working days of receipt of an application for alternate care made 
pursuant to a telephone hearing. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  The ten-day statutory 
deadline results in the need for summary proceedings. It also limits the parties’ ability to 
submit evidence. See 876 IAC 4.48(9) (limiting each party to 10 pages of evidence).  
Summary proceedings are not well suited to adjudicate complex medical matters.  Both 
those and issues of liability, however, can be addressed by filing a petition for medical 
benefits under rule 876-4.1, which permits full discovery, additional written evidence, 
and more time for hearing.  Under this limited record, Poush has not proven that the 
remainder of the services he seeks are compensable under Iowa Code section 85.27.  
That, however, does not preclude him from submitting additional evidence on those 
issues in a full arbitration proceeding.  
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant’s original notice and petition for alternate medical care is hereby 
dismissed without prejudice as it pertains to his request for mental health treatment.  
 
 
The remainder of his petition for alternate medical care is granted in part and 
denied in part.  Claimant’s request for a home aide to come once weekly to change and 
wash his sheets is granted. His request for a once weekly home aide to help with 
household chores is denied.  
Signed and filed this __31st___ day of March, 2025. 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 

POUSH V. READER TRUCKING, LLC 
Page 13 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Mindi Vervaecke (via WCES) 
James Ballard (via WCES) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
