Case Number: 21001872.01
Case Title:  THROCKMORTON, JAMIE V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Throckmorton Jamie-21001872.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JAMIE THROCKMORTON, 
  : 
 
 
  :                 File No. 21001872.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1402.40, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
       1803, 2502, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Jamie Throckmorton, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Seaboard Foods of Iowa, LLC, employer and Indemnity 
Insurance Company of North American, insurance carrier as defendants.  Hearing was 
held on September 27, 2021.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing 
occurring in Des Moines.  However, due to the declaration of a pandemic in Iowa, the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video 
means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via 
CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Jamie Throckmorton was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE8, claimant’s exhibits 1-6, and defendant’s 
exhibits A-D.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The evidentiary record 
closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on October 29, 2021, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-21  15:36:19     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 2 
1. Whether claimant sustained any permanent impairment as the result of the 
stipulated October 10, 2019, work injury.  If so, the nature and extent of 
disability.   
2. If claimant did sustain permanent disability, what is the appropriate number of 
exemptions claimant is entitled to for purposes of the weekly workers’ 
compensation rate. 
3. If claimant did sustain permanent disability, whether defendants are 
responsible for pre-existing disability pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(7). 
4. Whether defendants are responsible for payment of the past medical 
expenses as set forth in claimant’s exhibit 1. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for his Independent Medical 
Examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
6. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Jamie Throckmorton, was 37 years old at the time of hearing.  He 
sustained an injury to his right lower back on October 10, 2019, which arose out of and 
in the course of his employment with Seaboard Foods of Iowa, LLC (“Seaboard”).  Prior 
to working for Seaboard, Mr. Throckmorton sustained two work-related injuries while 
working for JBS, USA, LLC (“JBS”). The first injury sustained by Mr. Throckmorton 
occurred in May 2017.  He was loosening a bolt when he felt immediate pain in his 
lower right back.  (JE1, p. 1) Mr. Throckmorton sustained another work-related injury 
with JBS on February 15, 2018, which caused symptoms primarily in the thoracic spine 
and bilateral SI joints.  (JE4, p. 53) Mr. Throckmorton settled his workers’ compensation 
claims with JBS in June 2019.  (Def. Ex. B) The central dispute in this case is whether 
Mr. Throckmorton sustained any permanent disability as the result of the stipulated 
October 10, 2019, work injury with Seaboard.  
Due to the prior injuries, an understanding of the timeline in this case is 
important.  Trevor Schmitz, M.D., provided treatment to Mr. Throckmorton for all three 
dates of injury.  Mr. Throckmorton was released from treatment for his May 8, 2017, 
injury on August 15, 2017.  Dr. Schmitz assigned 5 percent permanent impairment of 
the whole person for the lumbar injury.  Mr. Throckmorton was released from treatment 
for his February 15, 2018, injury on August 27, 2018.  Dr. Schmitz did not assign any 
additional impairment.  Dr. Schmitz did not assign any permanent restrictions for either 
date of injury.  (Testimony)   
Mr. Throckmorton returned to work for full duty at JBS.  He described some days 
at work as horrible, depending on his load.  If he performed a lot of strenuous work, he 
would be sore and sometimes miss work due to pain.  At some point, he was terminated 
by JBS because he missed work due to his back symptoms.  (Testimony)   
 
 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 3 
At the beginning of February 2019, Mr. Throckmorton was hired by Seaboard as 
a maintenance mechanic.  The job at Seaboard was a far easier physical job than the 
job he was performing at JBS.  Mr. Throckmorton did not do a lot of the heavy lifting that 
he did at JBS and the pace was not as rushed as it was at JBS.  At Seaboard he was 
not working on the ground as much or lifting heavy objects above his head.  (Testimony) 
As noted, Mr. Throckmorton was hired by Seaboard in February 2019.  The injury 
in this case occurred in October 2019.  The only doctor that Mr. Throckmorton saw 
between his Seaboard date of hire and the date of the injury he sustained at Seaboard 
was David H. Segal, M.D.  (Testimony)   
On February 14, 2019, at the request of his attorney, Mr. Throckmorton 
underwent an IME with Dr. Segal for the May 8, 2017, and February 15, 2018 dates of 
injury.  At the time of the IME, Mr. Throckmorton reported low back pain that was worse 
than his upper back pain.  His right-sided pain was constant and more severe than the 
left side.  Mr. Throckmorton reported that initially he had constant pain that radiated 
from right low back into the right buttock and hip, wrapping around into the right groin, 
and down the right leg into his foot with severe numbness in the right leg.  His back, 
buttock, and leg pain felt like one pain syndrome.  However, his radiating pain got better 
over a few months to where it is now intermittent and stops at the anterior thigh just 
above the knee.  Mr. Throckmorton stated that sitting is terrible, especially if he must sit 
erect; he cannot sit erect more than 20 minutes.  Lifting causes pain if it is more than 50 
pounds for any extended period.  Mr. Throckmorton also reported that kneeling and 
squatting were very difficult.  He also noted weakness in his right leg with a lot of 
activity.  His low back pain averaged 5-6/10 with activity.  Mr. Throckmorton informed 
Dr. Segal that the 2017 and 2018 injuries greatly affected his life including his ability to 
play with his children, fish, and work out.  He was unable to enjoy activities as much as 
he once did because of his constant pain.  He was able to secure employment with a 
different company; he is able to do his job, but it is sometimes difficult.  (JE6; 
Testimony)   
With regard to the May 8, 2017, work injury, Dr. Segal noted an immediate onset 
of right radicular pain in correlation with the MRI that shows a disc herniation with 
impingement on the descending S1 nerve root.  He also noted that he still had right 
radicular symptoms at the time of the IME.  Dr. Segal noted that on the MRI, at the level 
of the herniation, there was an annular tear that explained more widespread symptoms 
of bilateral leg numbness.  Dr. Segal recommended numerous restrictions for Mr. Segal, 
including but not limited to:  sitting in a straight-backed chair up to 20 minutes, 60 
minutes in a reclined chair.  Occasional bending and no lifting over 50 pounds.  Dr. 
Segal noted that Mr. Throckmorton had not exhausted all treatment options and that he 
remained significantly symptomatic.  Dr. Segal stated that if conservative treatments do 
not help Mr. Throckmorton could be a candidate for lumbar discectomy.  (JE6; 
Testimony) 
 
 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 4 
In June 2019 Mr. Throckmorton entered into a full and final settlement of the 
2017 and 2018 workers’ compensation claims with JBS.  (Def. Ex. B) Approximately 
four months after the JBS settlement he sustained the work injury at Seaboard that is 
the focus of this case.     
It was on October 10, 2019, that Mr. Throckmorton sustained the stipulated work 
injury with Seaboard.  At the time of the October 2019, injury, Mr. Throckmorton was 
picking up 35-pound hog gates and putting them into the back of a three-quarter-ton 
pickup truck.  He picked the gates up one at a time.  He felt a sharp pain on the right 
side of his back and was not able to move.  He had to grab the truck, stood still for a bit, 
and then limped around to the driver’s side.  He drove back to the shop and reported 
the injury to his supervisor.  (Testimony) 
From the time Mr. Throckmorton was hired by Seaboard in February 2019 until 
the October 10, 2019 injury, he did not miss any time from work due to back pain.  At 
the hearing, Mr. Throckmorton testified that he would be “sore on occasion.”  (Tr. p. 26) 
He had some pain, but it was tolerable.  On average his pain was a three or a four out 
of ten. (Testimony) 
The defendants authorized several medical appointments for Mr. Throckmorton.  
These included just shy of ten appointments with an occupational medicine provider.  
Defendants also authorized an MRI of the lumbar spine and several appointments with 
Dr. Schmitz.    
On April 6, 2020, Dr. Schmitz authored a missive to the defendants.  In that 
missive he responded to a series of questions posed to him by the defendants.  Dr. 
Schmitz stated: 
I do have a lengthy history of treating Mr. Throckmorton dating back to 
July 2017.  At that time, he did have a right paracentral disc protrusion 
causing moderate to severe right-sided lateral recess stenosis.  He has a 
new MRI, which, once again, does demonstrate the same findings from 
January 10, 2020.  He has had a significant amount of treatment including 
physical therapy and injections without drastic relief of his overall 
symptomatology.   
(JE4, p. 91)   
 
Dr. Schmitz was asked to provide his opinion regarding causation.  He stated: 
I would state, at this time, that the reported incident on October 10, 2019, 
did not cause his low back symptoms.  It does not appear as though his 
disc herniation is drastically changed from his previous lumbar spine MRI 
and, as such, I cannot, in any way, state that this was an underlying cause 
of the disc herniation necessitating treatment in question. 
(Id.) 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 5 
 
The defendants also sought Dr. Schmitz’s opinion regarding whether the October 
10, 2019, work incident substantially aggravated, accelerated, or worsened any 
preexisting condition.  Dr. Schmitz stated: 
I would, once again, state that the work incident in question did not likely 
substantially aggravate, accelerate, or worsen the preexisting condition.  
He had a known disc herniation at L5-S1 on the right, and I do think that 
his current clinical presentation is a natural underlying progression of the 
disc herniation in question. 
(Id.) 
Dr. Schmitz opined that the October 2019 work incident “did not have any 
significant material effect on his need for surgery.”  He felt that Mr. Throckmorton “was 
likely going to progress on to surgery whether or not he had the workplace incident on 
October 10, 2019, or not.”  (JE4, pp. 91-92) 
Based on Dr. Schmitz’s opinions, defendants denied further treatment.  Mr. 
Throckmorton decided to seek treatment with a provider of his choosing. (Testimony) 
On May 29, 2020, Mr. Throckmorton saw Chad D. Abernathey, M.D.  He 
recorded a seven-month history of low back and right leg pain that began when he was 
lifting a gate at work on October 14, 2019.  He reported pain, numbness, and tingling 
radiating into the right lower extremity with weakness on plantar flexion of the ankle and 
toes.  Dr. Abernathey noted that Mr. Throckmorton had low back pain three years ago 
which responded to epidural steroid injections.  Dr. Abernathey’s impression was that 
the patient presented with right S1 radiculopathy secondary to a right L5-S1 disc 
extrusion.  It was decided that Dr. Abernathey would proceed with surgical intervention.  
On June 8, 2020, Dr. Abernathey performed a right L5-S1 partial hemilaminectomy, 
diskectomy, microscope.  Mr. Throckmorton continued to follow-up with Dr. Abernathey 
post-surgery.  He made excellent progress.  Dr. Abernathey gave him permission to 
return to regular duty on October 5, 2020.  The surgeon noted he would be available for 
further consultation if so desired. (JE5, p. 93-95) 
Seaboard terminated Mr. Throckmorton’s employment in June 2020.  At the time 
of his termination, he still had temporary restrictions placed on his activities by Dr. 
Abernathey following the surgery.  Seaboard was not able to accommodate those 
restrictions; they told him he could reapply if his condition improved.  Dr. Abernathey 
ultimately released Mr. Throckmorton from his care with no restrictions.  (Testimony)   
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Throckmorton underwent an IME on July 19, 
2021, with Mark C. Taylor, M.D.  In addition to examining Mr. Throckmorton, Dr. Taylor 
reviewed 154 pages of records that were provided to him by claimant’s counsel.  Dr. 
Taylor’s diagnoses included back injury with low back pain, herniated disc, and radicular 
symptoms; and right-sided L5-S1 partial hemilaminectomy and discectomy with Dr. 
Abernathey on June 8, 2020.  Dr. Taylor noted the two prior work injuries sustained by 
Mr. Throckmorton in 2017 and 2018.  He also noted that the 2017 injury resulted in Dr. 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 6 
Schmitz assigning 5 percent whole person impairment and no additional impairment for 
the 2018 injury.  Dr. Taylor stated: 
Given the history, and the currently available medical records, it is my 
opinion that Mr. Throckmorton’s October 14, 2019, incident at work 
represented a significant aggravating factor to his pre-existing condition, 
which was a small, herniated disc at L5-S1.  There was a substantial 
change in his pain in the back, and he was also experiencing pain and 
symptoms into the right lower extremity.  Based on these findings, Dr. 
Schmitz recommended surgery, whereas he previously recommended 
against surgery for the prior MRI findings and prior exam findings.  In my 
opinion, this is consistent with a material change.  Also, the MRI revealed 
changes in the disk herniation was now described as large, and was 
impinging and displacing the nerve root.  Regardless of the MRI changes, 
there was also a clear change in his symptomatology, which also 
contributed to the need for surgery. 
(CE4, p. 29)    
Since Mr. Throckmorton was released by Dr. Abernathey without restrictions Mr. 
Throckmorton has not reapplied at Seaboard.  By that time, Mr. Throckmorton was 
already employed at Vermeer.  He did undergo a pre-employment physical with 
Vermeer wherein Mr. Throckmorton denied any problems.  That physical did not place 
any restrictions on his activities.  Additionally, on March 18, 2021, Dr. Abernathey 
reiterated that Mr. Throckmorton was cleared to return to work full duty, no restrictions.  
Since working at Vermeer Mr. Throckmorton has gone to the Vermeer medical 
providers for any medical needs; they have not placed any restrictions on his activities.  
(Testimony; Def. Ex. A, p. 9, 13, 16; Def. Ex. C) 
We now turn to the central dispute in this case; whether the October 2020 work 
injury caused any permanent impairment.  Mr. Throckmorton argues that a comparison 
of the MRI reports is highly probative of whether there was a new injury.  In support of 
this argument, claimant points to the impression portions of the 2017 and 2020 
radiology reports.  The 2017 MRI was performed at Pella Regional Health Care Center.  
The impression from the report states in pertinent part, “[s]mall right L5-S1 HNP with no 
critical nerve impingement or edema.”  (JE1, p. 7) The 2020 MRI was performed at 
Southern Iowa Open MRI.  The impression states in pertinent part, “[l]arge right 
paracentral disc protrusion/annular fissure at L5-S1 which results in moderate to severe 
right lateral recess narrowing with impingement and posterior displacement of the non-
exited right S1 nerve root.”  (JE3, p. 43) 
Claimant also relies on the opinions of Dr. Taylor, whom he selected to perform 
his IME for this pending litigation.  Dr. Taylor is Board Certified in Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine.  Unfortunately, Dr. Taylor’s opinions are based, at least in part, 
on an incorrect history.  In August 2021, approximately 21 months after the October 
2019 injury, Mr. Throckmorton reported to Dr. Taylor that prior to the October 2019 
injury, he had essentially recovered from the prior injuries.  However, this is not 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 7 
consistent with what Mr. Throckmorton told Dr. Segal just a few short months before the 
October 2019 injury.  (CE 4, p. 29; JE6)   
I find that the records generated contemporaneously with Mr. Throckmorton’s 
symptoms are more accurate than Mr. Throckmorton’s recollection.  There were several 
instances in Mr. Throckmorton’s hearing testimony that demonstrated that he is a poor 
historian.  For example, his recollection of what his condition was before the October 
2019 injury differs from what he described to Dr. Segal.  Additionally, Mr. Throckmorton 
testified that Dr. Segal did not give him any permanent restrictions and also did not 
discuss possible surgery with him.  However, Dr. Segal’s report sets forth his 
recommendations for restrictions and also discusses potential surgery.  (Testimony; 
JE6)    
While the radiology reports and Dr. Taylor’s opinions are noteworthy, I place 
greater weight on the opinions of the surgeons’ and their interpretations of the MRIs.  
Dr. Segal is Board Certified in Neurosurgery, Brain, and Spine.  Additionally, Dr. Segal 
was the doctor selected by claimant’s attorney to perform an IME with regard to the 
2017 and 2018 injuries.  Because he was selected by the claimant’s attorney, it can 
hardly be argued that he is biased against the claimant.  Dr. Segal was also the last 
doctor to examine Mr. Throckmorton before he sustained the October 2019 injury.  In 
his February 2019 IME report, Dr. Segal noted that the 2017 MRI “shows a disc 
herniation with impingement on the descending S1 nerve root . . .” (JE6, p. 110) He also 
felt that surgical intervention, specifically lumbar discectomy was certainly a possibility 
for Mr. Throckmorton.  (JE6, p. 112-113) Dr. Segal attached portions of the MRI pictures 
to his report and drew arrows to show the disc herniation, annular tear, and nerve 
impingement that were present in 2017.  (JE6, pp. 117-125)   
Dr. Schmitz is the orthopaedic surgeon who treated Mr. Throckmorton for all 
three of his workers’ compensation injuries.  Dr. Schmitz treated Mr. Throckmorton both 
before and after the October 2019 work injury.  He provided his opinion on the MRI 
results.  As noted above, he opined that the new MRI demonstrated the same findings 
from January 10, 2020.  (JE4, p. 91) 
 
Dr. Schmitz felt the work incident did not likely substantially aggravate, 
accelerate, or worsen the preexisting condition.  He felt that Mr. Throckmorton’s current 
clinical presentation was a natural underlying progression of the disc herniation.  (Id.) 
Dr. Schmitz felt that Mr. Throckmorton “was likely going to progress on to surgery 
whether or not he had the workplace incident on October 10, 2019, or not.”  (JE4, pp. 
91-92) 
 
The record is void of any type of causation opinion from Dr. Abernathey.  
However, it should be noted that the surgery he performed on June 8, 2020 was related 
to the diagnosis of “[r]ight S1 radiculopathy, right L5-S1 disk extrusion.” (JE5, p. 95) 
This is the same diagnosis made by Dr. Schmitz on August 9, 2017 and by Dr. Segal on 
February 14, 2019. (JE4, p. 50; JE6, p. 10) 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 8 
 
I find the opinions of the surgeons, Dr. Segal and Dr. Schmitz, carry greater 
weight than those of Dr. Taylor.  I further find that the opinions of Dr. Segal and Dr. 
Schmitz are more consistent with the record as a whole.  I find the opinion of Dr. 
Schmitz to be the most persuasive in this case.  He is an orthopaedic spine surgeon 
and is in the unique position of seeing Mr. Throckmorton on numerous occasions since 
2017.  I find the surgery performed by Dr. Abernathey was not related to the October 
2019 injury.  Rather, it was a natural underlying progression of the disc herniation.  I 
further find claimant failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he 
sustained any permanent disability as the result of the October 2019 work injury with 
Seaboard.  As such, claimant has failed to demonstrate entitlement to any weekly 
permanency benefits. 
 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 1.  As previously noted defendants denied medical treatment to Mr. 
Throckmorton after Dr. Schmitz’s letter dated April 6, 2020.  In that letter, Dr. Schmitz 
opined that the October 2019 work incident did not substantially aggravate, accelerate, 
or worsen the preexisting condition.  Dr. Schmitz felt that Mr. Throckmorton’s current 
clinical presentation was the natural underlying progression of the prior disc herniation.  
(JE4, p. 91) The bills claimant is seeking payment for were all incurred after April 6, 
2020.  I find claimant failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that 
these expenses are causally connected to the October 2019 work injury.  As such, 
defendants are not responsible for the expenses set forth in claimant’s exhibit 1.    
 
Mr. Throckmorton is also seeking reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Taylor 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Defendants dispute that claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39.  (Hearing Report) As previously noted, 
on April 6, 2020, Dr. Schmitz opined that Mr. Throckmorton’s current clinical 
presentation was the natural underlying progression of the prior disc herniation.  Dr. 
Schmitz was a physician retained by the employer.  I find that his determination that Mr. 
Throckmorton’s clinical presentation were not caused by the October 2019 work injury 
was effectively an opinion that he suffered no impairment as the result of that work 
injury.  Mr. Throckmorton disagreed with that opinion and obtained an IME from Dr. 
Taylor on August 12, 2021 which found he did sustain permanent disability caused by 
the October 2019 injury.  I find that Dr. Taylor’s evaluation of permanency occurred after 
an evaluation of permanent disability had been made by a physician retained by the 
employer.      
 
Finally, Mr. Throckmorton is seeking an assessment of costs.  I find that Mr. 
Throckmorton was generally not successful in his claim and therefore exercise my 
discretion to not assess costs against the defendants.  Each party shall bear their own 
costs.   
 
Because Mr. Throckmorton has failed to demonstrate entitlement to weekly 
benefits, all other issues are rendered moot. 
 
 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 9 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When an expert's opinion is based upon an incomplete history, it is not 
necessarily binding on the commissioner or the court. It is then to be weighed, together 
with other facts and circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder of the 
fact. Musselman v. Central Telephone Co., 154 N.W.2d 128, 133 (Iowa 1967); Bodish v. 
Fischer, Inc., 257 Iowa 521, 522, 133 N.W.2d 867 (1965). 
The commissioner as trier of fact has the duty to determine the credibility of the 
witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and 
circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion. Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and 
Casualty Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant failed to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the surgery performed by Dr. 
Abernathey was related to the October 2019 injury.  Rather, I concluded Dr. Schmitz’s 
opinions were the most persuasive in this matter and that the need for surgery was a 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 10 
natural underlying progression of the prior disc herniation.  I conclude claimant failed to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained any permanent 
disability as the result of the October 2019 work injury with Seaboard.  As such, 
claimant has failed to demonstrate entitlement to any weekly permanency benefits. 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 1.  The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant has failed to carry 
his burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the medical 
bills set forth in his exhibit 1 are causally connected to the October 2019 work injury.  
The benefits claimant seeks payment for were all incurred after Dr. Schmitz opined that 
claimant’s clinical presentation was the natural underlying progression of the prior disc 
herniation and defendants stopped authorizing treatment.  As such I conclude that the 
defendants in this case are not responsible for those expenses under Iowa Code 
section 85.27.   
Claimant seeks reimbursement pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 for the IME 
he obtained with Dr. Taylor.  Defendants dispute that claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 permits an employee to 
be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice 
where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” 
and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
The Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 
85.39 in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 
2015) (hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 
(App. December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process set forth by the legislature in Iowa Code section 85.39 must be followed. This 
process permits the employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial 
arrangements for the evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent 
evaluation at the employer's expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the 
employer. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). 
In Mr. Throckmorton’s case, defendants asked Dr. Schmitz to address causation.  
Because Dr. Schmitz did not find causation, he did not provide an impairment rating.  In 
September 2021, the Iowa Court of Appeals provided additional guidance with respect 
to these types of situations.  See Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W2d. 

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 11 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021) (unpublished).  The court reiterated that the “primary purpose 
of the workers’ compensation statute is to benefit the worker and his or her dependents, 
insofar as statutory requirements permit.”  See Kern, at 4 (citations omitted).  Thus, the 
statutes are to be interpreted liberally.  Id.  In Kern, the physician selected by the 
employer found there was no causation and the doctor was silent on the issue of 
impairment.  Kern disagreed with that opinion and sought an IME under section 85.39 at 
the defendants’ expense.  In Kern, the court concluded an employer-chosen physician’s 
opinion that there was no causation was tantamount to a zero percent impairment 
rating.  (Id.)  The Court of Appeals found there was no conflict in applying the Supreme 
Court’s interpretation of section 85.39 in DART to a finding that a lack of causation 
opinion is tantamount to a zero impairment rating.  Id.  Based on this additional 
guidance from the Court of Appeals, I conclude that the no causation opinion from Dr. 
Schmitz was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating.   
More recently the Commissioner issued an appeal decision that addresses 
reimbursement of IMEs under Iowa Code section 85.39.  See Lopez v. Maple Valley 
Feeders Co., File No. 1663048.01 (App. December 9, 2021).  In Lopez, the deputy 
commissioner interpreted a return to work slip from a chiropractor as an assessment of 
disability.  On appeal, the Commissioner found there was no evidence that the 
chiropractor intended that note to be an evaluation of permanent disability.  The 
Commissioner also noted that the release was provided early in claimant’s treatment 
and claimant received additional treatment after the work release was issued.  The 
Commissioner also noted that there was no evidence that the providers were asked to 
assess claimant’s disability.  Further, the Commissioner noted there was insufficient 
evidence that defendants paid for claimant’s treatment at the time the return to work slip 
was issued, so there was insufficient evidence to show that the chiropractor was a 
provider retained by the employer.  The Commissioner concluded that the 
reimbursement provisions of Iowa Code section 85.39 were not triggered. 
In the Lopez appeal decision, the Kern case is not mentioned so it is unknown if 
it was considered.  Regardless, the present case is distinguishable from Lopez.  In the 
present case, the record is clear that Dr. Schmitz was a physician retained by the 
employer when he issued his no causation opinion.  Thus, the Lopez decision is not 
applicable to the present case.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Dr. Taylor’s evaluation of 
permanency occurred after an evaluation of permanent disability had been made by a 
physician retained by the employer.  I conclude that the no causation opinion from Dr. 
Schmitz was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating.  As such, I conclude that 
the prerequisites of section 85.39 were met, and defendants shall reimburse claimant 
for the costs of the IME in the amount of $3,055.50. 
All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commissioner.  876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant is seeking an assessment of 
costs in this matter.  However, I found claimant was generally not successful in his 
claim.  Therefore, I exercise my discretion and do not assess costs against the 
defendants.  Each party shall bear their own costs.    

THROCKMORTON V. SEABOARD FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 12 
Because Mr. Throckmorton has failed to demonstrate entitlement to weekly 
benefits, all other issues are rendered moot. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take no weekly benefits from these proceedings.   
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for the IME as set forth above.   
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _21st _ day of February, 2022. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Brian Keit (via WCES) 
 
Timothy Clausen (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
