Case Number: 21010678.02
Case Title:  BITTERLIE, CAMILLE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bitterlie Camille-21010678.02D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
CAMILLE BITTERLIE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
File No. 21010678.02 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  :               ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
GREAT AMERICAN ALLIANCE 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  :  
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
  Headnotes: 1803, 2501, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Camille Bitterlie, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against defendants Quantum Plastics (“Quantum”), employer, and 
Great American Alliance Insurance Co., insurer. In accordance with agency scheduling 
procedures and pursuant to the Order of the Commissioner in the matter of the 
Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the hearing was held on December 5, 2022, 
via Zoom. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made or 
discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations.   
 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 5, and Defendants' Exhibits A through G. Claimant testified on her own behalf. 
Danielle Story testified on behalf of defendants.  No other witnesses were called to testify.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing. All parties filed 
their post-hearing briefs on January 20, 2023, at which time the case was deemed fully 
submitted to the undersigned.   
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-May-30  09:01:08     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of medical expenses; and 
 
3. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Camille Bitterlie was a 51-year-old individual at the time of the evidentiary hearing. 
(See Ex. 1, pp. 1, 6) She graduated from South Tama High School in 1989. (Ex. B, p. 6)  
She did not attend any post-secondary educational institutions. (See Id.)  Prior to working 
for the defendant employer, Bitterlie worked as a production worker and line leader at 
Lennox Industries, as a social worker at Central Oklahoma Community Action Agency, 
and as a clerk/cashier at Jiffy Convenience Store. (Ex. B, p. 7)  
 
Bitterlie began working for what would become Quantum Plastics (“Quantum”) as 
a temporary worker in late 2015. (Hr. Tr., pp. 11-12)  She eventually applied for and 
received a full-time position with Quantum in 2016. (Hr. Tr., p. 12)  Quantum manufactures 
plastic injection moldings for various clients.  For example, the Quantum facility in Victor, 
Iowa manufactures refrigeration parts for Whirlpool and Amana. (Hr. Tr., pp. 63-64) In the 
beginning, claimant worked as a press operator. (Hr. Tr., p. 13) Claimant subsequently 
operated a printing machine, inspected parts for quality, and worked on the floor. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 13-15) 
 
On the date of injury, claimant was working in the “box/color” department. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 15) In this department, employees work on a box machine and make the packaging for 
various products. According to claimant, the box machine produces various cutouts and 
the employees put the boxes together. Employees in the box/color department also 
prepare the color that the utility workers will eventually load into the press machine. (See 
Hr. Tr., p. 66) To prepare the color, employees scoop dye pellets out of a Gaylord and fill 
buckets or barrels with said dye pellets, according to the order’s specifications. (See Hr. 
Tr., pp. 31-32) Claimant asserts that the buckets can hold about 25 pounds. (Hr. Tr., p. 
32) 
 
Bitterlie sustained a stipulated injury on April 14, 2021. (Hr. Tr., p. 16) According 
to claimant, she was backing up in order to give a forklift operator space to pick up a 
cardboard bale when she tripped over an unassembled crate. (Id.) Claimant landed in a 
seated position on an uneven surface. (Id.) After the fall, claimant stood up and went 
outside to try to catch her breath. (Hr. Tr., p. 17) When her symptoms did not alleviate 
within 10 to 15 minutes, claimant called to her husband and asked him to take her home. 
(Id.) 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
The next morning, claimant could not get out of bed due to her low back pain. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 18) She contacted the defendant employer, reported that she would not be in for 
her shift, and requested medical treatment. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19) 
 
Defendants initially directed claimant’s care to Clayton Francis, M.D. at Grinnell 
Regional Medical Center. (JE 2, p. 1) However, when conservative care failed to improve 
claimant’s condition, defendants referred her for an orthopedic evaluation with Trevor 
Schmitz, M.D. (JE 3, p. 1) The initial evaluation occurred on June 15, 2021. (Id.) Dr. 
Schmitz assessed claimant with a compression fracture of T12 vertebra and midline low 
back pain without sciatica. (JE 3, p. 3) He then ordered an MRI of the lumbar spine and 
thoracic region. (Id.) 
 
The June 24, 2021 MRI of Bitterlie’s lumbar spine revealed an acute compression 
fracture involving the T12 vertebral body. The imaging also revealed a prominent left far 
lateral osteophyte at L5-S1 that causes mild impingement on the left exiting L5 nerve root. 
(JE 1, p. 2) 
 
Claimant’s medical care largely consisted of physical therapy and medication 
management.  She underwent 35 sessions of physical therapy between July 19, 2021 
and November 4, 2021. (See JE 5, pp. 1-35) At her final session, claimant reported 80 
percent improvement and rated her pain 3 out of 10 at its worst. (JE 5, p. 34) Bitterlie has 
not received any injections and she has not undergone any surgical procedures for her 
back complaints. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 48-49) 
 
Dr. Schmitz placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and 
recommended a functional capacity evaluation on November 9, 2021. (See JE 3, pp. 14, 
18) 
 
Occupational therapist John Kruzich performed a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) of Bitterlie on November 15, 2021. (JE 4, p. 1) Based on the results of the 
evaluation, claimant demonstrated capabilities and functional tolerances to function within 
the Medium physical demand level. Mr. Kruzich outlined a number of restrictions for Dr. 
Schmitz to consider. (Id.)  According to the report, claimant is able to lift up to 15 pounds 
occasionally, from floor-to-waist. She is able to lift 25 pounds occasionally from 12 inches 
to waist and from her waist to her shoulder. She is able to lift 20 pounds occasionally from 
waist-to-overhead, and when performing a bilateral carry. Lastly, she is able to push and 
pull with 40 pounds of force, occasionally. In addition to lifting restrictions, Mr. Kruzich 
recommended limitations for bending, kneeling, and squatting. (Id.) 
 
On November 24, 2021, Dr. Schmitz adopted the restrictions outlined in the FCE 
report and released claimant from treatment. (JE 3, p. 18) Claimant has not returned to 
Dr. Schmitz since November 24, 2021. (Hr. Tr., p. 49) She has not requested any 
additional medical treatment from defendants. (Hr. Tr., pp. 51-52) 
 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 4 
 
Following her release from Dr. Schmitz, claimant began presenting to her primary 
care provider, Sherri Vesely, N.P., for her low back complaints. On January 10, 2022, Ms. 
Vesely opined that claimant’s condition was under poor control and prescribed Medrol 
dose pack, neurontin, Zanaflex, and Lidoderm patches to address claimant’s ongoing low 
back pain. (JE 7, pp. 3-4) Ms. Vesely continues to prescribe claimant medication for her 
ongoing low back pain. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 24-26, 50-51) At hearing, claimant testified she 
first asked Dr. Schmitz to provide her with pain medication; however, he declined her 
request. (Hr. Tr., p. 60) 
 
Claimant returned to work as a full-time assembly worker in late November of 
2021. According to claimant, this was the only job available to her given the restrictions 
from Dr. Schmitz. (Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28; Ex. 3, Depo. p. 10) In the “Assembly/Secondary” 
position, claimant builds icemakers with the help of her co-workers. (Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28) 
According to the job description in evidence, the role requires employees to have the 
ability to exert up to 35 pounds, “of which requires lifting that can require assistance.” (Ex. 
2, p. 1)  The job description further provides, “The job is considered relatively active work 
requiring standing, twisting, turning, and the use of your hands and fingers.” (Id.) 
 
Immediately prior to the date of injury, claimant was earning $16.50 per hour in the 
box/color position. (See Ex. 3, Depo. p. 12)  Claimant received a raise on June 12, 2022, 
and now makes $17.00 per hour. (Hr. Tr., pp. 47-48)  There is a dispute as to the extent 
of overtime available to claimant in her new role.  Claimant acknowledges that overtime 
is available to “Assembly/Secondary” employees; however, she asserts that her ability to 
accept overtime is dependent upon client demand and whether there are other employees 
in her department opting to work overtime that could help her with the physical 
requirements of the job. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 29-30)    
 
Danielle Story, a Human Resources Generalist for the defendant employer, 
testified at the evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 64) According to Ms. Story, claimant has 
not requested any additional accommodations beyond her permanent restrictions. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 68) Additionally, claimant has not complained to Ms. Story about the physical 
aspects of her current position or requested any additional medical care. (Hr. Tr., pp. 68, 
71) 
 
Claimant continues to struggle with low back pain and feels her condition has not 
improved. (Hr. Tr., p. 35)  Her pain increases throughout the workweek and, as a result, 
she becomes irritable by Thursday or Friday. (Hr. Tr., p. 35) The pain limits her ability to 
bend at the waist and engage in various activities of daily living. (See Hr. Tr., p. 36) It also 
affects her ability to engage in hobbies she enjoys. (Hr. Tr., p. 36) For example, claimant 
enjoys the outdoors and camping. She used to travel to various campsites and camp in 
tents; however, she now limits the campsites she travels to and she only sleeps in a 
camper. (Hr. Tr., pp. 36-37) Similarly, claimant does not fish as often as she used to. She 
still goes on fishing trips with her husband; however, she has a difficult time casting and 
reeling in. (Hr. Tr., pp. 38-39) On cross-examination, claimant acknowledged that she still 
goes canoeing with her husband, and she has the ability to get in and out of a canoe. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 57-58) 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 5 
 
With respect to her home life, claimant testified she does less cooking, she needs 
assistance when doing laundry, and her husband now handles the vacuuming. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 41) Claimant can no longer pull weeds or work effectively in her garden. (Hr. Tr., pp. 
42-43) 
 
Defendants introduced approximately one hour of surveillance video taken on 
October 17, 2022, October 19, 2022, and October 28, 2022. (Ex. G) The video depicts 
claimant walking, driving, sitting in her vehicle, and eating at a restaurant. (Id.)  I did not 
observe any specific activities on the surveillance footage that would clearly violate the 
medical restrictions recommended by Dr. Schmitz and the November, 2021 FCE report.   
 
Two physicians have addressed permanent impairment as it relates to claimant’s 
stipulated work injury.  
  
Dr. Schmitz addressed claimant’s permanent impairment in a letter, dated 
December 17, 2021. (JE 3, p. 20) Dr. Schmitz assessed a thoracic compression fracture 
at T12 with approximately 45 percent height loss. Using Table 15-3, page 384 in the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Schmitz placed 
claimant in DRE Lumbar Category III and assigned 10 percent whole person impairment. 
(Id.) Notably, Dr. Schmitz assessed claimant with a thoracic spine injury, but assigned 
impairment based on an injury to the lumbar spine. 
 
In response to Dr. Schmitz’s impairment rating, Bitterlie sought an independent 
medical examination with Farid Manshadi, M.D. (Ex. 1, p. 6) The examination occurred 
on May 11, 2022. (Id.) Following his review of the medical records and a physical 
examination of claimant, Dr. Manshadi assessed claimant with a T12 compression 
fracture of 40 to 50 percent. He noted that claimant, “remains with pain and reduced 
function as well as reduced lumbar active range of motion.” (Ex. 1, p. 9)  Like Dr. Schmitz, 
Dr. Manshadi placed claimant in DRE Lumbar Category III; however, it is likely this was 
a typographical error.  Unlike Dr. Schmitz, who utilized Table 15-3, Dr. Manshadi utilized 
Table 15-4, for thoracic spine injuries, and assigned 16 percent whole person impairment. 
(Id.)  The 16 percent rating falls within the impairment range provided for DRE Thoracic 
Category III, not DRE Lumbar Category III. 
 
After reviewing the expert opinions and comparing the same to Table 15-3 on page 
384, and Table 15-4 on page 389 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, I find the impairment 
rating of Dr. Manshadi to be more accurate and convincing than the impairment rating of 
Dr. Schmitz. Both physicians agree that claimant sustained a compression fracture in the 
thoracic spine. The AMA Guides allow physicians to assign between 15 and 18 percent 
impairment in DRE Thoracic Category III. (AMA Guides, p. 389) While Dr. Schmitz’s 10 
percent impairment rating falls within the range of impairment ratings available in DRE 
Lumbar Category III, it does not fall within the range provided in DRE Thoracic Category 
III. (See AMA Guides, pp. 384, 389)  Although the impairment assessments are relatively 
similar, I ultimately find Dr. Manshadi’s impairment rating for the thoracic spine to be more 
accurate that Dr. Schmitz’s impairment rating for the lumbar spine.  Therefore, I accept 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Manshadi’s rating and find that claimant proved she sustained 16 percent whole 
person impairment as a result of the April 14, 2021, work injury. 
 
Bitterlie seeks an award of past medical expenses. She included an affidavit of 
medical costs and medical mileage in Exhibit 4. Claimant first requests an award of 
medical expenses for the treatment she received from Ms. Vesely on January 10, 2022, 
and February 1, 2022. (Ex. 4, pp. 3-4) Claimant did not request that Ms. Vesely’s care be 
authorized and defendants did not authorize Ms. Vesely’s care. Accordingly, I find the 
care with Ms. Vesely was unauthorized care.   
 
Claimant relies on her own testimony and the opinions of Dr. Manshadi to establish 
the care she received from Ms. Vesely was reasonable and beneficial. Claimant testified 
she asked Dr. Schmitz to refill her pain medication; however, Dr. Schmitz told her that he 
does not prescribe pain medication. (Hr. Tr., pp. 60-61) Claimant later reported ongoing 
back pain to Ms. Vesely, who prescribed Zanaflex and Neurontin. (JE 7, p. 3) Dr. 
Manshadi opined that the treatment provided by Ms. Vesely was medically reasonable 
and related to claimant’s April 14, 2021, work injury. (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
 
I find claimant failed to prove the care provided by Ms. Vesely provided a more 
favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved through authorized care 
that could have been offered by the employer. This finding will be discussed in greater 
detail in the Reasoning and Conclusions of Law section. 
 
The mileage claims asserted on Exhibit 4 from April 15, 2021, through November 
23, 2021, appear appropriate, reasonable, and for necessary medical care related to the 
work injury.   
 
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The primary issue to be addressed in this decision is the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits for a stipulated injury to the thoracic 
spine.   
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 7 
 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The expert 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 
 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v). The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 14 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through “u”, 
or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning 
capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the 
American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner 
by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized 
in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning 
capacity. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). 
 
Bitterlie’s injury constitutes an unscheduled injury under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) as back injuries are not listed in the statutory schedule. 
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), an unscheduled injury is compensated 
on a functional impairment basis if the injured worker returns to work and receives the 
same or greater salary than what the worker earned on the date of injury. However, if the 
employee no longer works for the employer, permanent disability is payable based upon 
an industrial disability analysis. Martinez v. Pavlich, Inc., File No. 5063900 (App. July 
2020). In this instance, claimant returned to work and received the same or greater 
earnings than what she earned on the date of injury. She was still working for Quantum 
at the time of hearing. Therefore, under the statute, Bitterlie’s entitlement to benefits must 
be determined based only upon the functional impairment resulting from her injury, not 
her lost earning capacity. Any determination of industrial disability relating to the work 
injuries must be pursued using the mandatory bifurcated litigation process in section 
85.34(2)(v), if the statutory requirements are met. 
 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 8 
 
As mentioned, two physicians offered opinions as to claimant’s permanent 
functional impairment. I ultimately found the opinions of Dr. Manshadi to be the most 
thorough and consistent with the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, and most convincing on the 
issue of permanent impairment. I accepted Dr. Manshadi’s impairment rating and found 
claimant proved she sustained 16 percent whole person impairment as a result of the 
April 14, 2021 injury to her back.    
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), Bitterlie shall be paid proportionally 
based upon the functional limitation on a 500-week basis. Having found that claimant 
sustained a 16 percent permanent functional impairment of the whole person, I conclude 
she proved entitlement to 80 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at this time. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). If claimant’s employment ends subsequent to this award, 
she may be entitled to further permanent disability benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v). 
 
Bitterlie next asserts a claim for payment or reimbursement of past medical 
expenses. Defendants stipulate that the fees or prices charged by the providers in Exhibit 
4 are fair and reasonable. Defendants also stipulate that the medical providers would 
testify as to the reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
 
In this case, the claimant did not request additional medical care from the 
employer.  Claimant did not seek an order of the agency authorizing alternate medical 
care.  Instead, she selected her own medical care and abandoned the statutory scheme 
that permits the employer to select care.  In so doing, claimant assumes a higher burden 
of proof to establish liability for unauthorized medical care. Bell Bros. Heating and Air 
Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010).   
 
If the claimant elects to pursue unauthorized medical care, she can still recover 
the expenses of that unauthorized care if she proves by a preponderance of the evidence 
that such care was reasonable and beneficial. Id. at 206. However, there are often times 
multiple reasonable courses of treatment. Therefore, to recover the cost of unauthorized  
care, claimant must prove that the unauthorized care was beneficial in that it “provides a 
more favorable outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care authorized by 
the employer.” Id. 
 
Claimant offered testimony and the opinion of Dr. Manshadi to establish that the 
care she sought and obtained after her release from Dr. Schmitz would provide a more 
favorable outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care authorized by 
defendants.   
 
Claimant did not request additional care from defendants. Therefore, the 
defendants did not select or authorize any additional care.  While there is evidence that 
the medication claimant received from Ms. Vesely was more beneficial that the treatment 
being provided by defendants, claimant never gave defendants the opportunity to 
exercise their statutory right to select the care to be provided.  I conclude claimant failed 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 9 
 
to overcome her burden to establish that the care provided by Ms. Vesely provided a 
more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved through 
authorized care that could have been offered by defendants. Accordingly, I conclude 
claimant is precluded from recovery of her medical expenses for the treatment provided 
by Ms. Vesely. 
 
I found the medical mileage listed in Exhibit 4 from April 15, 2021, through 
November 23, 2021, was appropriate and reasonable.  I conclude those medical mileage 
expenses are payable or reimbursable by defendants. (Iowa Code section 85.27) The 
medical mileage associated with Dr. Manshadi’s IME is reimbursable under Iowa Code 
section 85.39. 
 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of 
the deputy commissioner or workers' compensation commissioner hearing the case. Rule 
876 IAC 4.33. I conclude that claimant was successful in her claim and therefore exercise 
my discretion and assess costs against the defendants in this matter. 
 
Bitterlie seeks assessment of her filing fee ($100.00) as well as the cost of service 
upon defendants ($14.66). Both of these costs are reasonable and appropriate pursuant 
to 876 IAC 4.33(3), (7). Claimant also requests the cost of her deposition transcript be 
assessed against defendants. This cost is reasonable and appropriate pursuant to 876 
IAC 4.33(3).  
 
I assess costs against the defendants in this matter in the amount of $100.00 for 
the filing fee, $14.66 for service fees, and $277.05 for the October 19, 2022 deposition 
transcript.   
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant eighty (80) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on November 9, 2021, at the stipulated weekly rate of four hundred 
forty-one and 10/100 dollars ($441.10). 
 
Defendants shall pay all accrued weekly benefits in lump sum with applicable 
interest pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for any weekly benefits paid to date. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s medical mileage for all medical treatment 
found to be causally related to the work injury at the applicable mileage rate applicable 
pursuant to 876 IAC 8.1(2). If the parties cannot agree as to the amount of medical 
expenses owed or the amount of medical mileage owed under this award, the parties 
shall file a timely request for rehearing, along with a brief setting forth each parties' 

BITTERLIE V. Q.P. HOLDINGS, LLC 
Page 10 
 
calculations, for a specific and detailed entry of the amount of medical expenses and 
medical mileage owed. 
 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33, as set forth in the 
decision. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this    30th    day of May, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Andrew M. Giller (via WCES) 
Jean Zetta Dickson (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed 
via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
