Case Number: 19700153.01
Case Title:  FECKERS, MONTE V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Feckers Monte-19700153.01d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MONTE FECKERS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                 File No. 19700153.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  :      Head Note Nos.:1100, 1108, 1800, 1801, 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
     
 
1803, 1803.1, 1804, 3200, 3202 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Monte Feckers, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers 
compensation benefits against John Deere Waterloo Works, a self-insured employer, 
and the Second Injury Fund of Iowa, both as defendants, arising out of an accepted 
work injury that occurred on September 15, 2017.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on July 13, 2020, via Court Call. The case was considered fully 
submitted on August 3, 2020, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-14; claimant’s exhibits 1-11; defendant’s 
exhibit A-F along with the testimony of the claimant. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from October 23, 2017, 
through November 19, 2017;  
2. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent total disability (PTD) to the bilateral 
arms under 85.34(2) or whether he has sustained a body as a whole (BAW) 
due to mental injury, weight gain, and reconditioning due to the work injury or 
whether he is completely and totally disabled under the odd-lot doctrine;  
3. The extent of the disability; 
4. The appropriate commencement date for permanent disability benefits;  
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of the independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-06  09:18:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 2 
 
 
 
 
6. Whether claimant sustained a first prior qualifying loss to the right leg in May 
2011;  
7. Whether claimant is entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa;  
8. The credit to be applied against benefits awarded by both the Defendant 
Employer/Insurer and the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
9. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits for failure to pay temporary 
partial disability (TPD).  
10. Taxation of costs itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 11. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties agree the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with defendant employer on or about September 15, 2017.  
At the time of the injury, the claimant’s gross earnings $852.00 per week. He was 
married and entitled to four exemptions. Based on the foregoing, the weekly benefit rate 
would be $569.02. 
Defendants waive all affirmative defenses.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
At the time of the hearing, claimant was a 49 year old right hand dominant male. 
His past educational background includes a high school diploma. Claimant testified, and 
his school records show, that he experienced some learning disability necessitating 
special education services. (Ex. 8). Claimant testified he has difficulty with math, 
spelling, and remembering what he reads. He had a below-average GPA of 2.14 and 
his composite scores on the ITED were at the first percentile every year in high school 
except his junior year, when his scores fell at the fourth percentile. (Ex. 8, p. 49). An IQ 
test administered when Monte was a junior in high school produced a full scale IQ of 84, 
indicating below average intelligence. (Ex. 8, p. 52). 
Claimant has not received any further education since high school.  He has no 
experience working with computers, does not know how to use Microsoft Word or Excel, 
and relies on family members to assist with computer-related tasks such as filling out 
online job applications.  
Claimant underwent a pre-employment physical before starting work at John 
Deere, which showed grip strength of 140 pounds on the right and 135 pounds on the 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 3 
 
 
 
 
left. (Joint Exhibit 1). Both measures exceeded normative values by about 20 pounds. 
(JE1). The physical capability evaluation found that Monte was capable of “heavy” work. 
(JE1). Monte began work for John Deere on March 29, 2004. (Ex. A). At the time of his 
pre-employment physical, claimant weighed 415 pounds. (JE 1) Claimant has struggled 
with his weight for a long time. He sought out weight loss treatment in 2010. (JE 2:2) His 
weight at the time was 568 pounds which was the heaviest he had been up until that 
date. (JE 2:2) While weight loss medication was prescribed, it had little effect. His 
weight crept up and in the months and years preceding his injury, claimant weighed a 
minimum of 580 pounds.  
During his 2010 visit with Kyle P. Christiason, M.D., at the Family Medicine clinic 
in Cedar Falls, claimant was experiencing a number of “active problems” as the medical 
records categorized them. (JE 2:2) These problems consisted of asthma, back pain, 
bursitis, edema, esophagitis, gastroenteritis, hypertension, lateral epicondylitis of the 
right elbow, morbid obesity, neck strain, plantar fasciitis, and ulcer. (JE 2:2) In August 
22, 2011, claimant returned to Dr. Christiason with primary complaints regarding his 
weight and right knee pain which was not alleviated by a knee mobilizer or rest. (JE 2:3) 
Claimant testified that the origin of the knee injury was a high school football incident. 
Dr. Christiason referred claimant to orthopedic specialist, Todd Johnston, M.D. (JE 2:3, 
Ex. JE3). 
Claimant saw Dr. Johnston on September 8, 2011, with complaints of constant 
right knee pain accompanied by popping, catching, and weakness. (JE3, p. 21)  During 
this medical visit, claimant maintained that there was no injury but that the symptoms 
started in May 2011 with a slow and progressive onset.  (JE 3:22)  Examination of the 
right knee revealed painful terminal extension, significant medial compartment 
tenderness, and posterior impingement at the end of the flexion range of motion. (JE 
3:22)  Based on diagnostic testing, Dr. Johnston diagnosed grade III medial joint space 
narrowing. (JE3, p. 22, JE 4:27). Dr. Johnston recommended injections, bracing, or 
arthroplasty— the latter of which was not an option due to claimant’s weight. (JE3, p. 
23).  Dr. Johnston ultimately provided claimant with a brace and injected the right knee 
in January 2012. (JE3, pp. 25–26). 
Claimant continued to experience right knee pain and sought treatment on June 
24, 2013. (JE2, p. 4). Dr. Christiason prescribed piroxicam, an anti-inflammatory, for 
claimant’s right knee pain. (JE2, p. 4, 9). Claimant testified that he experienced regular 
knee pain during his shifts but was able to complete his duties without accommodation 
while giving himself palliative treatment such as Aleve.  
On January 24, 2017, claimant was seen at the University of Iowa Hospital and 
Clinics for medical nutrition therapy in hopes that he could lose enough weight to 
undergo bariatric surgery. (JE 5:28) On April 21, 2016, claimant weighed 609 pounds. 
(JE 5:30)  At the January 24, 2017, visit claimant’s weight was 558 pounds. (JE 5:30)  In 
the follow-up visit on February 28, 2017, his weight was 572 pounds. (JE 5:35) On April 
26, 2017, his weight was recorded at 582 pounds. (JE 5:40) 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 4 
 
 
 
 
On September 15, 2017, Monte presented to the medical department of the 
defendant employer to complain of numbness in his hands for the past week, which he 
felt was caused by repetitive use of his hands at work. (JE 6:61) Claimant was restricted 
from repetitive gripping or twisting and banned from using intense vibratory tools. (JE 
6:61) He was referred out for testing. (JE 6:61). Brian O’Shaughnessy, M.D., performed 
EMG/NCS on September 22, 2017, which showed moderate left and mild to moderate 
right carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE7, p. 62).  
Claimant underwent a course of physical therapy beginning on October 13, 2017.  
(JE8, p. 67).  Claimant was placed on light duty which claimant testified involved 
sweeping the floor and sitting around. He was earning less than normal on light duty 
because he was removed from the incentive pay program and had no opportunity to 
work overtime. 
On October 24, 2017, claimant consulted with orthopedic surgeon, Thomas 
Gorsche, M.D., who performed injections. (JE9, p. 93).  When he returned to Dr. 
Gorsche on November 13, 2017, claimant reported that the cortisone injections helped 
but he continued to have nighttime paresthesia.  (JE 9:94)  The two discussed surgical 
release and claimant was informed that there was no guarantee to the outcome. One-
third of the patients will have complete relief, one/third will get some relief and 
approximately one-fourth will get no relief; however, it would prevent the condition from 
worsening. (JE 9:94) Claimant agreed to proceed with the surgery. The right carpal 
tunnel release was performed on November 22, 2017 and the left was performed on 
December 12, 2017. (JE10, pp. 104–105)  
Claimant was taken off of work a few days before November 22, 2017, and has 
not worked since. 
On January 18, 2018, claimant was seen by his family practice doctor, Dr. 
Christiason for shortness of breath and wheezing. He was unable to be weighed due to 
being over the limit, but his weight was recorded as 666 lbs. (JE 2:7)  
On January 23, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. Gorsche following the bilateral 
carpal tunnel releases. (JE 9:96) Claimant reported no improvement in either hand with 
some nocturnal numbness on the right side.  (JE 9:96) Claimant regretted having the 
surgery done but Dr. Gorsche’s reassured him that the surgery did prevent the carpal 
tunnel from worsening even if it did not improve his symptoms. (JE 9:96)  Claimant was 
sent to physical therapy again and reported no improvement. (JE 9:97)  When he 
returned to Dr. Gorsche on February 2, 2018, his grip strength was 45 on the right and 
54 on the left which showed some improvement as at the time of the initial evaluation 
when he exhibited 40 pounds of grip strength of the right and 35 on the left. (JE 8: 68) 
On February 9, 2018, Dr. O’Shaughnessy performed repeat EMG/NCV, which 
showed no appreciable change in the function of the median nerve compared to the 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 5 
 
 
 
 
testing performed on September 22, 2017. (JE7, p. 63). Claimant still had mild to 
possibly moderate dysfunction of the median nerve at the wrist bilaterally. (JE 7:63) 
During the February 20, 2018 visit, Dr. Gorsche offered to perform a revision 
surgery but informed the claimant that the odds of giving him relief were less than a 
third. (JE 9:97)  Absent the surgery, Dr. Gorsche had no further treatment to offer. He 
released claimant with permanent restrictions of no forceful repetitive gripping on the left 
or right. (JE 9:98) 
On March 3, 2018, Dr. Gorsche authored a report assigning a three percent 
permanent impairment to each arm for a total of four percent body as a whole. (Ex. C).  
Claimant agreed to undergo revision carpal tunnel releases in the hope that he could 
obtain some relief from his severe symptoms. (Tr. p. 21:6–7). Dr. Gorsche then 
performed revision right carpal tunnel release on April 3, 2018. (JE10, p. 106). 
Claimant returned to therapy beginning on May 9, 2018.  (JE 8:70) The therapist 
documented impaired fine motor coordination and 25 pounds of grip strength bilaterally. 
(JE8, p. 70, 72). Claimant reported that he felt 25 percent better after the second 
surgeries. (JE 8:71) His range of motion in his right forearm, wrist and hand were all 
within normal limits but he was hampered by pain, numbness and weakness. (JE 8:73) 
On June 5, 2018, claimant reported 40 percent improvement since the second surgery 
although he continued to feel numbness in his right hand while working hard at home. 
(JE 8:75 to 76) His grip strength was 45 pounds on the right and 50 pounds on the left. 
(JE 8:77)  
On June 11, 2018, he was seen by the nurse practitioner at Unity Point for 
morbid obesity, lower extremity edema and a hypertrophic toenail. (JE 2:10) Claimant 
was counseled on weight loss and advised to count calories and exercise. (JE 2:10) 
The prescription for phentermine was continued. (JE 2:10) As for his lower extremity 
edema, claimant was advised to wear his compression stockings and lose weight as the 
excess weight was likely contributing to this lower extremity issues. (JE 2:10) Finally, a 
referral to a podiatrist was made for a hypertrophic toenail. (JE 2:10)  
On June 14, 2018, claimant reported to his therapist that his impairment was 
approximately 35 percent compared to 100 percent normal. (JE 8:81) On August 1, 
2018, claimant began physical therapy following his left revision surgery. (JE 8:85)  
During the September 7, 2018 physical therapy appointment, claimant performed a 
simulated assembly test which caused shooting pain and increased numbness and 
tingling in the bilateral hands starting at three minutes. (JE 8:88) 
At discharge on September 12, 2018, claimant’s grip strength was 40 pounds on 
the right and 23 pounds on the left, both significantly less than half of normative values. 
(JE8, p. 90).  

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 6 
 
 
 
 
On September 13, 2018, Dr. Gorsche released claimant to return to work with 
permanent restrictions of no repetitive gripping or grasping and no use of vibratory tools.  
(JE 9:102)  Dr. Gorsche noted that claimant had failed surgery and would only see 
claimant on an as needed basis. Dr. Gorsche subsequently authored a report dated 
February 12, 2019 wherein he assigned 5 percent permanent impairment to each arm 
for a total of 6 percent BAW. (Ex. D). 
Deere’s in-house physician, Dr. Sarvenaz Jabbari, recommended a second 
opinion on September 17, 2018. (JE11, p. 112; JE6, p. 50)  A referral to Dr. Rene 
Recinos was arranged by the John Deere Medical Department on October 17, 2018, but 
no appointment was apparently available until February 6, 2019. (JE12, pp. 113–114). 
In the interim, Dr. O’Shaughnessy performed repeat EMG/NCV, which showed no 
change on the right and some improvement on the left. (JE7, p. 64).  
Dr. O’Shaughnessy stated the following:  
Nerve stimulation studies:  These were done in both upper extremities.  
The median nerve distal motor latency was normal on the right and 
prolonged on the left.  The amplitude of the motor unit response was 
normal bilaterally.  The motor NCV was normal bilaterally.  The ulnar 
nerve distal motor latency was normal bilaterally the amplitude of the 
motor unit response was normal bilaterally.  The motor NCV in the forearm 
was normal bilaterally, and across the elbow was normal bilaterally.  The 
radial nerve distal motor latency was normal bilaterally.  The amplitude of 
the motor unit response was normal bilaterally.  The motor NCV in the 
forearm was normal bilaterally. 
The ulnar nerve sensory latency was normal bilaterally.  The median 
nerve sensory latency was normal bilaterally.  The radial nerve sensory 
latency was normal bilaterally.  
Needle electrode studies:  Needle electrode studies of muscles in both 
upper extremities showed no significant abnormalities.  
Impression:  This is a abnormal electrodiagnostic study of the upper 
extremities bilaterally.  The findings are electrically compatible with 
dysfunction of the median nerve motor fibers at the right wrist.  Compared 
to the previous examination this is without change.  On the left side there 
has been improvement in the median nerve motor and sensory conduction 
at the wrist.  No evidence for cervical radiculopathy was noted. 
(JE 7, p. 64) 
On January 28, 2019, claimant was seen by Samantha A. Shaw, a nurse 
practitioner in follow up to the abdominal wall cellulitis for which she had prescribed 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 7 
 
 
 
 
clindamycin the previous week. (JE 2:12)  His daughter was supposed to monitor the 
area for increased redness but the claimant reported that it had not been accomplished. 
(JE 2:12) During the examination it appeared that the redness had approved in the area 
was not warm to touch. (JE 2:12) In addition to the cellulitis issue, claimant discussed 
his weight issue with the nurse practitioner. He explained he had tried several weight 
loss medications in the past including phentermine and Contrave and while the 
phentermine helped to decrease his appetite initially, continued use saw a return of his 
appetite.  (JE 2:12) The claimant  wanted to undergo bariatric surgery, but struggled 
losing the approximately 250 pounds necessary to qualify for the procedure. (JE 2:12) 
He maintained that his only full meal was at supper where he had meat, potatoes and 
vegetables and throughout the day he ate only smaller snacks such as yogurt, granola, 
and fruit. (JE 2:12) As it pertained to his cellulitis, the plan was to complete the course 
of antibiotics. As for the weight issue, claimant was counseled regarding diet, 
recommendation to exercise, decrease of portion sizes and avoidance of breaded and 
fatty foods. (JE 2:13) 
On February 7, 2019, claimant was able to see Dr. Recinos. (JE 12:114) At this 
time, claimant weighs approximately 700 pounds although Dr. Recinos number was a 
guess given that the scale in his office was not capable of recording claimant’s weight. 
(JE 12:114) The operative records were not available for review. (JE 12:114) Claimant 
reported continued numbness in both hands, right worse than left. (JE 12:114) He was 
dropping things and having difficulty with zippers and twist top objects. (JE 12:114) He 
was also experiencing cramping in the right arm. (JE 12:114)  
Dr. Recinos inaccurately quoted Dr. O’Shaunessey’s January 21, 2019, 
EMG/NCS.  
The patient had follow-up EMG and nerve conduction velocity studies 
performed on January 21, 2019 by Dr. Brian O’Shaughnessy of Waterloo.  
On this basis, he concluded that the patient had abnormal studies of the 
upper extremities bilaterally with improvement in the median nerve motor 
and sensory conduction of the left wrist.  He attended his note stating,  
Compared to the examination done in February 2018, 
the median nerve function on the right has improved and 
now is in the normal range.  The median nerve function on 
the left shows no significant change in the distal motor 
latency but does show some mild improvement in the 
sensory function at the wrist.  No worsening significantly was 
some seen compared to the last exam. 
(JE 12, p. 114) 
Dr. Recinos did conduct his own examination and concluded that claimant’s 
nerve function had improved but was still abnormal.  (JE 12:116) Dr. Recinos did not 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 8 
 
 
 
 
recommend further surgery because of odds of success after two prior surgeries was 
extremely low.  (JE 12:116)  He recommended that claimant continue to wear splints at 
night, every night.  (JE 12:116) Dr. Racine further informed claimant that he needed to 
lose weight for his own health. (JE 12:116)  
On February 19, 2019, following the meeting with Dr. Recinos, claimant 
presented to Dr. Jabbari for further evaluation and review of the medical treatment. (JE 
6:47) Claimant reported continuing cramping in both hands and numbness episodes 
occurring at least five times a day and lasting five minutes each. (Ex. JE6, p. 47). Dr. 
Jabbari assigned permanent restrictions of no gripping or grasping with the hands and 
no vibratory power tools. (JE6, p. 48). Claimant was advised to lose weight and return 
after weight loss for a re-evaluation. (JE6, p. 48). 
On or about July 15, 2019, Deere instructed claimant to report to work to 
determine whether he could perform a job driving a forklift. (JE14, p. 130).  Claimant 
reported he could not lift himself into the forklift truck and that when he attempted to do 
so, he experienced numbness and tingling. (JE 6:45) Dr. Jabbari was informed that the 
claimant could not operate a forklift truck due to his body habitus. (JE 6:45) The steering 
wheel was positioned too close to the abdomen and there was not enough room to 
accommodate the claimant’s size. (JE 6:4 to 5)  Claimant related to Dr. Jabbari that he 
had been attempting to lose weight but because of the cost of the medication and his 
lack of pay, he was no longer able to afford the medication. (JE 6:45) Dr. Jabbari 
recommended the claimant obtain a work restriction from his primary care provider of no 
forklift driving due to his weight. (JE 6:45) 
Claimant testified at hearing that the employees of the defendant employer who 
are overseeing the forklift test drive had concluded the claimant could not safely operate 
the forklift. He further testified that there was nothing mentioned about his size. Given 
that the claimant was unable to operate the forklift and that he experienced numbness 
simply by attempting to hoist himself into the forklift, there is no evidence that actual 
operation of the forklift was outside of the claimants abilities. 
On August 28, 2019, claimant returned to the nurse practitioner in follow-up 
regarding his weight. Four months prior he had begun a course of Saxenda but given 
the $60.00 per month cost, he had not been able to use it for the previous two months. 
(JE 2:17) He was working with a therapist for his over eating disorder and that he had 
lost some weight from September, presumably 2018, going from 704 pounds down to 
688 pounds. (JE 2:17) It was recorded that the claimant did attempt to return to work but 
while he was driving a forklift, he experienced a significant flare-up in symptoms. (JE 
2:17) He requested work restrictions which would avoid driving a forklift as he did not 
feel he could safely operate one. (JE 2:17)  There was no mention that he could not fit 
into the forklift as he testified to at trial.  Nurse practitioner Shaw issued a work 
restriction requesting that the claimant be restricted to not operating a forklift due to his 
chronic medical condition. (JE 2:20) 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 9 
 
 
 
 
Claimant has not attempted to return to work since this date and defendant 
employer has provided no position for the claimant.  
Claimant underwent a functional capacity evaluation on November 20, 2019. It 
lasted for approximately 3 hours and 15 minutes. (JE 13:118) The functional capacity 
evaluation placed claimant in the sedentary work category. According to the therapist 
claimant was only able to exert up to 10 pounds of force occasionally and a negligent 
amount of force frequently.  (JE 13:118) During the evaluation, claimant reported that he 
had not driven on the streets for 3 to 4 months due to claimant’s belief that his grip was 
not safe enough to hold the steering wheel. (JE 13:123)  Claimant further expressed 
significant pain in the right hand rating the right hand pain 9 on 10 scale and 7 on a 10 
scale on the left. He also stated that his right knee was in constant pain, rating that pain 
8/10 on a 10 scale. (JE 13:123) Claimant reported continued numbness and tingling in 
his hands greater on the right than the left. (JE 6:43) His pain rating on his right was 
3/10 on a 10 scale and his pain rating on the left was 2/10 on a 10 scale. (JE 6:43) 
Defendant employer’s plan was to continue with the previous permanent work 
restrictions and add no two-handed carry from more than 20 pounds, no left-handed 
carry more than 30 pounds and no right hand carry at all. (JE 6:44) 
On November 27, 2019, claimant was seen by the in-house medical practitioner 
Dr. Jabbari in follow-up from the functional capacity evaluation that had been conducted 
on November 20, 2019. (JE 6:43) The functional capacity evaluation, as understood by 
Dr. Jabbari, limited the claimant to no two-hand carrying more than 20 pounds and no 
right-handed carry and no left-handed carry more than 30 pounds. (JE 6:43)  
On or around August 15, 2019, claimant began seeing a therapist. (JE 14:130)  
The clinical social history notes that claimant’s wife moved in with another man. Their 
divorce was finalized in January 2019. Another triggering factor was the loss of 
employment. (JE 14:130) Claimant noted that he ate when depressed and had gained 
at least 150 pounds since November 2017. (JE 14:131) 
Monte underwent an independent medical examination by orthopedic surgeon, 
Arnold E. Delbridge, M.D., on October 14, 2019.  Dr. Delbridge addressed the knee 
injury reciting a history that claimant had been struck on the medial side of his right 
knee while playing football. He missed a half game, was placed in a brace and played 
with a wrapped knee for the remainder of the season. Dr. Delbridge opined that as a 
result of that incident, claimant suffered a severe bone bruise to his right knee and 
along with a varus condition developed arthritis as a result. (CE 1:2) The impairment to 
the right knee was assessed to have caused a 7 percent impairment to the right lower 
extremity. As for the bilateral wrists, Dr. Delbridge opined claimant has vibratory injury 
syndrome superimposed on his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, as Monte was 
exposed to vibration at work and this is common in individuals who have a bad outcome 
from carpal tunnel release. (Ex. 1, p. 4). Dr. Delbridge assigned permanent impairment 
of 34 percent LUE (20 percent BAW) and 24 percent RUE (14 percent BAW), which he 
reached by combining the rating assigned by Dr. Gorsche with additional impairment 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 10 
 
 
 
 
due to Monte’s decreased grip strength. (Ex. 1, p. 5). The total impairment was 31 
percent BAW with a maximum medical improvement (MMI) date of September 15, 
2018. (Ex. 1, p. 5).  
Dr. Delbridge also noted that during the FCE claimant had problems sitting, 
squatting, walking, kneeling, and crawling. This was not attributed to the work injury but 
rather claimant’s weight.  
On exam the patient appears to be able to do some ambulation, but 
he has a huge apron overhanging his waist and proximal thighs and at his 
weight it is doubtful there is much of anything he can do if he is not sitting, 
as pointed out by the evaluator.  
(CE 1:3)  
Dr. Delbridge concluded claimant would not be able to work at defendant 
employer due to his size and no use of vibratory tools or hard gripping. (CE 1:6) If 
claimant lost weight and was more mobile, he would be able to undergo another FCE. 
(CE 1:6) Dr. Delbridge felt that was not likely to occur for some time, if ever. After 
consultation with the claimant’s attorney, Dr. Delbridge provided additional opinions in 
the form of a checklist letter. He agreed claimant experienced whole body 
deconditioning and weight gain as a result of his absence from work since 2017 and the 
fact that he was no longer standing and walking at work. (Ex. 1, pp. 8–9). Dr. Delbridge 
causally related both the deconditioning and weight gain to claimant’s work injury. (Ex. 
1, pp. 8–9, 12). As to limitations, Dr. Delbridge felt that claimant can only use his hands 
occasionally, cannot be exposed to vibration, and cannot lift more than 20 pounds 
occasionally (Ex. 1, pp. 9–10). Dr. Delbridge further felt that Monte is limited to 
sedentary work due to the combination of the deconditioning, his weight, and his right 
knee condition. (Ex. 1, p. 8–9). Finally, Dr. Delbridge opined that claimant is not capable 
of operating a forklift due to his carpal tunnel and vibratory injury syndromes. (Ex. 1, p. 
10). Dr. Delbridge was provided with a history of claimant’s weight in the form of a table 
prepared by claimant’s attorney.  
Dr. Christiason, claimant’s treating physician, also opined via a checklist letter 
that claimant’s weight increase was a substantial contributing factor in causing 
claimant’s weight gain given that claimant was not engaged in physical activity due to 
lack of work. (CE 2:17) As a result, the claimant’s inability to stand and walk were from 
his knee injury, his obesity and body deconditioning. (CE 2:17)   
Monte continues to have severe numbness, and tingling in his hands. (JE2, p. 
17). These symptoms intensify with use of the hands and claimant is only able to use 
his hands for 10 or 15 minutes before his symptoms become intolerable.  Claimant has 
decreased grip strength bilaterally and frequently drops things. (JE6, p. 43, 52).  
Claimant believes his hands and wrists are in worse condition now than prior to the first 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 11 
 
 
 
 
round of surgeries. Claimant also testified that he does not feel he can stand for more 
than 10 to 15 minutes or walk more than 20-30 yards.  
Barbara Laughlin performed a vocational analysis of the claimant. (CE 3) She 
identified claimant’s transferable skills in the area of mechanical fabricating, material 
moving, transporting, brush-spraying, farm and garden machinery and equipment, 
lumber and wood products and furniture and fixtures. (CE 3:26) Based on the 
restrictions set forth by Dr. Delbridge, as well as the FCE, Ms. Laughlin concluded 
claimant had sustained a 100 percent occupational loss. (CE 3:26-27) 
While Ms. Laughlin felt that claimant would benefit from retraining for a sedentary 
job, she felt that his training might be hampered by his learning disability and that he 
lacks the computer skills needed for sedentary work. (CE 3:27)  Upon further inquiry, 
Ms. Laughlin identified approximately 112 occupational titles that would be available to 
claimant if he was limited solely to sedentary work with no other limitations including to 
his hands, wrists or arms. (CE 3:31)  
Defendants argue Ms. Laughlin’s report is flawed as it states she consulted with 
claimant. Claimant testified that he did not remember her. (DE F, p. 14 of Deposition) 
The report of Ms. Laughlin includes statements made by the claimant including that he 
learned to read blueprints when he worked construction and that defendant employer 
attempted to accommodate his injuries. I find that claimant did not remember the 
consultation but that it did occur.  
Contrary to his testimony that he cannot drive or operate a vehicle, claimant has 
purchased two ATVs following his hand surgery. He also purchased a blade for his ATV 
with the goal of clearing snow. (JE 14:137) He related to his counselor that the ATV 
does not stress his injuries. (JE 14:137) The primary reason claimant cannot use a 
forklift at this time is based on the size of his body habitus. He is unable to maneuver 
the steering wheel. He has not driven a forklift since his injury.  
Claimant has applied to some positions following his surgeries including a 
position at a railroad and packaging position. He testified that he felt he was capable of 
doing those jobs.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 12 
 
 
 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
Monte has been overweight for most of his adult life and has received treatment 
for weight loss in the past. His weight has fluctuated a great deal with medical records 
noting variances between the mid 500s to over 600 pounds. In January 2017, he 
weighed mid 500 and directly before his injury, he had gained almost 40 pounds.  After 
his injury, he gained significantly more weight.  Despite his weight, claimant had no 
limitations in his ability to perform his work prior to the development of the bilateral wrist 
problems.  
Claimant maintains that his weight ballooned following his worker injury because 
he was no longer able to be active. However, claimant’s injuries were to his wrists and a 
wrist injury does not prevent the claimant from undertaking various exercising activities. 
It did not impact his ability to reduce the caloric intake. The mere fact that the claimant 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 13 
 
 
 
 
gained weight post his injury is not sufficient evidence to satisfy the claimant’s burden to 
show a “but for” or “substantial factor” causation connection between the injury and the 
weight gain. The deconditioning that the claimant experienced following his absence 
from the work force is not reasonable to lay at the feet of the defendant but rather the 
claimant’s own decision to be inactive and/or in ability to reduce his caloric intake.  
While he was not in a work setting where he was required to move for his work, 
he could have moved at home by walking. In fact, given that he was not working, he had 
more free time to walk and do low impact aerobics to facilitate weight loss. He was on 
medications at one point and those appeared to have little effect on his ability to reduce 
his weight.  
Dr. Delbridge and Dr. Christiason’s opinions that connect the weight gain to the 
work injury are based on a proximity in time but do not consider that claimant could 
have been mobile on his own at home.  Initially Dr. Delbridge did not attribute the weight 
gain to claimant’s lack of activity at work and the lower body problems were attributed to 
claimant’s weight issue. While the opinions are unrebutted, they do not take into 
account that the claimant work injury was to the bilateral wrists.  
When an expert’s opinions is based upon an incomlete history, it is not 
necessarily binding upon the commissioner or the court.  Musselman v Central 
Telephone Company, 154 N.W. 2d, 128 (Iowa 1967); Bodish v. Fischer, Inc., 133 N.W. 
2d, 867 (Iowa 1965).  It is then to be weighed, together with other facts and 
circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder of fact. It. [sic] 
The weight to be given an expert opinion may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding cirucmstances.  St. Luke’s 
Hospital v. Gray, 604 N.W. 2d, 646 (Iowa 2000). 
Claimant argues that attributing weight gain to his own personal choices instead 
of on the bilateral carpal tunnel injuries injects fault into the system. I disagree. The 
personal choice of the claimant is part of the causation analysis in this case to 
determine whether the lack of exercise and/or failure to reduce caloric intake was a 
substantial factor in bringing about claimant’s excess weight gain and deconditioning 
rather than the wrist injuries which occurred at work. Examining the claimant’s behavior 
in eating, dieting and exercising is no different than weighing whether a fall at home was 
more likely the causative insult bringing about a back injury rather than repetitive lifting 
at work.  
The knee injury leading up to the work incident did not prevent claimant from 
doing the essential elements of his job and there is no medical explanation for why it 
would prevent claimant from being mobile post surgery. The claimant has failed to prove 
the causal link between his post surgical body habitus and the bilateral carpal tunnel 
injuries and treatment thereto.  

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 14 
 
 
 
 
Claimant did seek out counseling in the fall of 2019; however, his complaints 
covered a variety of topics including his divorce and his physical condition. Neither Dr. 
Delbridge nor his family physician, Dr. Christiason, opined claimant suffered a mental 
injury related to his work injury nor was there evidence that his mental condition was 
limiting him from returning to the work force. Claimant has not carried his burden of 
proof that his current mental trauma is causally connected to the work injury.  
Claimant asserts that he is permanently and totally disabled pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(t) even if the only limitations that are considered arise out of his 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. However, even a bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome is 
still considered a scheduled member injury.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 
N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994) (noting that chapter 85 divides permanent partial disability 
into scheduled and unscheduled losses and paragraphs a through t are reserved for 
scheduled injuries). The odd-lot doctrine is applicable only as an alternative theory of 
recovery implicit in the industrial disability standard.  
Where an injury is limited to scheduled member the loss is measured 
functionally, not industrially.  Graves v. Eagle Iron Works, 331 N.W.2d 116 (Iowa 1983). 
The courts have repeatedly stated that for those injuries limited to the schedules 
in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a-t), this agency must only consider the functional loss of 
the particular scheduled member involved and not the other factors which constitute an 
“industrial disability.”  Iowa Supreme Court decisions over the years have repeatedly 
cited favorably the following language in the 66-year-old case of Soukup v. Shores Co., 
222 Iowa 272, 277; 268 N.W. 598, 601 (1936): 
The legislature has definitely fixed the amount of compensation that shall be paid 
for specific injuries . . . and that, regardless of the education or qualifications or nature 
of the particular individual, or of his inability . . . to engage in employment . . . the 
compensation payable . . . is limited to the amount therein fixed. 
Our court has even specifically upheld the constitutionality of the scheduled 
member compensation scheme.  Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 404 
(Iowa 1994).  Permanent partial disabilities are classified as either scheduled or 
unscheduled.  A specific scheduled disability is evaluated by the functional method; the 
industrial method is used to evaluate an unscheduled disability.  Graves, 331 N.W.2d 
116; Simbro v. DeLong's Sportswear 332 N.W.2d 886, 887 (Iowa 1983); Martin v. Skelly 
Oil Co., 252 Iowa 128, 133, 106 N.W.2d 95, 98 (1960). 
When the result of an injury is loss to a scheduled member, the compensation 
payable is limited to that set forth in the appropriate subdivision of Code section 
85.34(2).  Barton v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961).  "Loss 
of use" of a member is equivalent to "loss" of the member.  Moses v. National Union 
C. M. Co., 194 Iowa 819, 184 N.W. 746 (1921).  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(u) the workers’ compensation commissioner may equitably prorate 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 15 
 
 
 
 
compensation payable in those cases wherein the loss is something less than that 
provided for in the schedule.  Blizek v. Eagle Signal Co., 164 N.W.2d 84 (Iowa 1969). 
Evidence considered in assessing the loss of use of a particular scheduled 
member may entail more than a medical rating pursuant to standardized guides for 
evaluating permanent impairment.  A claimant's testimony and demonstration of 
difficulties incurred in using the injured member and medical evidence regarding general 
loss of use may be considered in determining the actual loss of use compensable.  
Soukup, 222 Iowa 272, 268 N.W. 598.  Consideration is not given to what effect the 
scheduled loss has on claimant's earning capacity.  The scheduled loss system created 
by the legislature is presumed to include compensation for reduced capacity to labor 
and to earn.  Schell v. Central Engineering Co., 232 Iowa 421, 4 N.W.2d 339 (1942). 
The right of a worker to receive compensation for injuries sustained which arose 
out of and in the course of employment is statutory.  The statute conferring this right can 
also fix the amount of compensation to be paid for different specific injuries, and the 
employee is not entitled to compensation except as provided by statute.  Soukup, 222 
Iowa 272, 268 N.W. 598. 
Claimant is unable to perform any of his past work due to the fact that every job 
he has held in the past required constant use of his hands. Further, claimant has 
minimal education and a learning disability which would affect his ability to retrain. The 
valid FCE results were adopted by both Dr. Gorsche and Dr. Delbridge, as well as used 
by the vocational rehabilitation specialist, Barbara McLaughlin. The FCE results placed 
claimant in the sedentary work category. According to the therapist, claimant was only 
able to exert up to 10 pounds of force occasionally and a negligent amount of force 
frequently.   
Dr. Delbridge assigned a 31 percent impairment based on the reduced grip 
strength and presumed ongoing numbness. His report contains a few errors. He 
incorrectly assumed that claimant actually drove the forklift and experienced numbness. 
This was not the case given that the forklift test was halted because claimant was not 
able to fit into the cab of the forklift. Dr. Delbridge was also unaware claimant had 
purchased recreational vehicles including an ATV to be used for snow removal 
purposes.  
Claimant testified that he has difficulty lifting, carrying, and holding items and this 
was borne out in his valid FCE. Dr. Gorsche’s 6 percent BAW rating is far too low 
considering the outcome of the FCE which placed claimant in the sedentary work 
category and allowed claimant to only exert 10 pounds of force occasionally and a 
negligent amount of force frequently. The FCE results are closer to the testimony of the 
claimant and the assessment of Dr. Delbridge. Thus, Dr. Delbridge’s impairment of 31 
percent is adopted and claimant is entitled to 155 weeks of compensation.  

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 16 
 
 
 
 
Both Dr. Delbridge and Dr. Gorsche set the MMI date for the claimant as 
September 15, 2018. That was the date on which Dr. Gorsche determined that there 
was no further treatment to be offered to claimant and therefore that date is adopted as 
the appropriate commencement date for PTD benefits. Any benefits already paid past 
this date shall be credited to the defendant against this award.  
The next question is whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits during the 
period of time in which he worked light duty.  
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Section 85.33(2). 
While he was working light duty, claimant did not receive the benefit of incentive 
pay or overtime. Claimant presented evidence that he earned less than his average 
weekly wage during the period of October 23, 2017 through November 19, 2017, as a 
result of working only 40 hours and being taken off the incentive pay plan. (CE 7:47) 
Unfortunately, the wage table presented does not indicate much other than claimant did 
not earn CIPP after November 10, 2017. It does not present a full picture of claimant’s 
CIPP earnings pre dating the injury. (CE 7:48) It is the claimant’s burden to prove 
entitlement to benefits. Without more evidence than that which is provided, claimant is 
not able to meet the burden that he suffered a reduction in benefits during those two 
weeks and therefore the claim for late payment of TTD is moot.  
Claimant seeks full reimbursement of the IME, as well as costs including the 
report fee of Ms. Laughlin, Dr. Christiason, as well as deposition costs and filing fees. 
Defendants argue that claimant is entitled to only a portion given that the IME covered 
the issue of claimant’s ankle for the Second Injury Fund claim. Approximately 1.5 pages 
of the 6 page report pertain to the claimant’s ankle. (See CE 1:1-2, 5) Therefore, 
defendant employer and insurer are responsible for 75 percent of the IME charges. The 
claimant is entitled to recover costs at the discretion of the deputy. The entirety of Ms. 
Laughlin’s report is awarded as are all other costs in Claimant’s Exhibit 11 to be shared 
by the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
Claimant asserts he is entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 17 
 
 
 
 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer 
and Higgs, section 17-1 (2006). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 335 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal Co., 
274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970). 
Claimant argues that he sustained a first qualifying injury to his right knee that 
was injured when he was playing football in high school. Dr. Delbridge examined the 
claimant and assessed a 7 percent lower extremity impairment as a result. A first 
qualifying injury need not be a work-related injury to count. Gregory v. Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 400 (Iowa 2010). Instead, the focus is on whether the 
claimant sustained an injury to a scheduled member and that a permanent disability 
follows. The unrebutted opinion of Dr. Delbridge is that claimant has a permanent 
disability to his knee. Claimant exhibited problems during his FCE with bending, 
kneeling, squatting and crawling. This was sufficient evidence for claimant to meet his 
burden of having a permanent loss to a scheduled member.  
The second qualifying injury was to claimant’s bilateral wrists as discussed 
previously and therefore, claimant is entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa. In determining the claimant’s industrial disability for Fund liability, the Supreme 
Court has said that it is the cumulative effect of the scheduled injuries resulting in 
industrial disability to the body as a whole. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 
N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994). 
Claimant is unable to perform any of his past work due to the fact that every job 
he has held in the past required constant use of his hands. Further, claimant has 
minimal education and a learning disability which would affect his ability to retrain. The 
valid FCE results were adopted by both Dr. Gorsche and Dr. Delbridge, as well as used 
by the vocational rehabilitation specialist, Barbara McLaughlin. The FCE results placed 
claimant in the sedentary work category. According to the therapist, claimant was only 
able to exert up to 10 pounds of force occasionally and a negligent amount of force 
frequently.  He was not able to squat, crawl, or kneel.  
Claimant has presented substantial evidence that he is not employable in the 
competitive labor market in part due to defendant employer’s inability to locate work for 

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 18 
 
 
 
 
the claimant, claimant’s learning disability that has marked him as a poor candidate for 
retraining, the FCE results placing claimant in a sedentary work category, and 
claimant’s lack of familiarity with the computer a skill which most sedentary jobs would 
require. These are factors weighed irrespective of claimant’s weight gain and taking into 
consideration solely his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and knee injury. Jobs such as 
material handling, fast food, or even driving would require regular to frequent use of his 
hands and wrists. While Ms. Laughlin’s vocational assessment concluded that there 
would be 112 occupational titles available to the claimant under a transferable skills 
analysis, these positions did not take into consideration limitations in the use of hands, 
fingers, or upper extremities.  Defendant employer found one position—fork lift driving--
and while the claimant’s habitus prevented him from testing this job, no other positions 
have been offered to claimant.  
Based on the foregoing, it is found that the claimant is found to be permanently 
and totally disabled. When “both injuries are scheduled, that is, neither is itself an injury 
to the body as a whole, the Fund is liable for the entire amount of the industrial disability 
minus the two scheduled amounts.”   Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 
808, 813 (Iowa 1994).  
In this case, the two scheduled amounts are 155 weeks for the bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome and 15.4 weeks for the right lower extremity. The Fund’s responsibility 
begins 165.4 weeks following the commencement date of September 15, 2018.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, it is ordered: 
That defendants employer and insurer are to pay unto claimant one hundred fifty-
five (155) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred sixty-
nine and 02/100 dollars ($569.02) per week from September 15, 2018. 
That defendants employer and insurer are to pay claimant seventy-five (75) 
percent of the IME charges of Dr. Delbridge.  
That defendants employer and insurer shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a 
lump sum. 
That defendants employer and insurer shall pay interest on unpaid weekly 
benefits awarded herein as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.   
That defendants employer and insurer shall be credited the sums previously paid 
since September 15, 2018.  
That the claimant sustained a first and second qualifying injury entitling him to 
benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  

FECKERS V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 19 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
That the combined disability of both qualifying injuries has resulted in claimant 
being permanently and totally disabled. 
That the Fund is to pay unto claimant permanent total disability benefits at a rate 
of five hundred sixty-nine and 02/100 dollars ($569.02) commencing sixty-five point 4 
(65.4) weeks following September 15, 2018, and continuing during the period of 
permanent total disability.  The Fund’s responsibility begins one hundred sixty-five point 
four (165.4) weeks following the commencement date of September 15, 2018.  
That defendants employer and insurer and the Fund shall share equally in the 
costs itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 11, except for the IME fee which was addressed 
previously.  
Signed and filed this __6th __ day of November, 2020. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE 
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
James Kalkhoff (via WCES) 
Tonya Oetken (via WCES) 
