Case Number: 5042244
Case Title:  CHILTON, BRENDA V. HORMEL FOODS CORP
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Chilton Brenda-5042244r.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRENDA CHILTON, 
  : 
 
 
  :                   File No. 5042244 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :               REVIEW-REOPENING 
 
 
  :   
HORMEL FOODS CORP., 
  :  
 
     DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :   
 
Defendant. 
  :         Head Note Nos.:  2905, 2300 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Brenda Chilton, filed a petition for review-reopening and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from Hormel Foods Corporation, a self-insured 
employer.  The claimant was represented by Ryan Beattie.  The defendants were 
represented by Edward Rose. 
The matter came on for hearing on October 22, 2018, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa.  The record in the case 
consists of joint exhibits 1 through 5; claimant’s exhibits 6 through 7; and defense 
exhibits A through B.  The claimant testified under oath at hearing.  Amy Pederson was 
appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The parties 
also requested the agency take administrative notice of portions of the agency file.  The 
matter was fully submitted on December 10, 2018, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The primary issue in this case is whether the claimant has proven the 
prerequisites to demonstrate she is entitled to review-reopening benefits 
under Iowa Code section 86.14. 
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to medical expenses under Iowa Code 
section 85.27 as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 7. 
3. Costs are disputed, including the medical evaluation of Sunil Bansal, M.D. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-07  09:08:12     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 2 
 
 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated and/or established in the prior 
hearing: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship at the time of the injury. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on August 13, 2001. 
3. This work injury is a cause of both temporary and permanent disability. 
4. In an October 9, 2014, arbitration decision, claimant was awarded a 15 
percent industrial disability.  This decision was affirmed on appeal on 
November 30, 2015. 
5. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are not in dispute. 
6. The weekly rate of compensation is $426.36. 
7. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Brenda Chilton lives in Lovilia, Iowa and has worked at Hormel Foods for the 
past 27 years as of the time of hearing.  She testified live and under oath at hearing.  
She is a credible witness.  She was an accurate historian.  Her testimony generally 
comports with the other evidence in the record.  There was nothing about her demeanor 
at hearing which caused the undersigned any concern regarding her truthfulness. 
This case is extraordinarily old.  The first snapshot of claimant’s condition was 
taken on March 7, 2014.  On October 9, 2014, the agency entered a decision which 
legally established Ms. Chilton’s condition as of March 7, 2014.  Relevant findings of 
fact are set forth below. 
Claimant was 54 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant graduated 
from high school.  She attended a community college at Indian Hills but 
did not graduate.  (Transcript pages 10-12) 
Claimant has worked as a bartender and a cook at a bar.  She has 
worked at a convenience store.  Since 1992 claimant has worked as a 
production line worker with Hormel.  (Ex. H, p. 3; Tr. pp. 13-14) 
During her employment with Hormel, claimant also worked part time 
as a cook at the North End Tap.  Claimant worked at the North End Tap 
from 1985 through 2009.  (Ex. H, p. 6; Tr. pp. 15-16) 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 3 
 
 
At the time of her injury, claimant worked in the Cryovac line at 
Hormel.  On the Cryovac line claimant worked with salami rolls, 
approximately 17 inches long and 5-6 inches in diameter.  Claimant was 
also involved with the cutting and bagging of meat, boxing meat and 
palletizing the boxes.  (Tr. 18-25) 
Claimant testified that at approximately every hour, workers on the 
Cryovac line changed jobs.  She said she worked an average of 10 hours 
per day 5-6 days per week.  (Tr. p. 26)  Claimant testified she used her 
right arm constantly on her job.  (Tr. p. 39) 
In 2001 claimant began experiencing pain in her right shoulder.  She 
noticed her right arm began to be swollen.  (Tr. pp. 26-27) 
On August 13, 2001 claimant was evaluated by Jeffrey Davick, M.D. 
with complaints of right shoulder pain.  Claimant was assessed with right 
shoulder impingement with trapezius pain.  (Ex. A, pp. 1-2) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Davick in October of 2003 with complaints of 
symptoms in the right shoulder.  She was assessed as having an 
impingement syndrome on the right.  Claimant was recommended to go to 
Iowa City to be evaluated.  (Ex. A, pp. 3-4) 
On January 9, 2004 claimant was evaluated by Lynn Nelson, D.O. for 
neck and right shoulder pain.  A cervical MRI was recommended.  (Ex. A, 
pp. 4-7)  Claimant underwent an MRI.  It showed small degenerative 
protrusions from level C4-C7 and a C5-6 level disc herniation.  Claimant 
declined work restrictions.  She was treated with medication.  (Ex. A, pp. 
7-11) 
In a September 29, 2005 note claimant was restricted from working 
the pre-break or batching jobs at Hormel.  (Ex. 2, p. 5)  In a December 22, 
2005 note claimant was also restricted from lifting more than 50 pounds, 
or pushing more than 100 pounds more than 5 times an hour, due to her 
shoulder condition.  (Ex. 2, p. 6) 
In approximately 2009 claimant quit working at the North End Tap.  
She began working at the South End Tavern.  Claimant worked at the 
South End Tavern, and continues to work there, approximately 10-20 
hours a week.  Claimant cooks and tends bar.  Claimant testified she gave 
her son money to purchase the South End Tavern and that she only works 
there to help him out.  (Tr. 73-74) 
Claimant was returned to work with no restrictions on January 28, 
2010.  (Ex. 2, p. 10) 
 
 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 4 
 
 
On April 5, 2010 claimant saw Dr. Davick with complaints of 
numbness in the right hand.  EMG and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) 
studies were recommended.  (Ex. 8, p. 12) 
EMG/NCV testing was done on the right on April 7, 2010.  Test results 
were normal.  Claimant was given a subacromial injection by Dr. Davick 
for pain.  (Ex. A, p. 12; Ex. C, pp. 1-2) 
An MRI of claimant’s cervical spine on June 4, 2010 showed 
degenerative spondylosis with mild disc protrusions at the C5-C7 levels.  
Claimant was referred to a hand specialist.  (Ex. 2, p. 15; Ex. A, p. 14) 
Claimant saw Delwin Quenzer, M.D., a hand specialist, on July 14, 
2010.  Dr. Quenzer recommended against surgery.  Claimant indicated 
she did not want to take off or be restricted from work.  (Ex. A, pp. 16-17) 
On October 11, 2011 claimant underwent EMG/NCV studies.  They 
showed claimant had a right carpal tunnel syndrome, but did not show 
evidence of a right cervical radiculopathy.  (Ex. C, pp. 3-4) 
On October 15, 2010 claimant was evaluated by Christian Ledet, M.D.  
Dr. Ledet is an anesthesiologist specializing in pain management.  A 
cervical epidural steroid injection (ESI) was recommended.  Claimant was 
found to be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and had no 
permanent impairment for her neck.  (Ex. A, pp. 24-26) 
On December 14, 2010 claimant underwent a right shoulder surgery 
consisting of a subacromial decompression and a distal clavicle excision.  
Surgery was performed by Dr. Davick.  (Ex. A, pp. 28-30) 
On February 9, 2011 claimant was returned to work with no 
restrictions by Dr. Davick.  She was found to be at MMI.  (Ex. A, pp. 34-
35) 
In a February 16, 2011 note, Dr. Davick found claimant had a 14 
percent permanent impairment to the right upper extremity, converting to 
an 8 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  Claimant had 
no permanent restrictions.  (Ex. A, p. 37) 
On October 6, 2011 claimant was evaluated by Dr. Quenzer with 
complaints of elbow pain and some finger numbness.  EMG and NCV 
studies were recommended.  (Ex. A, pp. 43-44) 
EMG/NCV studies performed on October 11, 2011 found that claimant 
had a right carpal tunnel syndrome in the right upper extremity.  (Ex. C, 
pp. 3-4) 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 5 
 
 
In February, April, and July of 2012 claimant was evaluated at Mercy 
Ruan Neurological Clinic for migraines.  Claimant believed her migraines 
were triggered by her right arm pain.  Claimant was treated with 
medication.  (Ex. 3, pp. 18-23) 
Claimant testified she was sent to Mercy Ruan by Dr. Ledet.  (Tr. 49)  
She said an overuse of her right arm and pain in her right shoulder 
seemed to trigger her migraines.  She testified she takes prescription 
medication for migraines, which seemed to help with her symptoms.  (Tr. 
pp. 50-54) 
In an August 21, 2012 report, Sunil Bansal, M.D., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an independent medical evaluation (IME).  
Claimant complained of continued right shoulder and arm pain.  Claimant 
also had numbness and tingling in the right hand.  Claimant noted difficulty 
with sleeping due to pain.  (Ex. 1) 
Dr. Bansal agreed claimant was at MMI on February 9, 2011.  He 
found claimant had a 5 percent permanent impairment to the neck.  He 
also found that claimant had an 18 percent permanent impairment to the 
right shoulder, converting to a 10 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole.  He opined that the combined values of both the neck 
and right shoulder resulted in a 15 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole.  He restricted claimant from lifting no more than 
35 pounds and pushing and pulling no more than 40 pounds.  He also 
found claimant had a depressive condition as a result of the August 13, 
2001 injury, and recommended claimant be evaluated for depression.  
(Ex. 1) 
Claimant testified that she has daily pain across her right shoulder, 
through her trapezius muscle, into the right side of her neck.  She said this 
pain is aggravated by work.  (Tr. pp. 54-55)  Claimant said that 
improvements made in the line at Hormel have made work less 
aggravating to her neck and shoulder condition.  (Tr. p. 40) 
Claimant testified that because of her shoulder pain, she is limited in 
activities with her grandchildren.  She said she was also limited in yard 
work and work around her house.  (Tr. p. 56) 
Claimant testified she has worked full duty for most of the last 14 
years.  She said she sometimes works up to 48 hours per week.  Claimant 
testified she works the same hours now as she did in 2001.  She said she 
makes more money now than she did in 2001 because of increases in her 
hourly wages under a collective bargaining agreement.  (Tr. pp. 68-71) 
 
 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 6 
 
 
Todd Yocum testified he is the plant superintendent at Hormel plant 
where claimant works.  In that capacity he is familiar with claimant and her 
job at Hormel.  (Tr. 88-89)  Mr. Yocum testified claimant works full time 
and sometimes works overtime hours.  (Tr. 93) 
Mr. Yocum testified that Hormel has improved the line where claimant 
works.  He said these improvements were not done specifically for 
claimant, but benefit all workers on the line.  (Tr. 93)  Mr. Yocum testified 
that claimant’s direct supervisor, John Short, has not indicated that 
claimant has difficulty doing her job.  Mr. Yocum testified that he 
occasionally sees claimant working and that claimant does not appear to 
have difficulty performing her job.  (Tr. pp. 94-96) 
Mr. Yocum said that claimant has not been put in a job due to her 
shoulder problems.  He said that claimant has been taken out of heavier 
physical positions at the plant.  This decision was based on restrictions 
given to him by Lloyd Thurston, D.O.  (Tr. 99-106) 
(Arb. October 9, 2014, pp. 2-5) 
 
Based upon these findings of fact, the agency awarded the claimant a 15 percent 
industrial disability.  (Arb., p. 6)  The agency also awarded Ms. Chilton medical 
expenses and alternate medical care with Mercy Ruan Neurology for her headaches. 
As detailed above, Dr. Ledet, an authorized physician, referred 
claimant to Mercy Ruan Neurology.  (Ex. 3, p. 2; Ex. A, p. 21; Tr. p. 49)  
As an authorized treating physician has referred claimant to treat at Mercy 
Ruan Neurology, claimant is entitled to the alternate medical care with 
Mercy Ruan Neurology. 
(Arb., p. 8) 
The second snapshot of Ms. Chilton’s condition was taken on October 22, 2018.  
After her March 2014, hearing, she continued to work on the cryovac line for a period of 
time.  Eventually, through the union bid process, she was able to secure a different 
position.  While she was still on the cryovac line, she became an operator.  This position 
did not require lifting.  Instead, she slid five pound pieces of meat into bags.  She 
continued to experience symptoms in her neck and shoulder.  She testified that her 
headaches became more frequent and the pain was worse. 
Sometime thereafter, Ms. Chilton bid onto the rosa line.  This job required her to 
seal and palletize 10-pound bags of meat.  She testified that the rosa line position was 
significantly lighter than the operator position, although it still aggravated her symptoms.  
In 2016, Hormel closed the rosa line.  Ms. Chilton briefly moved to the slice line before 
securing a utility position.  The utility position is essentially a cleaning job.  She uses a  
 
 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 7 
 
 
squeegee to remove pepperoni from the floor, she dumps garbage cans and moves film 
around in dry storage.  The utility position is lighter than any of the other positions she 
has held.  
Ms. Chilton testified at hearing that her right shoulder has gotten worse primarily 
due to the physical activities at work.  Regular use of her shoulder aggravates her 
symptoms and this can vary on a daily basis.  She testified at hearing that seemingly 
insignificant activities such as turning wrong or jerking her arm can set off pain across 
her shoulder and up her neck, which leads to headaches. 
Ms. Chilton’s medical care since the first hearing has primarily been managed by 
her primary care physician at Pella Regional Medical Clinics (PRMC).  In 2015, PRMC 
documented right shoulder pain and weakness beginning in 2001 and cervical 
discomfort.  (Joint Exhibit 5, page 52)  Her diagnoses were chronic migraine cephalgia, 
chronic cervical spine and shoulder pain and depression.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 54)  Her 
treatment provider managed her medications, provided FMLA paperwork and follow up 
with her routine appointments through Mercy Neurology Clinic.  She has continued to 
follow up through PRMC through the date of hearing.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 55-82)  In May 2018, 
she requested a referral to Iowa Ortho for evaluation of her right shoulder pain.  (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 84) 
During this same timeframe, Ms. Chilton has continued to treat with Mercy Ruan 
Neurology for her headaches.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 7-29)  Mark Puricelli, D.O., last saw Ms. 
Chilton on April 14, 2017, providing medications and other treatment for her. 
On November 14, 2017, after conferencing with defense counsel, Dr. Puricelli 
signed an opinion letter written by defense counsel on defense counsel letterhead 
indicating his medical opinion regarding Ms. Chilton’s headaches. 
It is merely ‘possible’, as opposed to ‘probable’ or ‘likely’, that Ms. 
Chilton’s cumulative work injury date of 8/13/01 and further cumulative 
work at Hormel thereafter forms a ‘material’ causally contributing factor 
with respect to her chronic migraine headaches. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 31)  I do not find this medical opinion compelling. 
In approximately May 2018, Ms. Chilton testified she aggravated her ongoing 
right shoulder pain while pushing a box on a taper machine.  Ms. Chilton returned to Dr. 
Davick on June 18, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 32-33)  Dr. Davick noted that she was doing 
well with her right shoulder until recently, stating “she was doing well with her right 
shoulder until a month ago.  She was moving some boxes and had to force them 
through a taper.  This caused pain in the right shoulder that has persisted.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
32)  He diagnosed right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis and right shoulder previous 
decompression and distal clavicle excision.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 33)  He ordered a new MRI, 
which did not demonstrate any new tearing.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 43)  He also sent her to 
physical therapy.  He provided an injection for pain on July 30, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 36)  

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 8 
 
 
Dr. Davick signed an opinion letter on defense counsel letterhead, indicating he opined 
that her “current right shoulder condition, for which she initially saw you on 6/18/18 is 
not causally related to her 8/13/01 work injury based upon the history she conveyed to 
you.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 40) 
I find this opinion somewhat puzzling.  Dr. Davick’s working diagnosis in June 
2018 included right shoulder previous decompression and distal clavicle incision, which 
was the surgery from the August 2001 injury.  I interpret his opinion to mean that he 
believes her injury in May 2018, was a new, intervening injury which substantially 
aggravated her preexisting condition. 
In September 2018, Sunil Bansal, M.D., evaluated Ms. Chilton.  He thoroughly 
reviewed her medical records since her previous hearing and examined her.  (Cl. Ex. 6, 
pp. 2-7)  He also took a complete history.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 6)  He had previously examined 
her prior to the first hearing in 2012.  (Arb. Ex. 1)  I have reviewed the previous report 
thoroughly.  Dr. Bansal opined that “Ms. Chilton’s right shoulder range of motion and 
functionality has worsened since she was last seen”.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 8)  He then rated her 
impairment based upon his examination, opining she now suffers from a 13 percent 
whole body impairment, rather than a 10 percent whole body impairment based upon 
documented range of motion measurements.  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 8-9)  I find there is some 
decrease in her range of motion from the time of the first hearing.  (Compare Cl. Ex. 6, 
p. 8 with Arb. Ex. 1, p. 14)  Dr. Bansal recommended severe permanent restrictions, 
including no “lifting greater than 10 pounds occasionally , or 5 pounds frequently with 
the right arm, along with no lifting above shoulder level away from the body with the 
right arm.”  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 9)  He also recommended no frequent reaching.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 
9)  Ms. Chilton, however, does not utilize these restrictions at work because she has to 
keep working.  She testified she has looked for other jobs because she does not feel 
that she can keep working for Hormel.  It is too hard on her shoulder. 
Ms. Chilton presented unpaid medical bills from Mercy Ruan Neurology in the 
amount of $3,932.00, for headache treatment in 2017.  (Cl. Ex. 7)  I find these medical 
expenses are causally connected to the August 13, 2001, work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first and primary question is whether the legal elements for review-reopening 
have been met in light of the findings of facts set forth above.  Ms. Chilton alleges she 
has proven that her right shoulder and cervical symptoms have worsened since March 
2014, causing an increase in industrial disability.  The defendants argue that her 
condition has not changed significantly and that she has suffered a new injury which 
explains her current problems. 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 86.14, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon.  Iowa Code section 86.14(2) (2017).  In order to demonstrate 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 9 
 
 
eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 86.14(2), the claimant must 
demonstrate what her physical or economic condition was at the time of the original 
award or settlement.  At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant has the 
burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which warrants 
an increase in compensation.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009).  
The difference can be economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  
Essentially, two snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each hearing or 
settlement.  The claimant must prove that there is something substantially different 
between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits.  Gosek v. 
Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at 392.  Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to relitigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.”  The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot.  Id.   
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  When a work-related injury causes another injury to the 
worker, this new injury (sequela) may also be considered as a work-related injury under 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws. 
When an employee suffers from a compensable injury and another condition or 
injury arises that is the consequence or result of the previous injury, the sequelae rule 
applies.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and later suffers further disability, 
which is the proximate result of the original injury, such further disability is 
compensable.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and thereafter returns to 
work and, as a result, the first injury is aggravated and accelerated so that the employee 
is more greatly disabled than they were before returning to work, the entire disability 
may be compensable.  The employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and 
proximately flow from the accident.   Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-
68, 266 N.W. 480 (1936).  
In order to apply the facts to the law, the two snapshots must be contrasted and 
compared.  The first snapshot was taken at the time of the first hearing in March 2014.  
At that time, Ms. Chilton had a surgically-repaired right shoulder condition with an 
impairment rating between 8 and 10 percent.  Dr. Bansal had recommended restrictions 
or lifting no more than 35 pounds and pushing and pulling no more than 40 pounds.  
She continued to work at Hormel on the cryovac line, earning more money than she did 
prior to the injury.  Dr. Davick had released her with no restrictions.  She had ongoing 
symptoms in her right shoulder and cervical spine which caused disabling migraine  
 
 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 10 
 
 
headaches several times per month.  She was apparently working under some medical 
restrictions at that time from Dr. Thurston which prevented her from securing permanent 
employment at that time. 
The second snapshot was October 2018.  At that time, there were few objective 
changes in Ms. Chilton’s right shoulder condition.  There is evidence that her range of 
motion had decreased some between March 2014 and October 2018, creating 
additional functional impairment (increased from 10 percent to 13 percent whole body).  
Dr. Bansal recommended much more severe restrictions, including no “lifting greater 
than 10 pounds occasionally, or 5 pounds frequently with the right arm, along with no 
lifting above shoulder level away from the body with the right arm.”  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 9)  He 
also recommended no frequent reaching.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 9)  Ms. Chilton does not follow 
these restrictions as of the date of hearing.  Rather, she treats them as 
recommendations.  She had regular treatment for headaches following March 2014.  
This treatment was denied in 2017.  She had some additional treatment on her right 
shoulder in mid-2018, however, MRI tests revealed no new tears or other pathology. 
Ms. Chilton testified credibly that she feels her pain is worse since March 2014.  
While it is undoubtedly true that she subjectively feels this is the case, it is not 
quantifiable in any meaningful way.  She has changed jobs to an easier position at 
Hormel.  With her years of seniority, her position appears secure at the time of hearing.  
Ms. Chilton needs to keep working and earning enough money to survive, so she has 
not quit.  She has, however, begun looking for alternative, lighter employment which 
would be easier on her medical condition. 
Considering all of the appropriate factors for weighing Ms. Chilton’s claim for 
review-reopening, I find that she has failed to meet her burden of proof that review-
reopening is warranted.  While she has had some reduction in her range of motion, I do 
not find this significant enough to warrant review-reopening.  Her new recommended 
restrictions also do not warrant review-reopening.  While Ms. Chilton probably should 
have switched jobs, she has not done so for economic reasons.  She is able to continue 
working a real, unaccommodated job for Hormel and she earns more money than she 
did at the time of her injury. 
The next issue is medical expenses.  The claimant seeks medical payments for 
the bills from Mercy Ruan Neurology which were deemed compensable in the prior 
arbitration award.  Defendants argue that these bills are not causally connected to her 
work injury. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 11 
 
 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by section 17A.14.  
The agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge 
may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in 
the courts are not controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of 
evidence on which reasonably prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of 
serious affairs.  Health care is a serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 124 N.W.2d 548 
(1963).  
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
I find that defendant owes the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 7.  
These expenses were found to be causally connected to her work injury in the original 
arbitration decision.  The fact that the defendant has secured a new expert medical 
opinion regarding causation is immaterial.  The defendant had an opportunity at the first 
hearing to present medical causation evidence.  At the time Hormel secured the new 
medical causation opinion in 2017, there was no evidence of an intervening injury which 
would break the chain of causation.  Defendant must pay the bills set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 7, as Mercy Ruan Neurology remains an authorized treatment provider. 
The final issue is costs. 
 
 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 12 
 
 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).   
Using the discretion set forth in Section 85.40, defendant shall pay the cost of Dr. 
Bansal’s report as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 6, page 12, in the amount of $1,517.00 
 
 

CHILTON V. HORMEL FOODS CORP. 
Page 13 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant has failed to prove the elements required to reopen the case for 
additional weekly benefits. 
Defendant shall pay medical expenses as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 7, in the 
amount of three thousand nine hundred thirty-two and no/100 ($3,932.00), consistent 
with this decision. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendant in the amount of one thousand five hundred 
seventeen and no/100 ($1,517.00). 
Signed and filed this __7th __ day of February, 2020. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Ryan Beattie (via WCES) 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
