Case Number: 5054642.03
Case Title:  GARDNER, SHANNON V. MENARDS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Gardner Shannon-5054642.03mJRD.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
SHANNON GARDNER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 5054642.03 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
MENARDS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
     ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
 
          DECISION  
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
PRAETORIAN INSURANCE CO., 
  :  
 
 
  :                     Head Note: 2701    
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
 
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedures of rule 876 IAC 4.48, the “alternate medical care” rule, are 
invoked by claimant, Shannon Gardner.  
 
 
This alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on December 9, 2024. The 
proceedings were recorded digitally and constitute the official record of the hearing.  By 
an order filed by the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this decision is designated 
final agency action. Any appeal would be by petition for judicial review under Iowa Code 
section 17A.15(1).  
 
 
The record in this case consists of Claimant’s Exhibit 1, Defendants’ Exhibits A-
E, and the testimony of claimant.  
 
ISSUE 
 
 
The issue presented for resolution in this case is whether claimant is entitled to 
alternate medical care consisting of authorization for care and treatment with Towncrest 
Wellness Apothecary, physical therapy as recommended by Fred Dery, M.D., and 
transfer of client’s prescription medications and supplements to claimant’s primary care 
provider (PCP).  
 
FINDING OF FACTS 
 
 
In a December 20, 2019, arbitration decision, claimant was found to have a work-
related back injury. That decision was affirmed on intra-agency appeal. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-10  11:28:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GARDNER V. MENARDS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
In a May 3, 2023 note, Fred Dery, M.D. referred claimant to Towncrest Wellness 
Apothecary (Towncrest) for management of supplements for her low back and leg 
pain. (Exhibit 1, page 3) 
 
 
Claimant was evaluated by Dr. Dery on September 20, 2023. Claimant was 
evaluated as having postlamincetomy syndrome with lumbar pain dramatically improved 
by supplements. Claimant was continued on a supplement regime. (Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Claimant was seen by Dr. Dery on July 22, 2024. Claimant was again assessed as 
having a postlamincetomy syndrome.  Claimant was continued on supplements.  (Ex. 1, 
pp. 5-6) 
 
 
Claimant was evaluated by Dr. Dery on October 7, 2024.  Dr. Dery indicated he 
would get an MRI of claimant’s back and would “…consider some injections and get her 
into PT.”  Dr. Dery indicated “…we are going to pursue additional imaging with an MRI, 
PT, and home exercise.” (Ex. E, pp. 9-10) 
 
 
On October 7, 2024, Dr. Dery prescribed claimant undergo physical therapy with 
Kepros PT. (Ex. 1, p. 7) 
 
 
In an October 23, 2024, report, Kurt Smith, D.O. indicated he performed a review 
of claimant’s records with Steindler Clinic and Towncrest.  Dr. Smith opined 
supplements from Towncrest were not medically necessary.  He indicated claimant had 
exhausted treatment options and treatment was only for maintenance and control of 
symptoms.  (Ex. D) 
 
In a November 11, 2024, email claimant’s counsel’s office asked defendants to 
pay bills from Towncrest and to approve physical therapy for claimant.  (Ex. 1, p. 1) 
 
Claimant was evaluated by Dr. Dery on November 18, 2024.  Dr. Dery noted 
claimant had been doing well with prescription medication and supplements.  Claimant 
was to continue on prescription medications and supplements.  (Ex. 1, pp. 8-9) 
 
At that visit, Dr. Dery noted: “Shannon has been on a stable dose of non-opioid 
medications which we are currently not actively managing.  For well over a decade, the 
Steindler Clinic’s policy has been to have medications that we are not actively managing 
transitioned to the PCP for refills…As noted, our office will not be refilling medication 
that we are not actively managing and are both safe and appropriate for the PCP to refill 
going forward.”  (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
 
Dr. Dery went on to indicate: “Ongoing medical management, if needed, should 
be provided locally by the PCP or an Occ Med doctor…This letter will act as a referral 
for the Worker’s [sic] Compensation Insurance Carrier to assist the patient with locating 
a provider for maintenance of medications/supplement/adjunct treatments and given 
that she has a well-established primary care in the area this should go to her 
primary care, Dr. Schuster.” (Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) (emphasis added) 
 

GARDNER V. MENARDS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
An invoice from Towncrest dated November 22, 2024, indicated an outstanding 
balance for claimant totaling $2,704.53.  (Ex. 1, p 2) 
 
Emails from Towncrest on November 26, 2024, and December 2, 2024, indicated 
payments had been received for supplements.  The emails indicated claimant still had 
outstanding balances.  In a November 25, 2024, email, defendants requested 
information from Towncrest regarding double billing.  There is no response in the record 
from Towncrest regarding concerns with double billing.  (Ex. C) 
 
Claimant testified that because of her pain from her back condition, she had been 
considering placement of a spinal cord stimulator (SCS).  She said that medications and 
supplements prescribed by Dr. Dery have improved her symptoms.  She said she would 
like to continue the medications and supplements prescribed by Dr. Dery as they have 
been very beneficial.  She said she would like to have her PCP, Dr. Schuster (no first 
name given) to prescribe medications and supplements recommended by Dr. Dery. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3).  
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers  compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975).       
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care –
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). Determining what care is 
reasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Id. The employer’s obligation turns on 
the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability. Id. at 124; Harned v. Farmland 
Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98, 101 (Iowa 1983).   An application for alternate medical care 
is not automatically sustained because claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has 
been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with medical care is not ample grounds for 
granting an application for alternate medical care.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
 
A decision in an alternate medical care proceeding operates prospective only, 
not retroactively.  Moline v. Nordstrom, File No. 1273226 (December 21, 2000) 
 
In her petition for alternate medical care, claimant seeks authorization for 
physical therapy recommended by Dr. Dery.  She also requests the management and 

GARDNER V. MENARDS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
prescribing of medications and supplements recommended by Dr. Dery be transferred 
to her PCP. 
 
Regarding the physical therapy, defendants counsel indicated defendants have 
agreed to authorize physical therapy recommended by Dr. Dery.  Therefore, defendants 
shall schedule physical therapy with Kepros as recommended by Dr. Dery within two 
weeks from the date of this decision.  The actual appointment does not need to occur by 
this date. 
 
Regarding the authorization of medications and supplements, defendants 
contend that based on the opinion of Dr. Smith, the supplements recommended by Dr. 
Dery are not medically necessary.  (Ex. D) 
 
An employer’s failure to follow recommendations of an authorized physician in 
matters of treatment is commonly a failure to provide reasonable treatment. Boggs v. 
Cargill, Inc., File No. 1050396 (Alt. Care Decision January 31, 1994)  
 
The right to choose the care means the right to choose the provider, not the 
treatment modalities recommended by the provider.  Employers must provide the 
treatment, testing, imaging or other treatment modalities recommended by its own 
authorized treating physician, even if another consulting physician disagrees with those 
recommendations.  Haack v. Von Hoffman Graphics, File No. 1268172, p. 9 (App. July 
31, 2002) [MRI and x-rays]; Cahill v. S & H Fabricating & Engineering, Alt. Care 
Decision, File No. 1138063, May 30, 1997 (work hardening program);  Hawxby v. Hallett 
Materials, File No. 1112821, Alt. Care Decision February 20, 1996.  Leitzen v. Collis, 
Inc. File No. 1084677, Alt Care Decision September 9, 1996.  The right to choose the 
care does not authorize the employer to interfere with the medical judgment of its own 
treating physician. Boggs v. Cargill, Inc., File No. 1050396 (Alt. Care Decision January 
31, 1994)  
 
Dr. Dery is an authorized provider.  Dr. Dery prescribed and recommended the 
medications and supplements detailed in Exhibit 1, page 8.  Agency precedent indicates 
that, in this case, defendants must provide the medications and supplements 
recommend by Dr. Dery, as detailed in in Exhibit 1, page 8. 
 
As noted, Dr. Dery indicated that management of medications and supplements 
could be transferred to a PCP.  He also indicated that ongoing management of 
medications and supplements should be managed by a PCP or an occupational 
medicine physician.  However, because Dr. Dery indicated several times that 
medications and supplement management be moved to a PCP, and because he 
specifically named claimant’s PCP, Dr. Schuster, management of claimant’s 
prescription medications and supplements is transferred to Dr. Schuster. (Ex. 1, pp. 9-
10) 
 
 
 

GARDNER V. MENARDS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
ORDER 
 
Therefore, it is ordered that claimant’s petition for alternate medical care is 
granted.  Defendants shall schedule physical therapy appointments with Kepros as 
recommended by Dr. Dery within two weeks from the date of this decision.  The actual 
appointment does not need to occur by this date. 
 
Defendants shall also authorize and pay for medications and supplements as 
detailed in Exhibit 1, page 8 as recommended by Dr. Dery.  Defendants shall also 
authorize the continued management of claimant’s medications and supplements with 
Dr. Schuster. 
 
Signed and filed this    10th    day of December, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 Thomas M. Wertz (via WCES) 
 
 Charles A. Blades (via WCES) 
 
  
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
