Case Number: 5067929
Case Title:  HENRY, RHONDA C V. TYSON FOODS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Henry Rhonda-5067929D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RHONDA HENRY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                          File No. 5067929 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :              Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 2402, 
 
Defendant. 
  :              2502, 2701 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Rhonda Henry, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Tyson Foods, Inc., self-insured employer.  This matter was 
heard on September 15, 2020 with a final submission date of October 23, 2020. 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-26, 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-L, and the testimony of claimant. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
Whether clamant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
employment. 
Whether claimant’s claim for benefits is barred by application of Iowa Code 
section 85.26. 
Whether there is a causal connection between the injury and the claimed medical 
expenses. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Dec-07  09:29:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was 60 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant graduated from high 
school.  Claimant has worked on a farm and at a Baskin Robbins store. 
Claimant began working for Tyson, then known as IBP, in 1987.  Claimant 
testified that during the 33 years she has worked at the plant, it has always been on the 
processing side. 
Claimant has worked several different jobs during her 33 years as an employee 
at Tyson.  Claimant testified that for approximately 12-14 years, she worked on a trim 
strip position.  In that job claimant cut meat with her right hand and grabbed and moved 
meat on a hook with her left hand.  (Transcript pages 17-18) 
For approximately two years, claimant worked the drop flank job.  In this job, 
claimant cut with a knife with her right hand and moved meat with a hook in her left 
hand.  Claimant said this job required her to work between shoulder and nose level.  
(Tr. p. 20)  Plant records indicate that claimant indicated she had left shoulder and arm 
pain from this job.  (JE2, p. 6) 
For approximately five years, claimant worked a Bader machine.  In this job, 
claimant pushed plate bones across the table into a machine.  Claimant said the bones 
weighed between two to four pounds each.  Claimant said the job was done at chest 
level.  (Tr. p. 22)  Claimant said that her shoulder symptoms began around the time that 
she was working on the Bader machine.  (Tr. p. 58) 
From 2003 through April of 2017, claimant worked the skinner operator job.  In 
that job, claimant pulled slabs of meat, called culottes, from one conveyor belt and then 
put the meat on a belt on her left.  Claimant also moved fat from the belt.  Claimant said 
not all meat on the belt on her right were culottes and claimant had to grab the culottes 
with a three-foot hook.  A video of this job is found at Exhibit L.  A job description is 
found at Exhibit 2, page 7; Exhibit 3, page 11; Exhibit 17, page 40 and Exhibit H.  The 
ergonomic analysis of the job is found at Exhibit K. 
Exhibit L is a short video of claimant’s job.  It shows a worker putting together the 
skinner operator area and tearing the area down.  It also shows a worker taking meat 
from a moving production belt on the right and putting the meat on a smaller belt on the 
left.  The video also shows the employee putting what appears to be fat onto another 
area off the belt.  Video shown in Exhibit L was shot in June of 2020, approximately 
three years after claimant left the job.  Claimant testified the job shown in Exhibit L is 
done at a slower pace than the rate that claimant worked while on the job.  (Tr. p. 56) 
Claimant’s description of the job is found at Exhibit 2, page 7.  The ergonomic 
analysis for the job reads, in part: 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
While running the machine throughout the day the Team Member 
transfers product from a moving conveyor directly in front of the 
workstation with the use of a hand hook or long hook and properly 
positions it onto the infeed belt for the skinner, located directly next to the 
workstation.  Product weights [sic] approximately 3-6 lbs.  All belts are at a 
consistent height. 
(Exhibit K, p. 1) 
The ergonomic analysis indicates that there is no reaching overhead and no 
reaching at chest height.  The ergonomic analysis also suggests that the job has a 
“minimal” impact on the shoulder.  (Ex. K, p. 1) 
Claimant testified her job required her to reach out, hook and pull approximately 
4,800 culottes each day.  (Tr. pp. 32-33; Ex. A, p. 9)  Claimant said she developed 
some shoulder symptoms in 2004, on this job, that never went away.  (Tr. pp. 60-61) 
Claimant’s prior medical history is relevant.  In 1995, claimant reported left 
shoulder pain while dropping flanks.  (JE2, p. 6) 
Claimant testified at hearing she had right shoulder symptoms while working on 
the Bader machine.  (Tr. p. 58) 
When the Bader machine was discontinued, claimant returned to dropping flanks 
in February of 2012.  Claimant gave notice, on return to the dropping flanks position, of 
pain in her hands, arms and shoulders.  (JE2, p. 7)  A few weeks later, claimant 
reported no symptoms.  (JE2, p. 8) 
In 2012, claimant reported right shoulder pain caused by repetitive gripping, 
pulling and reaching.  (JE2, p. 10)  Claimant also testified having symptoms in her left 
shoulder in 2012 that slowly progressed due to repetitive motion at work.  (Ex. A, p. 10) 
In March of 2012, a plant nurse assessed claimant’s condition as being resolved.  
(JE2, p. 14)  Claimant returned to her job as a skinner operator at full duty. 
Claimant testified that on April 13, 2017, she went to the plant nurse after putting 
together the skinner operator machine as she was having too much trouble with her 
right arm and shoulder.  (Tr. p. 38) 
On the day claimant reported the injury, she was seen by the plant nurse.  
Claimant indicated the repetitive work, where claimant pulled product from a belt and 
put it on a machine, was the cause of her pain.  Records indicate that claimant had 
been doing the skinner operator job for approximately 13 years.  (Tr. pp. 86-87) 
On or about April 20, 2017, claimant was put on a different job called a pick trim 
position.  (JE4, p. 18) 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
On May 3, 2017, claimant was evaluated by Douglas Martin, M.D.  Claimant had 
problems with lifting above shoulder level on the right.  Claimant was evaluated as 
having right shoulder glenohumeral and AC joint degenerative joint disease.  Based on 
the repetitive nature of claimant’s job, Dr. Martin recommended claimant have an MRI of 
the right shoulder.  (JE5, pp. 28-29) 
On May 8, 2017, claimant had an MRI of the right shoulder.  It showed advanced 
glenohumeral arthrosis and AC joint arthrosis.  The MRI also showed a small 
full-thickness tear and tendinosis of the supraspinatus tendon.  Claimant was assessed 
as having advanced degenerative joint disease on the right.  Dr. Martin indicated 
claimant was probably a candidate for a total right shoulder replacement.  Dr. Martin 
opined claimant’s shoulder condition was not work related.  (JE5, pp. 31-32) 
In an August 7, 2017 letter to a Tyson claims examiner, Dr. Martin opined that 
claimant’s 28-year plant employment at Tyson, requiring repetitive activity with the 
upper extremities, did not result in a repetitive work injury to the right shoulder.  (Ex. G, 
p. 2)  He attributed claimant’s shoulder injury to other non-occupational risk factors.  
(Ex. G, p. 3) 
In a January 28, 2019 report, Michael O’Neil, M.D., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME.  Dr. O’Neil opined claimant’s right shoulder 
condition was work related.  This was based, in part, on the fact that claimant had 
performed repetitive work for defendant employer for approximately 31 years.  He 
opined claimant needed a total right shoulder replacement.  (Ex. 4) 
In an April 22, 2019 report, Edward Fehringer, M.D., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME.  Dr. Fehringer opined claimant’s right shoulder 
condition was not work related, but was more likely attributed to an underlying 
degenerative condition.  He found claimant was not at MMI and recommended claimant 
have a right shoulder replacement.  (Ex. C) 
Claimant was evaluated by Mark Goebel, M.D., on December 16, 2019 with 
complaints of right shoulder pain.  Claimant had advanced arthritic changes in the right 
glenohumeral joint.  In the left shoulder, claimant had a rotator cuff tear.  Claimant was 
recommended to have a right shoulder replacement.  (Ex. 11) 
In a March 10, 2020 report, Sunil Bansal, M.D., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following an IME.  Dr. Bansal assessed claimant as having glenohumeral 
arthritis and a right shoulder rotator cuff tear.  Dr. Bansal recommended a right shoulder 
replacement and an MRI of the left shoulder.  (Ex. 18, pp. 43-48) 
Dr. Bansal opined that claimant had a cumulative overuse injury to the right 
shoulder.  He based this opinion on an understanding that claimant had worked 
approximately 30 years at various highly repetitive jobs at Tyson.  (Ex. 18, p. 49) 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
In a June 1, 2020 report, Joshua Kimelman, M.D., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following an IME.  Dr. Kimelman suspected claimant had an “unknown” 
arthritic condition for her right shoulder.  He did not believe claimant’s right shoulder 
condition was related to her job.  He limited claimant to lifting ten pounds on the right 
with no lifting above shoulder level.  (Ex. D) 
In a June 12, 2020 letter, Dr. O’Neil indicated he had reviewed medical records, 
including IME reports from Drs. Bansal, Goebel and Fehringer.  He indicated his opinion 
of claimant’s condition was unchanged following review of these reports.  He opined 
claimant’s repetitive work at Tyson caused or accelerated the pathology in claimant’s 
left shoulder.  (Ex. 6) 
In a June 18, 2020 note, written by defendant’s counsel, Dr. Kimelman indicated 
he had read Dr. O’Neil’s report.  Dr. Kimelman indicated he disagreed with the opinions 
of Dr. O’Neil regarding causation.  (Ex. E) 
In an August 6, 2020 note, Dr. Kimelman indicated that he had reviewed the 
ergonomic analysis of claimant’s job at Tyson.  He again opined that he did not believe 
claimant’s shoulder condition was caused by performing the skinner job.  (Ex. F) 
In an August 3, 2020 letter, Dr. O’Neil indicated he had discussed the causation 
of claimant’s injury with Dr. Goebel.  Both doctors agreed claimant did not have an 
inflammatory type of arthritis in the right shoulder.  Claimant also did not have any 
history of psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, adult-onset Still’s disease, 
scleroderma, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, or systematic lupus.  Dr. O’Neil indicated that 
both he and Dr. Goebel again believe claimant had a “wear-and-tear” type of injury in 
the right shoulder caused by repetitive work at Tyson.  (Ex. 8) 
In a September 3, 2020 supplemental opinion, Dr. Bansal indicated he had 
reviewed additional records of claimant, including medical records, exams, diagnostic 
testing, and video of claimant’s jobs.  He also reviewed correspondence from experts.  
Dr. Bansal opined that as claimant did not have symptoms associated with inflammatory 
arthritis, the cause of claimant’s right shoulder condition was the repetitive use of her 
upper extremities in over 30 years’ work at Tyson.  (Ex. 19) 
In a September 8, 2020 letter, written by claimant’s counsel, Dr. O’Neil indicated 
he reviewed the video of claimant’s job of skinner operator and took this information into 
account regarding his opinions.  (Ex. 9, p. 24) 
In a September 10, 2020 letter, Dr. Goebel indicated he reviewed Dr. Kimelman 
and Fehringer’s opinions.  He noted that if claimant had inflammatory arthritis, it would 
likely have been diagnosed with another underlying inflammatory condition.  Claimant 
did not have a diagnosis of another underlying inflammatory condition.  Testing also 
suggested that claimant had no evidence of an inflammatory condition.  Based on his 
review of the radiographic evidence, Dr. Goebel did not find a specific inflammatory 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
arthritis in claimant’s right shoulder.  He again opined that claimant’s right shoulder 
condition was due to claimant’s repetitive work at Tyson for over 30 years.  (Ex. 15) 
At the time of hearing, claimant was still working for Tyson in the pick trim 
position.  Claimant had no work restrictions on that job.  Claimant does work some 
overtime.  Claimant’s hourly earnings have increased since leaving the culottes skinner 
job.  (Ex. A, pp. 15-16) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is whether claimant sustained an injury to her 
shoulders that arose out of and in the course of employment. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
Claimant worked at Tyson for approximately 33 years on the production side of 
the plant.  The record indicates that every job claimant has worked at Tyson required 
repetitive use of her upper extremities.  Claimant worked at the skinner operator job 
from 2003 to April of 2017.  Claimant’s unrebutted testimony is that she pulled and 
moved approximately 4,800 culottes per shift, for approximately 14 years.  This would 
result in claimant pulling and moving pieces of meat approximately 192,000 times per 
week, and approximately 9,984,000 times per year. 
Six experts have opined regarding the causal connection between claimant’s job 
and her shoulder condition. 
Dr. Martin opined claimant’s work at Tyson did not cause the condition to her 
shoulders as there was no injury.  He also opined claimant’s shoulder condition was due 
to advanced degenerative joint disease.  (Ex. G, p. 2)  Dr. Martin’s opinion does not 
appear to take into consideration that claimant has a cumulative injury.  Dr. Martin’s 
opinion also does not appear to take into consideration that claimant worked at a job for 
approximately 14 years that required her to reach and pull approximately 4,800 pieces 
of meat per day.  Given these deficiencies in the opinion of Dr. Martin, his opinion 
regarding causation is found not convincing. 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
Dr. Fehringer and Dr. Kimelman also opined claimant has an “inflammatory” 
condition.  Dr. Kimelman opined that claimant had an “unknown inflammatory arthritis.”  
(Ex. D, p. 2)  Claiming the claimant has an “unknown inflammatory arthritis” is 
speculative at best.  As detailed in Dr. Goebel’s and Dr. O’Neil’s reports, claimant’s 
blood tests indicate claimant does not have any inflammatory condition.  Claimant also 
lacks a history of any inflammatory conditions such as, but not limited to, rheumatoid 
arthritis and psoriatic arthritis.  (Ex. 8, p. 23)  Dr. Fehringer and Dr. Kimelman also 
appear to ignore that claimant had to move and pull pieces of meat on a conveyor belt 
approximately 4,800 times a day for approximately 14 years.  Given the problems with 
the opinions of Drs. Fehringer and Kimelman, their opinions regarding causation are 
found not convincing. 
Drs. Goebel, Bansal and O’Neil all opined that the conditions to both of 
claimant’s shoulders were work related.  These opinions are based, in part, on the fact 
that claimant worked highly repetitive positions at Tyson for approximately 33 years.  
This opinion is also based, in part, on the fact that claimant does not have a history of 
any inflammatory disease and that claimant’s testing suggests claimant does not have 
markers indicative of an inflammatory disease.  (Exs. 6, 8, 15, 18 and 19)  As Drs. 
Bansal, Goebel and O’Neil take into consideration the highly repetitive work the 
claimant performed during her 33 years at Tyson and because their opinions explain 
why claimant does not have inflammatory arthritis, it is found that the opinions of Drs. 
Goebel, Bansal and O’Neil regarding causation are found more convincing. 
Claimant worked highly repetitive jobs for 33 years at Tyson.  For approximately 
14 years, claimant worked on a repetitive job pulling and moving meat approximately 
4,800 times a shift.  The opinions of Drs. Bansal, O’Neil and Goebel regarding 
causation are found convincing.  The opinions of Drs. Martin, Fehringer and Kimelman 
are found not convincing regarding causation.  Given this record, it is found that 
claimant has carried her burden of proof that she sustained an injury to both shoulders 
that arose out of and in the course of employment at Tyson. 
The next issue to be determined is whether claimant’s injury to her shoulders is 
barred by application of Iowa Code section 85.26. 
Iowa Code section 85.26(1) requires an employee to bring an original proceeding 
for benefits within two years from the date of the occurrence of the injury if the employer 
has paid the employee no weekly indemnity benefits for the claimed injury.  If the 
employer has paid the employee weekly benefits on account of the claimed injury, 
however, the employee must bring an original proceeding within three years from the 
date of last payment of weekly compensation benefits.       
Failure to timely commence an action under the limitation statute is an affirmative 
defense which defendant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. 
Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91 (1940); Venenga v. John Deere 
Component Works, 498 N.W.2d 422 (Iowa Ct. App. 1993).     

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a 
fact-based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985).       
An original proceeding for benefits must be commenced within two years from 
the date of the occurrence of the injury for which benefits are claimed or within three 
years from the date of the last payment of weekly compensation benefits if benefits 
have been paid under Iowa Code section 86.13.  Iowa Code section 85.26(1).  Under 
the rule, the time during which a proceeding may be commenced does not begin to run 
until the claimant, as a reasonable person, should recognize the nature, seriousness 
and probable compensable character of the condition.  Failure to timely commence an 
action under the limitations statute is an affirmative defense, which defendant must 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence.  Venenga v. John Deere Component Works, 
498 N.W.2d 422 (Iowa Ct. App. 1993).       
For a cumulative injury, the beginning of that period may not begin, under the 
discovery rule, until the worker knows the nature of the disability, the seriousness of the 
disability, and the probable compensable nature of the disability.  Chapa v. John Deere 
Ottumwa Works, 652 N.W.2d 187 (Iowa 2002).  See also Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 
763 N.W.2d 842, 854–55 (Iowa 2009); Midwest Ambulance Serv. v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 
860, 865 (Iowa 2008); Swartzendruber v Schimmel, 613 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000). 
In this case, defendant has the burden of proof to show claimant knew the nature 
of her injury, the seriousness of the disability, and the probable compensable nature of 
the disability. 
The record indicates that claimant did know she had shoulder problems as far 
back as 2003.  However, records from the plant also indicate that claimant reported no 
symptoms on or about February 13, 2010.  (JE2, p. 8) 
In February of 2012, claimant reported shoulder pain due to repetitive gripping.  
(JE2, p. 10)  It is true that claimant testified that pain in her shoulders progressed 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
gradually from 2012 due to repetitive motion at work.  (Ex. A, p. 10)  However, claimant 
also was assessed by the plant nurse that her symptoms had resolved and that her 
case was “closed” at that time.  (JE2, p. 14) 
Claimant did testify that she began to have shoulder issues in 2004 and 2005.  
She also indicated that she had symptoms in both of her shoulders as of 2012.  Given 
this record, it is found that claimant did know that she had a bilateral shoulder condition 
on or about 2012. 
There is little evidence in the record indicating that claimant knew her injuries to 
her shoulders were work related before she reported it on April 13, 2017.  In fact, 
defendant’s experts, Dr. Martin, Dr. Kimelman and Dr. Fehringer, all told claimant that 
her condition was not work related.  There was also no evidence in the record that 
claimant knew of the severity of the disability before she reported it to Tyson on April 13, 
2017. 
Claimant reported her injury to Tyson on April 13, 2017.  There is little evidence 
claimant knew her bilateral shoulder condition was work related before April 13, 2017.  
There is no evidence claimant knew of the severity of her bilateral shoulder condition 
before April 13, 2017.  Claimant filed her petition on March 28, 2019.  Given this record, 
defendant has failed to carry its burden of proof that claimant’s claim for benefits is 
barred by application of Iowa Code section 85.26. 
The next issue to be determined is whether there is a causal connection between 
the injury and the claimed medical expenses.  
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975).  
Both of claimant’s shoulder injuries have been found to be injuries arising out of 
and in the course of employment.  As a result, defendant is liable for medical expenses, 
including medical mileage, related to the treatment of claimant’s shoulders. 
The next issue to be determined is whether defendant is liable for reimbursement 
of the IMEs. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendant is responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Regarding the IME, the Iowa Supreme Court provided a literal interpretation of 
the plain-language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section 85.39 only allows 
the employee to obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if 
dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer.  Des Moines Area Reg’l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). 
Under the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the 
employer’s expense if an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an 
employer-retained physician. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 limits an injured worker to one IME.  Larson Mfg. Co., 
Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842 (Iowa 2009). 
The Supreme Court, in Young noted that in cases where Iowa Code section 
85.39 is not triggered to allow for reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination (IME), a claimant can still be reimbursed at hearing the costs associated 
with the preparation of the written report as a cost under rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Young at 
846-847. 
In its brief, defendant agrees that it is liable for $2,769.00 associated with 
reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME opinion.  (Defendant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 14) 
Dr. O’Neil gave his opinions of claimant’s condition in an IME, but did not include 
an opinion of permanent impairment.  (Ex. 4)  Dr. Goebel also gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME, but did not give an opinion regarding permanent 
impairment.  (Ex. 15)  Given this record, claimant is due reimbursement of the costs 
associated with Dr. O’Neil and Dr. Goebel’s reports under rule 876 IAC 4.33(6).  (Ex. 
26) 
The final issue to be determined is whether claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
Claimant was initially provided care by defendant up until the denial of liability 
that occurred on or about August 24, 2017.  Since August 24, 2017, defendant has not 
authorized any care for claimant’s shoulders.  Claimant has been found to have carried 
her burden of proof that her bilateral shoulder condition arose out of and in the course of 
employment.  Defendant has not provided care to claimant since August 24, 2017.  
Offering no care is the same as offering no care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
Dr. Bansal opined that claimant required a right shoulder replacement and an 
MRI of the left shoulder.  (Ex. 18, p. 49)  Dr. O’Neil and Dr. Goebel also recommended 
claimant have a right total shoulder replacement.  (Ex. 6; Ex. 15, p. 35) 
Dr. Fehringer, the expert retained by the employer, also recommended claimant 
have a right shoulder replacement.  (Ex. C, p. 1)  Dr. Kimelman also agreed that 
claimant required a right shoulder replacement.  (Ex. D, p. 3)  Given this record, 
claimant has carried her burden of proof that she is entitled to alternate medical care 
consisting of a right shoulder replacement and continued treatment of the left shoulder. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That claimant has carried her burden of proof that she sustained a bilateral 
shoulder injury that arose out of and in the course of employment on April 13, 2017. 
That defendant shall reimburse claimant for the IME with Dr. Bansal. 
That defendant shall pay costs as detailed above. 

HENRY V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
That defendant shall authorize and pay for claimant’s right shoulder replacement 
and for further treatment regarding claimant’s left shoulder. 
That defendant shall pay all other costs. 
That defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
under rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Signed and filed this        7th        day of December, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dennis McElwain (via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
