Case Number: 5052990
Case Title:  HESS, SHELLY V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hess Shelley-5052990d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SHELLEY HESS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5052990 
SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SFM MUTUAL INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                       Head Note No.:  1803 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a petition in arbitration.  The contested case was initiated when claimant, 
Shelley Hess, filed her original notice and petition with the Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation.  The petition was filed on March 2, 2017.  Claimant alleged she 
sustained a work-related injury on April 21, 2015.  Claimant alleged the work injury 
affected her left lower extremity, and her body as a whole.  (Original notice and petition) 
For purposes of workers’ compensation, Spirit Lake Auto Parts City, is insured by 
SFM Mutual Insurance.  Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Defendants called no 
witnesses to testify. 
Defendants filed their answer on March 10, 2017.  They admitted the occurrence 
of the work injury.  A first report of injury was filed on April 22, 2015. 
The hearing administrator scheduled the case for hearing on August 16, 2019.  
The hearing took place at Iowa Workforce Development in Des Moines, Iowa at 150 
Des Moines Street.  The undersigned appointed Ms. Buffy Nelson as the certified 
shorthand reporter.  She is the official custodian of the records and notes.   
Claimant testified at hearing.  The parties offered joint exhibits 1 through 14.  The 
exhibits were admitted as evidence in the case. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-24  12:00:37     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 2 
 
 
Post-hearing briefs were filed on September 16, 2019.  The case was deemed 
fully submitted on that date. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties completed the designated hearing report.  The various stipulations 
are: 
1. There was the existence of an employer-employee relationship at the time of 
the injury; 
2. Claimant sustained an injury on April 21, 2015 which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment; 
3. The parties agree the injury resulted in both temporary and permanent 
disability; 
4. Temporary or healing period benefits are no longer in dispute; 
5. The parties agree the weekly benefit rate is $268.02 per week; 
6. The parties agree the commencement date for any permanent partial 
disability benefits is February 1, 2019; 
7. Defendants have waived any affirmative defenses; 
8. Medical benefits detailed in exhibit 12 will be paid by defendants per 
statements made at the time of the arbitration hearing; 
9. Prior to the hearing date, defendants have paid twenty-seven (27) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits in the amount of $268.02 per week; 
10. Claimant has paid certain costs and defendants do not dispute those costs 
have been paid. 
ISSUES 
The issues presented are: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits in the form 
of an industrial disability; and 
2. If so, the extent of permanent disability to which claimant is entitled. 
 
 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 3 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
This deputy, after listening to the testimony of claimant at hearing, after judging 
the credibility of claimant, and after reading the evidence, and the post-hearing briefs, 
makes the following findings of fact and conclusions of law: 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving the issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
Claimant is 43 years old.  She is the single mother of two daughters.  At the time 
of her arbitration hearing, claimant was a two-month resident of Sioux Falls, South 
Dakota.  Prior to her move, she had been a life-long resident of Spirit Lake, Iowa.  
Claimant graduated from high school in 1994.  She has no formal education beyond the 
high school level.   
Claimant worked as a waitress for two establishments before her employment at 
Spirit Lake Auto Parts City.  Sam Noel, the owner of the auto parts store, hired claimant 
as a part time delivery driver.  After three months, claimant was promoted to a full time 
counter sales person.  Claimant waited on customers, looked up parts, processed 
freight, assisted with returns, performed bookkeeping duties, worked as a back-up 
person for the delivery driver, and performed other duties as assigned.  (Transcript, 
page 13) Claimant testified the owner of the business trusted her to perform the work 
properly.  (Tr., pp. 14-15)  
On April 21, 2015, claimant was unpacking freight when an engine hoist fell onto 
her right foot.  (Tr., pp. 17-18) Claimant verbally notified the employer but continued to 
work for a period of time.   
On April 22, 2015, claimant presented to the emergency room at Lakes Regional 
Healthcare.  (Joint Exhibit 3, page 7) James A. Gamache, M.D., examined claimant’s 
right foot.  The physician found: 
Foot Exam  right foot bone tenderness (2-3+ TENDER OVER MOST OF 
THE RIGHT FOOT, BUT SEEMS MOST OVER THE DISTAL 1 
METATARSAL AND MID FOOT AREA MOD TENDER IN THE TALO-
TARSAL AREA), ecchymosis (SLIGHT BRUISING OF THE DORSUM  OF 
THE FOOT), pain, soft tissue tenderness (GENERAL TENDERNESS OF 
THE RIGHT FOREFOOT AND MID-FOOT), swelling (SLIGHT SWELLING 
OF THE MID AND FOREFOOT) 
(Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 9, 10) 
Dr. Gamache instructed claimant as follows: 
1. REST, ICE, ELEVATE SEVERAL TIMES A DAY ELASTIC BANDAGE AS 
NEEDED 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 4 
 
 
NAPROXEN (ALEVE) 2 TABS WITH FOOD 2 TIMES A DAY REGULARLY 
UNTIL FEELING BETTER, 
 
  THEN AS NEEDED 
 
  TYLENOL AS NEEDED FOR DISCOMFORT 
 
   GRADUALLY INCREASE ACTIVITY AS DIRECTED 
 
    USE CRUTCHES IF NOT ABLE TO BEAR WEIGHT COMFORTABLY 
2.  LIGHT DUTY AT WORK UNTIL RECHECK 
3. SEE WORKMAN’S [sic] COMP DR IN 5-7 DAYS 
Return IMMEDIATELY to the Emergency Department for any new symptoms or 
worsening of your current symptoms. 
(Jt. Ex. 33, pp. 10-11) 
Timothy D. Blankers, DPM, from NWIA Bone, Joint, & Sports Surgeons in 
Spencer, Iowa examined claimant on April 24, 2015.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 12) Dr. Blankers 
examined claimant’s right foot.  The podiatrist found: 
EXAMINATION:  Examination reveals tenderness over the midfoot at the 
2nd metatarsal and 3rd metatarsocuneiform joints.  The forefoot also 
reveals tenderness at the 4th metatarsal and mildly at the 3rd metatarsal 
heads.  There is ecchymosis at this level.  No open lesions are seen 
today.  Moderate swelling is seen to the forefoot. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 12) 
Dr. Blankers diagnosed claimant with “Right midfoot pain following injury with 
possible fracture versus joint disruption.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 12) Dr. Blankers ordered a CAM 
boot for claimant as well as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 12) MRI 
test results did not show signs of a contusion or a stress fracture.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 13) Dr. 
Blankers suspicioned there was some bruising.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 13) Dr. Blankers 
recommended a bone scan.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 14) 
The bone scan was performed.  It showed a “suggestion of chronic regional pain 
syndrome.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 15) Dr. Blankers recommended physical therapy.  (Ex. 4, p. 
15) Claimant reported the physical therapy was of minimal assistance in resolving her 
pain.  Dr. Blankers recommended a consultation with a neurologist.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 16) 
There were some scheduling difficulties.  As a result, Dr. Blankers recommended an 
appointment with a pain specialist.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 17)  

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 5 
 
 
Defendants requested claimant to submit to an independent medical examination 
with Douglas W. Martin. M.D., a specialist in occupational medicine.  The examination 
occurred on August 26, 2015.  Dr. Martin physically examined claimant’s right foot.  The 
physician found: 
O:  Examination done today reveals a lady who is 66 inches tall and 
weighs 180 pounds.  Inspection of her right foot and ankle reveals that 
there is no obvious discoloration, swelling or ecchymosis noted.  She has 
global tenderness about the mid foot area.  She seems quite hesitant and 
pain inhibited, with respect to attempts at strength; but, at least it is initially 
thought to be 5/5.  Her Achilles and gastrocnemius function are intact.  
She has a negative Homan’s sign.  Thompson testing is normal.  There is 
no joint asymmetry noted.  There are no ankle motion deficits noted.  
There is no ankle mortis instability, as the AP and circumduction laxity 
tests are both solid.  There does not appear to be any substantial 
abnormality in the arena of the location of the previous bunionectomy.  
She has a palpable dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulse.  There is no 
skin sweating.  There is no hair distribution loss.  There are no skin color 
changes.  The foot does not feel necessarily cooler to me than the other 
parts of her body. 
A:   
(1)  Right foot/mid foot contusion 
(2) Disuse atrophy 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 24) 
Dr. Martin adamantly disagreed with the opinions expressed by Dr. Blankers.  Dr. 
Martin opined, claimant did not have a diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome.  
The evaluating physician stated, “The entire concept of that disorder is not valid.”  (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 24) Dr. Martin continued: 
…This has recently been under a significant degree of review in the 
medical literature.  I would point to both an article in Autoimmunity 
Reviews by Borchers, as well as the recent compendium textbook written 
on the subject, supported by Veritas Medicus, the Certified Evaluator of 
Disability and Impairment Rating Foundation, of which I was the primary 
author. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 24) 
Dr. Martin recommended “functional restoration and recovery.”  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 24) 
Dr. Martin opined claimant had a possible “opioid hypersensitivity situation.”  (Jt. Ex. 6, 
p. 24) Dr. Martin advised claimant to alternate sitting and standing.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 25)  

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 6 
 
 
Dr. Martin set another appointment for claimant on September 9, 2015.  She did 
not appear for the appointment.  Dr. Martin believed he was the authorized treating 
physician.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 26) Claimant held a different opinion.  In a chart note bearing 
the date of September 9, 2015, Dr. Martin wrote in relevant portion: 
I stand by the information contained within my August 26, 2015 report 
regarding the so-called implication of the term, “Complex Regional Pain 
Syndrome.”  Again, this is a construct that is no longer valid.  I would 
recommend to both Dr. Blankers and anyone also involved in this case, to 
actually get a hold of the article by Borchers in Autoimmunity Reviews.  
Even better would be to get a hold of the textbook entitled, “Complex 
Regional Pain Syndrome- What is the Evidence?” which is available and 
published by Veritas Medicus at the majority of the book retailers, such as 
Amazon, Barnes and Noble, etc. 
I would also welcome the physical therapist to review these evidence 
based documents that I just discussed. 
Ultimately, this lady is dealing with a disuse atrophy situation because the 
lady was in a CAM walker and immobilized for quite a lengthy period of 
time.  This is the reason why she is having problems. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 26) 
Additionally, Dr. Martin continued: 
As an Occupational Medicine Specialist who has, obviously, a fair degree 
of experience with these chronic pain issues, I really do not understand 
what a Pain Management Specialist or a Neurologist is going to add to this 
situation.  I would point out that, in many cases that I have been involved 
with before, these Specialists sometimes harm the patient, as opposed to 
help them. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 27) 
Timothy J. Metz, M.D., a pain specialist, initially examined claimant on 
September 25, 2015.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 29) Dr. Metz conducted a physical examination of 
claimant’s right foot.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 29) The physician found: 
MUSCULOSKELETAL:  The right foot has a bluish gray discoloration to 
the left.  There is an incision over the anteromedial aspect from an old 
bunion operation years ago.  She is exquisitely tender to even light touch 
over the medial aspect and withdraws the foot with any contact. 
ASSESSMENT: 
1. Injury to the right foot, April 2015. 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 7 
 
 
2. Complex regional pain syndrome of the right foot. 
3. Smoking addiction. 
4. Little improvement with pain despite walking boot, extensive physical 
therapy, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, and neuropathic 
pain medications (amitriptyline). 
(Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 29, 30) The first injection occurred on the date of the first examination.  
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 30) 
     Dr. Metz developed the subsequent treatment plans: 
1. A right lumbar sympathetic blockade for diagnosis of sympathetic mediated 
pain and complex regional pain syndrome. 
2. Continued physical therapy aggressively to maintain range of motion. 
3. Prescription for gabapentin 300 mg 1 p.o. q.h.s. x7 days, then 1 p.o. b.i.d. x7 
days, then 1 p.o. t.i.d. thereafter (discontinue amitriptyline}. 
4. Meloxicam 15 mg 1 p.o. q day p.r.n. (discontinue naproxen). 
5. Return to clinic on Monday and Wednesday of next week for a series of 3 
lumbar sympathetic blockades. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 30)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Metz on September 28, 2015.  The patient reported she 
had near complete resolution of her right foot pain following the first injection.  Other 
symptoms had returned.  The second injection was completed.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 30-31) On 
September 30, 2015, the third injection occurred.  Dr. Metz assessed claimant’s 
condition as: 
 
ASSESSMENT: 
1.  Complex regional pain syndrome, right foot. 
2. Status post 3 lumbar sympathetic blockades with definitive identification of 
sympathetic maintained pain and CRPS. 
3. Initiation of gabapentin for neuropathic pain and CRPS treatment. 
4. Decreased range of motion of the right foot and ankle. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 33) Dr. Metz recommended claimant continue with her physical therapy.  
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 34) 
On July 25, 2015, Dr. Metz evaluated claimant’s right foot condition.  Claimant 
reported any activity on her feet exacerbated her pain, but if she elevated her right foot 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 8 
 
 
and leg on a pillow, her pain level would decrease.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 35) Dr. Metz 
recommended the placement of a trial spinal cord stimulator subsequent to a 
psychological prescreening evaluation.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 36)  
Dr. Metz explained to defendants in his report of August 2, 2016, why a spinal 
cord stimulator was a reasonable medical treatment for claimant.  The pain 
management physician opined in part: 
1. ...Regarding Miss Hess’s injury, she developed neuropathic pain 
following this, consistent with complex regional pain syndrome based 
on her description of the pain as well as the vasomotor changes and 
swelling and purplish to red color changes. 
2. …The injections in September confirmed neuropathic pain, particularly 
complex regional pain syndrome, with an autonomic component to her 
pain.  Despite this short-term benefit, the neuropathic pain medications 
including gabapentin and Lyrica did not continue to control her pain 
reasonably and she was unable to benefit from physical therapy, and I 
do not think additional sympathetic blockade would be particularly 
helpful. 
3. “Are there other diagnostic tests you would recommend at this time?”  
No, I would not. 
4. …Our clinic made the initial recommendations for gabapentin and 
meloxicam.  We did not see Miss Hess following the September visit 
until July 25, 2016, appointment.  During that time she was transitioned 
from gabapentin to Lyrica, which is a standard practice in treating 
neuropathic pain that has not responded to one agent. 
5. “Based on your current recommendation and treatment plan, when it is 
[sic] reasonable to anticipate Miss Hess will reach MMI?”  We do not 
do independent evaluations here and rate patients for any kind of 
disability and I am not familiar with the term MMI. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 37) 
Claimant participated in a psychological evaluation on November 7, 2016.  
Donald Baum, PhD, LP, conducted the following procedures: 
1. Minnesota Multiple Personality Inventory 
2. Beck Depression Inventory 
3. Beck Anxiety Inventory 
4. Behavioral pain evaluation questionnaire 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 9 
 
 
5. Diagnostic interview 
6. Information gathered from previous medical records. 
(Jt. Ex. 9. p. 89) 
Dr. Baum diagnosed claimant with:  Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Major 
Depressive Disorder, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Complex Regional Pain 
Syndrome.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 94) Dr. Baum recommended the placement of a 
neurostimulator.  However, the psychologist also recommended claimant undergo 
psychotherapy.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 95) 
A trial spinal cord stimulator electrode was implanted by Dr. Metz on November 
28, 2016.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 38-39) Claimant was quite pleased with the result of the trial 
stimulator.  She reported at least a 50 percent improvement in her level of pain.  Dr. 
Metz removed the trial stimulator.  He recommended an insertion of a permanent 
stimulator.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 40) 
The permanent spinal cord stimulator was implanted on December 27, 2016.  (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 41) Claimant followed up with Dr. Metz on January 3, 2017.  Claimant reported 
at least 50 percent improvement in her right foot pain.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 43)  
On January 17, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. Metz’s office.  Claimant reported: 
Immediately postop, she was having excellent coverage of her complex 
regional pain syndrome of the right foot and ankle.  Unfortunately, she 
tripped over her cat while going to the bathroom late at night and felt a pop 
in her back and subsequent distinct change in her stimulator. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 45)   
Dr. Metz attempted reprogramming the stimulator.  However, the attempt was not 
as successful as Dr. Metz had anticipated.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 46) 
On April 10, 2018, Dr. Metz performed a surgical revision of claimant’s spinal 
cord electrodes.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 49) Claimant had a follow up appointment on May 2, 
2018.  She was pleased with her overall progress.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 51) Dr. Metz released 
claimant to return to work with a 20-pound lifting restriction.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 51) By June 
12, 2018, claimant reported significant improvement in her overall activities of daily 
living with less restriction.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 52) 
Claimant had her 6-month appointment on December 5, 2018.  She reported at 
least a 75 percent improvement in her symptoms.  Claimant reported fatigue after she 
spent a long day on her feet.  Claimant was advised to return to the clinic on an as-
needed basis.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 53) 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 10 
 
 
On February 1, 2019, claimant presented to Thomas J, Ripperda, M.D., for an 
evaluation to determine whether claimant sustained any permanent impairment.  Dr. 
Ripperda opined claimant did have a permanent impairment due to her complex 
regional pain syndrome.  The evaluating physician calculated the impairment rating 
according to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition.  
Dr. Ripperda described his calculations as follows: 
Impairment for complex regional pain syndrome is noted on page 343 last 
paragraph states if a lower extremity needs to be rated for a complex 
regional pain syndrome use the station and gait table 13-15.  Page 336 
table 13-15 he [sic] fits under a class I column is [sic] rises to standing 
position, walks but has difficulty with elevators, grades, stairs, deep chairs 
and long distances.  This equates to 9% whole person impairment. 
Her rating for a complex regional pain syndrome is 9% whole person 
impairment.  This is calculated using the American Medical Association 
guides to evaluation of permanent [sic] fifth edition. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 97) 
Dr. Ripperda discussed claimant’s condition both before and after the 
implantation of the spinal cord stimulator.  Dr. Ripperda explained: 
Prior to the spinal cord stimulator her pain was 8-9 out of 10 now her pain 
is about a 3-4 out of 10.  Character of the pain is throbbing and aching.  
The pain starts at her dorsal lateral foot will radiate up to her right hip.  
She has tingling within her leg constantly but varies in intensity.  She has 
some weakness within her right foot and ankle that occurs intermittently 
and suddenly.  She has fallen about 6-7 times over the past year 
secondary to her ankle giving out.  Her symptoms are improved with a 
spinal cord stimulator as well as elevation.  Her symptoms are worse with 
walking, standing, driving, cold weather.  She has associated symptoms 
that her foot will turn blue at times.  Becomes very sweaty on the right 
side.  She initially had some alteration in hair growth but now does not 
generally grow hair as rapid on the right compared to left and she will 
developed [sic] some intermittent swelling in that right foot. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 98) 
At her arbitration hearing, claimant testified about the symptoms she was 
experiencing in late summer of 2019.  She stated during direct examination: 
Q.  (By Ms. Valentine) Okay.  What are your current symptoms that you’re 
having?  And by “current” I don’t mean it has to be at this very second. 
A.  Yeah. 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 11 
 
 
Q.  But on a day-to-day basis, what are your current symptoms? 
A.  I still get a lot of swelling and just a lot of pain.  Like towards the end of a day, 
it just gets worse.  There’s a lot of throbbing.  It just depends.  Some days it’s 
burning, some days it’s throbbing.  On good days it’s, you know, not bad. 
Q.  I want to talk about - - and maybe I should focus on this too.  Where is that 
pain?   
A.  It goes from my right hip to - - through my right foot. 
Q.  How does it impact, if at all, your ability to do certain activities? 
A.  It - - I just don’t do them.  I try to do - - if I need to get something done or I 
want to do something, I try to do it early in the morning. 
Q.  Does it impact your ability - - you’ve talked about standing. 
A. Yes. 
Q.  How long is it comfortable for you to stand? 
A.  If I’m stuck in one spot, not very long.  If I can move around - - so I’m trying to 
get it figured out different things I can do when I am at work so that way it’s - - to 
make it a little better. 
Q.  Any difficulties with walking? 
A.  On a bad day, yes. 
Q.  Okay.  What about sitting? 
A.  On bad days, but on good days it’s not. 
Q.  How about driving? 
A.  Driving can be an issue.  Long-distance driving is hard for me. 
Q.  And why? 
A.  I think probably because I don’t like using the cruise control or anything, like I 
start getting stiff from sitting too long or, like, my foot having to be in that position 
without being able to do things makes it worse. 
Q.  Okay.  Do you notice any change in your symptoms with the change in 
seasons? 
A.  yes.  Winter is really bad for me. 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 12 
 
 
Q.  And tell me about that. 
A.  I don’t know if it’s - - like if it’s from the cold or, like, if the snow gets on it, but 
then, you know, it’s already cooler anyway, the foot is, so when it gets a little bit 
colder, it just becomes intense pain. 
(Tr. pp. 46-48) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND RATIONALE 
PERMANENT PARTIAL DISABILITY BENEFITS 
Claimant is currently working at O’Reilly’s Auto Parts.  The company purchased 
Spirit Lake Auto Parts City from Sam Noel, the owner of the company.  Claimant later 
transferred to the O’Reilly’s Auto Parts Store in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.  Claimant 
stated she transferred stores so she could participate in group activities for patients with 
chronic pain.  The activities are sponsored by Avera McKenna Hospital in Sioux Falls.  
Management at O’Reilly’s promoted claimant to the position of assistant manager.   
At the time of claimant’s work injury, her gross earnings were $384.72 per week.  
In 2017 claimant was earning $14.00 per hour.  At the time of her hearing, claimant was 
earning $15.75 per hour.  Claimant also has health and dental insurance.  She was 
promoted to assistant manager of the store in Sioux Falls.  (Tr., pp. 52-53) 
As an assistant manager, claimant is required to work in excess of 40 hours per 
week.  (Tr., p. 59) She works at both the Spirit Lake, Iowa and the Sioux Falls, South 
Dakota stores.  Claimant supervises both the counter sales and the customer service 
departments.  (Tr., p. 58) Claimant also trains members of her team.  (Tr. p. 58) She 
engages in outside sales calls, is in charge of merchandising, and prepares for special 
sales.  (Tr., p. 58) Claimant is involved in store operations, provides support to other 
managers, and engages in inventory matters.  (Tr., p. 59)   
Previously, claimant was allowed to work from home, take extended rest periods 
and sit at the auto parts counter.  Since O’Reilly’s purchased Spirit Lake Auto Parts 
City, none of those accommodations are available to claimant.  A stool is not provided 
to claimant.  She is allowed to take breaks when needed.  (Tr., pp. 40-41)   
Claimant has an injury affecting the body as a whole.  As a result, any 
permanency is to be calculated by the industrial method.  The parties stipulated the 
commencement date for permanency benefits was February 1, 2019.  Defendants paid 
unto claimant twenty-seven (27) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits prior to 
the date of the hearing. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 13 
 
 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Claimant is 43 years old.  She only has a high school diploma.  With the 
exception of two part-time waitress jobs, claimant has spent her entire working life at 
Spirit Lake Auto Parts City, and its successor, O’Reilly Auto Parts.  She has become a 
trusted employee who is now an assistant manager.  However, with her increasing job 
duties, come additional work hours.  She is now expected to work longer hours.  She is 
engaged in standing and walking.  The standing and walking aggravate her right foot 
and her CRPS.  Claimant has a 20-pound lifting restriction.  The restriction has never 
been removed.  Because of the lifting restriction, claimant is precluded from holding a 
variety of unskilled or semi-skilled positions.  Fortunately, Mr. Noel has been an 
understanding manager.  He has accommodated claimant in the past.  It is not known 
whether upper management at O’Reilly Auto Parts will be as accommodating as Mr. 
Noel had been when he owned and operated Spirit Lake Auto Parts City.  Claimant 
testified she is no longer able to sit on a stool at the parts counter.  She cannot work 
from home as she did previously.  She cannot take extended rest breaks when she is 
experiencing difficulties managing her pain.  Dr. Ripperda rated claimant as having a 9 
percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 97)   
After considering all of the factors affecting industrial disability, it is the 
determination of the undersigned; claimant has a twenty-five (25) percent permanent 
partial disability.  Claimant is entitled to one hundred-twenty-five (125) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing on February 1, 2019, and said 
benefits shall be paid at the weekly rate of $268.02 per week. 
Defendants shall pay all accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology, File No. 5054686. 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 14 
 
 
 
MEDICAL BENEFITS 
The next issue is the matter of the cost of certain medical benefits.  Those costs 
are detailed in joint exhibit 12.  Also, the medical bills were discussed at the arbitration 
hearing.  The discussion is contained on page 6 of the transcript.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
It is the determination of the undersigned; all causally connected medical 
expenses detailed in joint exhibit 12 shall be the responsibility of defendants. 
The final issue for resolution is the matter of costs to litigate the claim.  Iowa 
Code section 86.40 states: 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 15 
 
 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010).  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
 
Filing Fee 
 
 
 
 
 
$100.00 
 
Service (certified mail) 
 
 
 
    13.18 
 
Records of Dr. Blankers 
 
 
 
     50.00 
 
Records of Avera Lakes Family 
 
 
    32.00 
 
Conference with Dr. Metz and letter 
 
   750.00 
 
Total:  
 
 
 
 
 
 $945.18 
Claimant is entitled to the costs detailed in the above paragraph 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant one hundred twenty-five (125) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing from February 1, 2019 and payable at 
the rate of two hundred sixty-eight and 02/100 dollars ($268.02). 
Accrued benefits, shall be paid in a lump sum together with interest as detailed in 
the body of the decision. 
Defendants shall take credit for all benefits paid prior to the date of the hearing, 
including any benefits paid in excess of the weekly benefit rate; 
Defendants shall pay the costs of any causally related medical expenses as 
detailed in joint exhibit 12. 
Defendants shall pay the costs to litigate as detailed in the body of the decision. 

HESS V. SPIRIT LAKE AUTO PARTS CITY 
Page 16 
 
 
Defendants shall file all reports as required by law. 
Signed and filed this 24th day of February, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Lindsey Mills (via WCES) 
Janece Valentine (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
MICHELLE A. MCGOVERN 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
