Case Number: 5068417
Case Title:  RICHARDSON, WAYNE V. HOLLAND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Richardson Wayne-5068417D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
WAYNE RICHARDSON, 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5068417 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
HOLLAND, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :      Head Notes:  1108.50, 1402.40, 1402.60,                
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
          1803, 2501, 2601.10, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Wayne Richardson, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Holland, self-insured employer as defendant.  Hearing was 
held on November 2, 2020.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing 
occurring in Des Moines.  However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video 
means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via 
CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.  The hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Wayne Richardson and Sherry Richardson were the only witnesses to testify live 
at trial.  The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE6, claimant’s exhibits 
1-5, and defendant’s exhibits A-M.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on December 4, 2020, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-May-12  15:01:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 2 
 
1. The amount of permanent partial disability benefits that claimant is entitled to 
receive. 
 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to additional medical care. 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to medical mileage. 
 
4. Assessment of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Wayne Richardson, sustained a work-related injury on January 11, 
2019.  Mr. Richardson has been an over-the-road truck driver for Holland for over 
twenty-one years.  He also worked on the dock where he switched trailers, lifted heavy 
items, and drove forklifts.  At the time of the injury, he was driving a heavy load out of 
Minneapolis.  He hit a very rough spot on Highway 218 in Iowa.  He hit a dip pretty hard 
causing his air seat to go up and slam into the floorboard.  He experienced pain in his 
low back with radiating pain across the back and down his left leg.  Mr. Richardson 
reported the injury when he returned to St. Louis.  (Testimony) 
 
On January 15, 2019, Mr. Richardson went to Motion Orthopaedics where he 
saw Donald Bassman, M.D.  He was diagnosed with an acute traumatic lumbar strain, 
degenerative disc disease, and facet degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine.  He was 
kept off of work for three weeks.  Dr. Bassman recommended physical therapy which 
began on February 4, 2019.  (JE2, pp. 3-9; JE3)   
 
Mr. Richardson underwent an MRI on March 11, 2019.  The MRI revealed 
multilevel spondylosis and stenosis with protrusions at T12-L1, L3-4, L4-5, and L5-S1.  
Dr. Bassman made a referral to an orthopaedic spine surgeon.  (JE4, pp. 47-48; JE2, p. 
12)   
 
Daniel L. Kitchens, M.D. saw Mr. Richardson on April 24, 2019.  He reported 
continued low back pain to his left buttock and left leg.  Dr. Kitchens noted that Mr. 
Richardson presented with the diagnosis of multiple-level disc protrusions and lumbar 
stenosis at L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1.  He also presented with symptoms of a left S1 
radiculopathy.  He recommended continued conservative measures, including pain 
management treatments.  He kept Mr. Richardson off work.  He prescribed tramadol 
and methocarbamol.  He was to return in approximately one month.  (JE4, pp. 49-52)   
 
Mr. Richardson returned to Dr. Kitchens on May 22, 2019.  He had received 2 
injections by Dr. Zhu and his symptoms had improved significantly.  He was able to 
stand and walk without much difficulty.  He denied pain into his legs or feet.  Dr. 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 3 
 
Kitchens felt Mr. Richardson was progressing satisfactorily.  He was to return to work on 
May 28, 2019 without restrictions.  (JE4, pp. 56-58)     
 
On June 19, 2019, Dr. Kitchens saw Mr. Richardson for the return of pain in his 
low back with pain radiating to his left buttock and left leg to his calf.  He also reported a 
new onset of pain radiating into his right thigh to his knee.  He has more pain with 
prolonged sitting.  He was driving, but has pain at the end of his workday.  In the 
evenings he takes tramadol and Flexeril.  Overall, his pain has not improved since the 
June onset.  Dr. Kitchens recommended L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1 decompressive 
laminectomy and facetectomies for neural foraminal decompression and removal of the 
disc protrusions.  Dr. Kitchens released him to return to work without restrictions until 
the time of surgery.  (JE4, pp. 61-63)   
 
Dr. Kitchens performed L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1 decompressive laminectomy, 
wide facetectomies for neuroforaminal decompression, discectomy, and posterior 
lumbar interbody fusions on July 22, 2019.  (JE6, pp. 114-115) 
 
Mr. Richardson returned to Dr. Kitchens on July 31, 2019.  His numbness had 
improved since surgery, but he continued to have numbness in his left ankle and right 
leg.  At this appointment he was given a bone growth stimulator.  He was also to begin 
physical therapy.  Overall, Dr. Kitchens felt Mr. Richardson was progressing 
satisfactorily.  (JE4, pp. 64-66) 
 
Mr. Richardson continued to follow-up with Dr. Kitchens.  On September 5, 2019, 
Dr. Kitchens released Mr. Richardson to light duty work of no lifting over 20 pounds.  
(JE4, pp. 68-70) 
 
On October 3, 2019, Dr. Kitchens changed the work restrictions to no lifting over 
40 pounds.  Mr. Richardson advised Dr. Kitchens that he needed to lift 70 pounds from 
waist to shoulder and 50 pounds from floor to waist in order to return to work.  (JE4, pp. 
71-74)  
 
Dr. Kitchens released Mr. Richardson to return to work without restrictions as of 
November 4, 2019.  He was to continue using his bone growth stimulator and 
conservative measures.  Overall, his pain had improved.  However, Mr. Richardson 
continued to experience pain across his low back and numbness into his right foot and 
occasional tingling into his left foot.  (JE4, pp. 75-78)   
 
On December 4, 2019, Dr. Kitchens placed him at maximum medical 
improvement for the January 11, 2019 work injury.  Mr. Richardson was released from 
care without any restrictions on his activities.  (JE4, pp. 79-81)  Dr. Kitchens stated that 
Mr. Richardson has “a partial permanent disability of 7% related to the January 11, 
2019, work incident and the need for lumbar spine surgery.”  Dr. Kitchens does not state 
how he arrived at his impairment rating.  It is unknown whether he utilized the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.  If he did utilize the Guides, it is 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 4 
 
unknown if he utilized the Fifth Edition or the Sixth Edition or even what section of 
methods he utilized.  (JE4, p. 81) 
 
Dr. Kitchens had a teleconference health visit with Mr. Richardson on March 26, 
2020.  Mr. Richardson reported increased discomfort in his lower back and into his 
thighs.  He has nearly constant pain, including days that he is not working.  He still has 
numbness into his right foot and leg.  He is working 10 to 11 hours a day, five days a 
week.  He drives a shorter bed wheel-based truck without the sleeper compartment.  Dr. 
Kitchens recommended additional workup to include x-rays of the lumbar spine.  He 
was to follow-up in four weeks with x-rays.  Mr. Richardson was allowed to continue 
working without restrictions.  (JE4, p. 82) 
 
Mr. Richardson saw Dr. Kitchens on April 30, 2020.  He reported that since he 
talked with Dr. Kitchens on March 26, 2020, he had been experiencing more discomfort 
across his back and into both thighs with some numbness, tingling, and pain into the 
soles of both feet.  He also has continued numbness and tingling into his right lower 
extremity.  He is only able to sleep a few hours at a time.  He also reported increased 
discomfort in his lower back and into both thighs when he lies down.  He rates his pain 
as 8 to 9/10.  Dr. Kitchens reviewed x-rays and saw no evidence of hardware failure.  
Dr. Kitchens saw no indicated treatment for the work injury.  He noted Mr. Richardson 
had a progression of symptoms related to his lumbar degenerative disc disease.  Mr. 
Richardson also has a condition of morbid obesity that also contributes to his now 
chronic lower back pain.  Dr. Kitchens stated Mr. Richardson had been placed at MMI 
and released him from his care.  He recommended Mr. Richardson discuss his chronic 
back pain with his primary care physician.  He released Mr. Richardson to return to work 
without restrictions.  (JE4, pp. 86-88) 
 
On May 25, 2020, Mr. Richardson went to the emergency room at Missouri 
Baptist due to pain and swelling in his right leg, right knee, and calf.  (JE6, pp. 124-128)  
 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Richardson saw Sunil Bansal, M.D. for an 
independent medical examination (IME).  Dr. Bansal issued his IME report on 
September 29, 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 6-19)  Mr. Richardson reported continued low back 
pain.  His pain increases when he lifts 35-pound bales of hay and when he is weed-
eating his yard.  Mr. Richardson returned to driving a truck, but developed back pain 
radiating down both his legs.  His right leg is worse and his pain radiates down into his 
foot and toes.  He still has pain in his left leg, with numbness when he lies down in bed.  
Mr. Richardson has to sit to sleep and only sleeps three to four hours per night.  He is 
able to sit for one hour in his chair, and he reported he is able to drive for two hours 
before he needs to stop and walk around.  He has pain with bending forward.  Dr. 
Bansal diagnosed Mr. Richardson with aggravation of lumbar spondylosis with lumbar 
disc herniations at L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1.  Utilizing the AMA Guides to Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, specifically Table 15-3, Dr. Bansal assigned 22 percent whole 
person impairment as the result of the work injury.  Dr. Bansal restricted Mr. Richardson 
to no lifting greater than 35 pounds occasionally, or 20 pounds frequently.  No frequent 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 5 
 
bending or twisting.  No prolonged sitting greater than one hour at a time.  Dr. Bansal 
stated: 
[i]t appears that he does not even have a solid fusion.  Over the long term 
he is especially at risk for adjacent segment disease where the adjacent 
nonfused segment has additional stress placed on it from the 
instrumentation.  Bending itself increases disc pressure 400%, and that 
task combined with any mechanical loading does not appear promising 
over the long term for Mr. Richardson.”    
(CL. Ex. 1, p. 18)      
 
On October 15, 2020, Dr. Kitchens authored a missive to the defendant 
regarding Dr. Bansal’s IME report.  Dr. Kitchens reiterated that Mr. Richardson 
remained at MMI for the work accident which resulted in the need for lumbar surgery 
which was successful.  He stood behind his prior opinions regarding permanent 
impairment and restrictions.  Dr. Kitchens opined that Mr. Richardson’s current ongoing 
symptoms were not related to the work accident of January 11, 2019.  Dr. Kitchens 
disagreed with Dr. Bansal’s opinion that additional treatment is necessary due to 
complications of the 2019 surgery.  Dr. Kitchens also disagreed with the statement that 
“[i]t appears that he does not even have a solid fusion.”  (JE4, p. 91)  Dr. Kitchens said 
there is no evidence to support that opinion.  Dr. Kitchens further believed there is no 
evidence to support Dr. Bansal’s speculation that Mr. Richardson is at risk for adjacent 
segment disease due to instrumentation.  Dr. Kitchens opined that Mr. Richardson is at 
risk for adjacent segment disease due to his degenerative disc disease, morbid obesity, 
and preexisting factors.  According to Dr. Kitchens, fusion is not a causative factor.  He 
stated, “[a]djacent segment disease may be correlated with degenerative back 
conditions and the presence of fusion; however, that does not make the surgery a 
causative factor.  Correlation does not equal causation.”  (JE4, p. 92)  Further, Dr. 
Kitchens stated that Dr. Bansal’s opinion that bending increases disc pressure 400% is 
not supported by medical literature.  Dr. Kitchens stated this was especially true 
because most bending occurs at the hip joints and not at the spine itself.  (JE4, pp. 91-
92) 
 
Claimant contends his permanent partial disability benefits should commence on 
November 4, 2019.  In their post-hearing brief, defendant agrees that November 4, 2019 
is the appropriate date.  (Defendant’s brief, p. 10)  The parties agree that the permanent 
partial disability benefits shall commence on November 4, 2019.  I find that the 
permanent partial disability benefits shall commence on November 4, 2019.   
 
The parties have stipulated that he returned to work with the same employer and 
is receiving earnings that are the same or greater than at the time of the injury and 
compensation should be based on Mr. Richardson’s permanent impairment resulting 
from his injury.  In this case, Dr. Kitchens and Dr. Bansal have both offered their 
opinions regarding permanent impairment.   

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 6 
 
There is no dispute that Mr. Richardson sustained permanent impairment as the 
result of the work injury.  The dispute centers around which impairment rating should be 
relied on in this case.  Dr. Kitchens stated that Mr. Richardson “has a partial permanent 
disability of 7% related to the January 11, 2019, work incident and the need for lumbar 
spine surgery.”  (JE4, p. 81)  Unfortunately, Dr. Kitchens provides no insight into how he 
determined Mr. Richardson had permanent disability of 7 percent.  He makes no 
mention of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.  It is unknown 
whether he did or did not utilize The Guides.  If he did utilize The Guides, it is not known 
what edition of The Guides he utilized.  The most current edition of The Guides is the 
Sixth Edition.  In Iowa, the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has adopted the Fifth 
Edition of The Guides.  Dr. Kitchens practices in Missouri.  Furthermore, it is not known 
what methodology or basis Dr. Kitchens used to reach 7 percent.  Therefore, I find that 
there is not sufficient evidence to determine that Dr. Kitchens utilized the Fifth Edition of 
the AMA Guides.    
Dr. Bansal assigned 22 percent whole person impairment as the result of the 
work injury.  In his report he explicitly stated that he utilized the AMA Guides to 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, specifically Table 15-3.  I find that Dr. Bansal 
utilized the Fifth Edition of the Guides to assign an impairment rating to Mr. Richardson.   
We now turn to the issue of alternate medical care.  Mr. Richardson is seeking 
ongoing medical treatment.  He argues that since his surgery, he has experienced 
ongoing and consistent complaints and symptoms related to the work injury and 
subsequent surgery.  Dr. Bansal is concerned that there is evidence of nonunion as 
there appears to be lucency around pedicle screws.  Mr. Richardson contends alternate 
care should be granted, allowing him to seek appropriate care to further evaluate his 
back condition.  Mr. Richardson does not believe that care should be with Dr. Kitchens 
because he has already expressed his opinions denying the need for care.    
Defendant argues that Dr. Bansal’s opinion is flawed.  Dr. Bansal’s opinion that 
claimant has a potential nonunion as the result of the fusion surgery is not based on the 
most recent x-ray taken on April 4, 2020, which indicates there was no evidence of 
hardware loosening or displacement.  (JE4, pp. 84-85)  Dr. Kitchens disagrees with Dr. 
Bansal’s opinion that Mr. Richardson did not have a solid fusion.  According to Dr. 
Kitchens, the surgery he performed on Mr. Richardson was successful and Mr. 
Richardson does not require any further treatment as the result of the work injury.  (JE4, 
pp. 91-92)  Defendant has relied on the opinions of Dr. Kitchens and has not authorized 
any additional care.   
At the hearing Mr. Richardson testified, and the evidentiary records support, that 
he has experienced ongoing low back pain since the work injury.  Following the injury, 
Mr. Richardson returned to driving in November of 2019.  Since that time, he 
experiences pain in his back while driving for Holland.  He also experiences pain in his 
leg when he sits.  He testified that he still experiences a lot of pain in his back, 
numbness in his leg if he sits in the truck for a period of time, stabbing pain in his leg 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 7 
 
and foot, and his left foot continues to be numb.  He has been consistently experiencing 
these symptoms since he returned to work.  Mr. Richardson’s wife, Sherry Richardson, 
also testified at hearing.  Mrs. Richardson testified about her husband’s ongoing 
symptoms.  She also testified about her observations of his physical abilities both before 
and after the work injury.  (Testimony)    
I find the opinions of Dr. Bansal regarding Mr. Richardson’s ongoing symptoms 
are more consistent with the record as a whole.  I find Dr. Bansal’s opinions to be 
persuasive and to carry greater weight than those of Dr. Kitchens.  I find that his 
ongoing symptoms are related to the work injury.         
Mr. Richardson has also made a claim for medical mileage.  He provided his 
round-trip medical mileage for the time period of December 10, 2018 through December 
4, 2019 in the amount of $2,205.66.  (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 30-33)  He submitted another 
mileage reimbursement request for the time period of March 26, 2020 through August 7, 
2020 in the amount of $717.36.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 35)  His total mileage reimbursement 
request amounted to $2,923.02.  The medical mileage logs that he submitted 
demonstrate the date, provider, mileage incurred, and the applicate mileage rate.  I find 
that all of the entries are related to treatment for his work injury.  On October 5, 2020, 
defendant advised claimant that the adjuster would pay what she believed was owed to 
Mr. Richardson.  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 34)  One mileage reimbursement payment was issued to 
Mr. Richardson on October 7, 2020.  This payment covered the time period of January 
15, 2019 through December 4, 2019 and was in the amount of $1,939.44.  Defendant 
does not offer evidence of why the remaining mileage was not or should not be their 
responsibility.   
Defendant argues that they should not have to pay the mileage expense for 
claimant’s IME with Dr. Bansal due to the distance he traveled and because Dr. Bansal 
did not provide any treatment.  Defendant contends Mr. Richardson “presumably 
passed at-least a handful of more qualified lumbar spine experts in his own state.”  (Def. 
Br., p. 14)  However, under Iowa law, defendants are responsible for the reasonable 
and necessary transportation expenses for a section 85.39 examination.  Defendant 
does not cite any legal authority for their position.  I find defendant is responsible for the 
remaining outstanding medical mileage submitted by the claimant.   
       CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 8 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.   St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 
2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions 
of section 85.34(2)(v).  The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an 
injured worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method.  Functional 
disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body 
part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella 
Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain Co. v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 
1986); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley 
Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943). Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 
272, 268 N.W. 598 (1936). 
I conclude that claimant established by the preponderance of the evidence that 
his injury extends into the body as a whole and should be compensated pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides:  
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’ hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 9 
 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive 
the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated 
based only upon the employee's functional impairment resulting from the 
injury, and not in relation to the employee's earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
 
In this case, the parties stipulated that Mr. Richardson returned to work with the 
same employer and is receiving earnings that are the same or greater than at the time 
of the injury and compensation should be based on Mr. Richardson’s permanent 
impairment resulting from his injury.  As such, I conclude that his current recovery is 
limited to his permanent functional impairment rating resulting from the injury.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v).   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) permanent disabilities states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x) (emphasis added). 
 
This agency has adopted The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for 
determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial 
disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4. 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that there is not sufficient 
evidence to find that Dr. Kitchens utilized The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association.  Defendant 
argues that there are flaws with Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating.  In 2017 the Iowa Code 
was amended and provides that the percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing The Guides, agency expertise shall not be utilized.  I 
conclude that Dr. Bansal utilized The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 10 
 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association to assign 
impairment to Mr. Richardson.  Thus, I must rely solely on Dr. Bansal’s impairment 
rating because he is the only physician in this case to render an impairment rating 
pursuant to the Fifth Edition of The Guides.  Therefore, I accepted the impairment rating 
offered by Dr. Bansal and found that claimant proved a 22 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the whole person as a result of the January 11, 2019 work injury.   
 
This finding entitles claimant to an award equivalent to 22 percent of the whole 
person.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), unscheduled injuries are 
compensated based upon a 500-week schedule.  Twenty-two percent of 500 weeks is 
110 weeks.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant is currently entitled to an award of 110 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits as a result of the January 11, 2019 work 
injury. 
 
The next issue that must be addressed is the appropriate commencement date 
for the permanent partial disability benefits.  The parties have agreed and I found that 
the permanent partial disability benefits should commence on November 4, 2019. 
 
We now turn to the issue of future medical treatment.  Claimant is seeking 
additional treatment for his ongoing symptoms.  Defendant has relied on the opinions of 
Dr. Kitchens and has denied that his ongoing symptoms are related to the work injury.  I 
conclude that defendant has denied liability for the ongoing symptoms and has offered 
no care.     
 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where 
the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27; Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner, 78 (Review-Reopening 1975).    
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I find the opinions of Dr. Bansal 
regarding Mr. Richardson’s ongoing symptoms to be more persuasive and give 
his opinions greater weight.  I find that his ongoing symptoms are related to the 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 11 
 
work injury.  Mr. Richardson is entitled to additional treatment for his work injury.  
Defendant shall authorize reasonable and necessary medical treatment for Mr. 
Richardson.  This care should not be with Dr. Kitchens who has already 
expressed that Mr. Richardson does not require any additional treatment for the 
work injury.      
 
Next, we turn to the issue of medical mileage.  Iowa Code section 85.27 
requires the employer to provide reasonably necessary transportation expenses 
for work-related medical appointments.  Iowa Code section 85.39 requires the 
employer to provide reasonably necessary transportation expenses for an IME.  
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement of the medical mileage that he has submitted to the carrier.  His 
total mileage request was in the amount of $2,923.02.  Prior to the hearing 
defendants paid $1,939.44.  Thus, defendant is ordered to pay the remaining 
$983.58.    
 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be 
assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or 
at the discretion of the deputy hearing the case.  876 IAC 4.33.   
 
I find that claimant was generally successful in this case and exercise my 
discretion to assess costs against the defendant.  Claimant is seeking costs in 
the amount of $200.00 for two filing fees in this case.  I find that assessment of 
one filing fee is appropriate under 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Defendant is assessed costs 
totaling one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00).   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of nine hundred ninety-five 
and 06/100 dollars ($995.06).   
Defendant shall pay one hundred ten (110) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on the stipulated commencement date of November 4, 2019. 
Defendant shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.  
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.  
Defendant shall provide medical treatment pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27, as set 
forth above. 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s medical mileage as set forth above. 

RICHARDSON V. HOLLAND 
Page 12 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ____12th ___ day of May, 2021. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas Wertz (via WCES) 
Stephen Murray (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
