Case Number: 19002053.01
Case Title:  WILLIAMS, PENNY V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Williams Penny-19002053.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PENNY WILLIAMS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
                File No. 19002053.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                     ARBITRATION DECISION     
COMMUNITY ACTION OF  
  : 
SOUTHEAST IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INS., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes:  1402.40; 1803; 1803.1; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
 2505 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Penny Williams filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Community Action of SE Iowa, employer, and West 
Bend Mutual Insurance Company, insurer, for an accepted work injury date of 
November 12, 2018.  The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on November 15, 2021. This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring 
in Des Moines. However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using 
CourtCall. Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all 
parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without 
significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 9, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G.  
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on November 15, 2021. The parties submitted 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Mar-28  14:44:30     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 2 
 
post-hearing briefs on January 6, 2022, and the case was considered fully submitted on 
that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether the stipulated work injury is the cause of permanent disability; 
 
2. 
If so, the nature and extent of permanent disability; 
 
3. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
 
4. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; and 
 
5. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 59-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
10) She is married and has two adult children, and lives in Keokuk, Iowa. (Tr., pp. 10-
11) Claimant did not graduate from high school, but did obtain her general education 
diploma (GED). (Tr., p. 13) Claimant then obtained an associate’s degree, and then a 
bachelor’s degree in law enforcement administration and sociology, and psychology. 
(Tr., p. 14) In 1997, claimant returned to school, and eventually graduated from Western 
Illinois University with a master’s degree in elementary education. (Tr., pp. 14-15) 
 
Claimant’s job history includes early positions working as a restaurant server, 
and in retail sales positions. (Tr., pp. 18-19) In the early 1990s, claimant started working 
for an agency called Living and Aging Concerns Enterprises (LACE), where she did in-
home family counseling for families at risk of having children removed by the 
department of human services (DHS). (Tr., pp. 19-20) After a couple of years there, 
claimant went to work at Hancock County Mental Health Center in Carthage, Illinois, as 
an alcohol and substance abuse prevention education specialist. (Tr., p. 20) She 
worked there for five years, at which time she returned to school for her master’s 
degree. Claimant did not finish her master’s degree until 2002, but was able to become 
licensed as a teacher before graduating and spent some time teaching in Illinois. (Tr., 
pp. 21-22) 
 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 3 
 
In 2004, claimant started with Community Action of SE Iowa (hereinafter 
“Community Action”), in a temporary position. (Tr., p. 22) The following year, in 2005, 
she became a permanent employee, and worked as the lead teacher for Head Start. 
(Tr., p. 23) Head Start is a federally funded preschool program for underserved children. 
The children are accepted into the program based on a variety of factors, including 
family income, special needs, or other such factors. (Tr., pp. 23-24) Claimant’s students 
were between the ages of three and five years old. (Tr., p. 24) When claimant first 
started her position as lead teacher, it was a part-time position, and claimant essentially 
created her own curriculum. In approximately 2011 or 2012, it became a full-time 
position. (Tr., pp. 24-25) Most of claimant’s overall job duties remained the same, but 
she worked more hours and at times had more children in her classroom. (Tr., p. 25) 
 
Claimant described her job duties as a preschool lead teacher as involving a lot 
of standing, sitting, squatting, kneeling, and getting up and down off the floor. Claimant 
indicated that she is a “firm believer” that a person cannot teach preschool without being 
on the floor and being at their eye level. (Tr., p. 26) Claimant also had to teach basic 
skills, such as jumping and hopping on one leg, and had to sit on small chairs with the 
children that are only about seven to twelve inches off the floor. She also noted that she 
was usually assigned children with behavioral concerns, which meant she would have 
to be prepared to run after them should they attempt to run away from the classroom.  
 
Claimant has preexisting, chronic low back pain. (Tr., p. 15) She testified that for 
about the past ten years, she has had problems with her low back. She believes it to be 
sciatica caused by a bulging disk with arthritis. It mainly affects her in the evenings or 
when she stops moving. (Tr., p. 16) She has pain in her lower back that radiates down 
the back of her legs, right worse than left. She has received injections in the past that 
provided temporary relief, sought chiropractic treatment, and has seen a neurosurgeon, 
who said her condition was not yet bad enough for surgery. (Tr., p. 17) She takes 
arthritis medication, and most nights she takes one hydrocodone to help her sleep. 
Claimant testified that her chronic back pain has never affected her ability to work or 
limited what jobs she could do or what jobs she would seek out, and never affected her 
ability to perform her job duties at Community Action. (Tr., pp. 17-18)  
 
Claimant testified that from the time she started at Community Action until the 
time of her work injury in 2018, she did not have any problem performing the physical 
duties of her job. (Tr., p. 26) While she may have had back pain at times, she was still 
able to play with the children and teach, and even taught the PE class. (Tr., pp. 26-27) 
She found the work very rewarding, and formed bonds with the children and parents of 
the children in her classes. (Tr., pp. 27-29) She thinks she did a good job as lead 
teacher, and testified that she had “more parents involved in everything than anybody 
else.” (Tr., p. 29)  
 
Claimant’s work injury occurred on November 12, 2018. (Tr., p. 31) Claimant 
explained that at Head Start, versus public school, if a teacher needs to be gone, they 
are responsible for securing their own substitute teacher. (Tr., pp. 31-32) On the date of 
injury, which was a Monday, claimant’s associate’s husband called her in the early 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 4 
 
evening to let her know that the associate had lost her voice and would not be able to 
work the following day. (Tr., p. 32) Since she had lost her voice, she also could not call 
for a substitute, so claimant agreed to call for her. However, the Friday prior to the injury 
claimant had been given an updated list of substitute teachers, which she had forgotten 
in the building when she left for the evening. As such, claimant returned to the building 
to retrieve the list. (Tr., pp. 32-33) 
 
At the time claimant returned to the building, it was drizzling outside and had 
been misty most of the day. (Tr., p. 33) By then it was also dark outside. As claimant 
entered the building, she was cautious, as she felt it was getting slippery. On the way 
back out of the building, claimant testified that despite trying to be cautious, when she 
reached for the hand railing at the steps leading down from the front door, she slipped 
and fell. She was able to make it home, and called or texted her supervisor immediately 
to report the fall. She was told to complete an incident report the next day at work, 
which she did. (Tr., p. 33) 
 
The incident report notes that claimant came to the building to get an updated 
sub list, and there was a thin coating of ice at the top of the stairs that she could not 
see. (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 6) When she fell, she reported hurting her back, both wrists, and 
jarring her neck and head. Claimant was sent to Great River Business Health on 
November 14, 2018, where she saw Terry O’Neal-Cox, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 8) Claimant 
reported slipping and falling on ice and landing “firmly on her buttocks.” She reported 
pain in her neck, back, and left upper extremity at that point. She advised that she had a 
history of left forearm pain from golfing, and a history of low back pain with sciatica. She 
reported discomfort down the right buttock and posterior right thigh, but not as bad as 
she has had in the past. After physical examination, she was diagnosed with 
musculoskeletal strain, and directed to start physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 9-10) She 
was allowed to return to work with no restrictions. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. O’Neal-Cox on December 4, 2018, after completing 
some physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 12) She reported that her neck was a bit better, but 
her right hip area was much worse. She reported the right hip pain began after a few 
sessions of physical therapy and was getting worse. She had pain with range of motion, 
difficulty crossing her right leg over the left, and pain if laying on her right side. She still 
had some pain in her low back as well, but her hip was now her main concern.  
 
On physical exam, she showed pain with range of motion and pain with applied 
pressure over the proximal femur. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 12-13) She also had discomfort with 
squatting, but was able to bear weight and walk with no difficulty. (Tr., p. 13) X-ray of 
the lumbar spine and right hip were normal, but in light of her examination and 
complaints, claimant was referred to orthopedics. She was to continue working regular 
duty and continue with physical therapy in the meantime.  
 
Claimant returned to Great River Business Health on January 9, 2019, and saw 
Sarah Wingate, ARNP. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) Her right hip pain was not improving, but at the 
time it was manageable. She reported that physical therapy was not helping, and 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 5 
 
actually increasing her pain. She also reported having an MRI done, which showed a 
partial thickness tear of the right gluteus medius tendon. Claimant was advised to 
continue physical therapy and working regular duty. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 15) She next saw 
ARNP Wingate on February 5, 2019, and reported that her hip pain had become much 
worse. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) She described the pain as constant, made worse by walking, 
going up and down stairs, and standing on her right leg. She also noted that walking 
caused pain and that her knee had begun to hurt due to an altered gait. Her pain was 
also affecting her job, as she often had to kneel when working with students. After 
physical examination, ARNP Wingate referred claimant to orthopedics, and placed her 
on work restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 17) 
 
Claimant saw Derek Breder, M.D., in orthopedics on February 13, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 18) He reviewed her history, and noted her current work restrictions were 
no/limited stairs, 10-pound lift limit, and decrease squatting. She continued to complain 
of right hip pain, along with some radiating pain to the right knee due to walking “funny” 
all day. On physical examination, Dr. Breder noted tenderness to palpation over the 
greater trochanter, and pain with range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 20) He reviewed the 
prior x-ray and noted minimal degenerative changes. Finally, he stated that the MRI 
showed a partial tear of the gluteus medius at its insertion on the greater trochanter. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, pp. 20-21) 
 
Dr. Breder diagnosed tendinopathy of the right gluteus medius and trochanteric 
bursitis of the right hip. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) He stated that while she had some pain and 
weakness of her abductors, she seemed to have more pain over the lateral aspect of 
the greater trochanter and tenderness down the IT band, consistent with trochanteric 
bursitis. As such, he recommended a trial of a right hip trochanteric bursal corticosteroid 
injection, with a six-week course of physical therapy focused on generalized hip 
strengthening and IT band stretching. He performed the injection without complication, 
and allowed claimant to return to work with no restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 21) 
 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Breder on March 25, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 23) She 
reported some relief from the injection, but said her hip still hurt. Her leg felt stronger 
from physical therapy, but she had complaints of lower back pain on the right side. Dr. 
Breder recommended she continue with physical therapy for another four to six weeks. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 25) At her next follow up on May 6, 2019, claimant reported that she had 
been having difficulty with her full work duties due to pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 27) She stated 
that any time she would get to 8,000 steps on her Fitbit, she would have increased pain. 
Dr. Breder noted that overall, she continued to have severe pain with any significant 
physical activity, and her condition had not changed much with physical therapy over 
the past months. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) As such, he recommended referral to the University of 
Iowa for further evaluation and potential surgical repair of the abductor tendon.  
 
Claimant saw Robert Westermann, M.D., at the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics on June 10, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 31) He ordered plain radiographs, which showed 
mild to moderate osteoarthritis. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 32) He reviewed the MRI of claimant’s hip 
and noted an anterior-superior labral tear with degenerative changes in the articular 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 6 
 
cartilage and underlying bone, and gluteus medius tear. After physical examination, Dr. 
Westermann discussed treatment options, and it was decided to proceed to surgery. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 34) 
 
Claimant had right hip arthroscopic surgery with gluteus medius repair, IT band 
release, and trochanteric bursectomy on August 21, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 39-41) His 
operative note indicates that an arthroscopic bursectomy was performed, and there was 
extensive scarring in the greater trochanteric bursa. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) He further 
recorded using a chondral pick in the footprint of the gluteus medius in a microfracture 
style fashion, in order to stimulate healing. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) At her first post-operative 
follow-up, claimant reported right hip and buttock pain with stabbing right lateral knee 
pain. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 42) She had been using crutches and a hip brace, as her workers’ 
compensation carrier did not approve a walker. She was cleared to start physical 
therapy, and kept on restrictions including toe-touch weight bearing on the right leg 
while using a walker or crutches for six weeks, no driving, change positions as needed, 
no squatting, kneeling, or ladders, must have an adult-sized chair, and should not be 
around children who might bump into her leg or crutches/walker. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 45) 
 
At her next follow up on October 7, 2019, claimant had progressed her 
weightbearing and had been occasionally bearing her full weight for the past week. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 46) However, claimant was experiencing increased pain in the hip with full 
weightbearing. She had improved her gait and strength in physical therapy. Dr. 
Westermann felt that overall claimant was doing well. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 49) He advised 
claimant to weight-bear as tolerated and wean off one crutch, continue physical therapy, 
and allowed her to return to work part-time if she could be accommodated with one 
crutch and an adult-sized chair.  
 
On November 12, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Westermann and reported 
doing very well. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 50-51) She had been working with physical therapy on 
“sport specific” strengthening and gait training, and was anxious to get back to her 
bowling league. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 51) She was ambulating without pain and without a limp, 
and was overall very happy with the outcome of her surgery thus far. On physical 
examination, Dr. Westermann agreed that she ambulated with a normal gait, and noted 
minimal pain with range of motion, and 5 of 5 strength on hip abduction. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
53) She was to continue physical therapy, and was allowed to return to work full-time 
with a 20-pound lifting restriction.  
 
At her next follow up with Dr. Westermann on January 6, 2020, claimant reported 
achiness in her right hip with cold or damp weather, sitting for a long time, or if she 
sleeps on her right side. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 54) However, she thought she was back at full 
strength and did not have pain with a two-mile walk. On physical examination, she had 
minimal pain with range of motion and minimal tenderness at the IT band. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
55) She had 5 of 5 strength, and ambulated with a normal gait and no assistive devices. 
Dr. Westermann advised that her achiness would likely improve up to one year post-
surgery. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 56) He placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI), 
and released her from care with no restrictions. He also provided an impairment rating, 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 7 
 
using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. Using 
chapter 17, he noted range of motion and strength within normal limits, no neurologic 
dysfunction, no joint space narrowing, and no diagnosis-based reason to assign 
impairment for her gluteus medius injury. As such, he assigned zero percent permanent 
impairment. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 56) 
 
Claimant testified that she continued to have problems after Dr. Westermann’s 
release, so she returned to see him within a few months. (Tr., p. 39) She was referred 
for a diagnostic ultrasound with injection with Ryan Kruse, M.D., which took place on 
March 2, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 57) Dr. Kruse’s summary findings were: 1) no evidence of 
recurrent gluteus medius tendon tear, and 2) greater trochanteric bursitis. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
58) He then provided a sonographically-guided right greater trochanteric bursa 
corticosteroid injection.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Westermann via telehealth visit on April 23, 2020. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 60) Despite the injection, claimant continued to have pain. She reported 
increasing soreness of the hip when walking any distance over a mile, and a pulling 
sensation in the hip when twisting. Dr. Westermann noted that claimant had known mild 
to moderate hip arthritis, so he recommended an MRI in order to assess if her pain was 
coming from the arthritis or the gluteus medius repair.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Westermann on May 14, 2020, following the MRI. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 63) She reported that she felt Dr. Kruse’s injection had actually made her pain 
worse, and at that point her pain was about to the level it was prior to hip surgery. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, p. 64) Dr. Westermann reviewed the MRI, which showed postsurgical changes of 
the gluteus medius tendon, and no discrete tears. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68) He noted that the 
tendon had healed, and he did not believe any further surgical treatment would be 
reasonable. He recommended TENEX treatment “in order to debride microscopically 
her pathological area which would stimulate some healing and relieve some of her 
pain.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 68) He noted that he would discuss with workers’ compensation for 
approval, and added that it “appears to be a continuation of her prior work comp injury 
will have her assessed for tenex procedure on the repaired tendon.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 69) 
 
Claimant testified that after that appointment, she received a letter from the 
workers’ compensation insurer indicating that Dr. Westermann said it was just arthritis 
and “they’re done with me.” (Tr., p. 40) Dr. Westermann did author a letter to Amy 
Schrang of West Bend Insurance on May 29, 2020.  (Defendants’ Exhibit C, p. 7) His 
letter notes it is in response to an email request dated May 12, 2020, in which he was 
asked to answer two questions. The first question was: “Care regarding the acute injury 
of 11/12/18 has been effectively treated and resolved leaving the [employee] at her 
baseline pre-existing arthritic status?” Dr. Westermann answered “Yes.” The second 
question read: “There was no permanent exacerbation or aggravation of her arthritis 
and she should resume regular care for her arthritic condition(s) with her personal 
provider?” Dr. Westermann again answered “Yes.” (Def. Ex. C, p. 7) It appears this 
letter was the basis on which the defendants denied any further care for claimant’s hip 
injury. 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
On June 26, 2020, Dr. Westermann replied to a “check-box” letter authored by 
Kimberly Westfall of West Bend Insurance. (Def. Ex. C, pp. 9-10) The letter indicates 
that Dr. Westermann was provided with preexisting medical records dating back to 
2006, and requested his opinions regarding additional questions. (Def. Ex. C, p. 9) First, 
Ms. Westfall wrote that claimant “has extensive preexisting arthritic condition(s),” which 
were temporarily exacerbated by her work injury, but “outside of the surgical tendon 
repair” the work injury did not materially change those conditions in any way. Dr. 
Westermann marked that he agreed with that statement. The next statement indicated 
that as of Dr. Westermann’s last visit with claimant on May 14, 2020, the repaired 
tendon had healed, and “the underlying arthritic condition and tendinopathy were 
causing continued pain complaints.” The work injury was only a temporary aggravation 
of the underlying arthritic condition, and no longer a substantial factor in causing 
claimant’s continued problems. Dr. Westermann again indicated agreement with that 
statement. The next statement indicated that going forward, any future care claimant 
needs, “including the TENEX procedure recommended 5/14/20 prior to your review of 
her prior medical records,” should be attributed to claimant’s preexisting arthritic 
condition, and the work injury would not be a substantial factor in causing the need for 
any future treatment. (Def. Ex. C, p. 10) Dr. Westermann agreed. Finally, the last 
statement indicated that Dr. Westermann’s prior declaration of MMI with a zero percent 
impairment rating and no restrictions remains accurate, with which he again agreed.  
 
After the denial of additional treatment for her work-related injury, claimant 
sought a second opinion on her own, at Steindler Orthopedic Clinic. (Tr., p. 41) On 
September 17, 2020, she saw Taylor Dennison, M.D. In reviewing claimant’s history, he 
noted that after surgery claimant’s strength recovered well and she had initial 
improvement in pain, but it never completely resolved and eventually worsened. (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 70) He also noted the repeat MRI claimant had in May of 2020 showed healing of 
the tendon and “only mild arthritic change.” On physical examination, Dr. Dennison 
noted marked trochanteric tenderness to palpation. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 71) Range of motion of 
the hip was painless, and claimant had 5 of 5 strength in all muscle groups, and a non-
antalgic gait. Hip x-rays taken that day showed well-preserved joint space without 
dysplastic features or significant FAI. Dr. Dennison’s diagnosis was trochanteric bursitis, 
right hip, and persistent right hip soft tissue pain. He noted that there is strong evidence 
clinically and radiographically that claimant’s tendon healed following surgery, she 
continued to experience significant pain in the area likely related to bursitis and/or 
tendinitis. He specifically noted that he did not think that arthritis was a significant factor 
in her pain. He noted that she had “minimal radiographic arthritis and negative 
provocative hip maneuvers.” (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 71-72) He thought needle tenotomy would 
be one possible treatment consideration, and referred claimant to another physician at 
Steindler for discussion. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 72) 
 
On Dr. Dennison’s recommendation, claimant saw Daniel Jones, M.D., on 
October 13, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 73) His physical examination was very similar to Dr. 
Dennison’s. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 74) On review of the MRI from May 6, 2020, he noted “mild 
femoral acetabular [degenerative joint disease]. Mild bilateral hamstring origin 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 9 
 
tendinopathy.” He reviewed x-rays from her prior appointment with Dr. Dennison and 
noted “mild bilateral femoral acetabular degenerative changes right-greater-than-left,” 
and “moderate enthesophyte formation around the greater trochanter on the right 
greater than left.” (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 74) Under “impression,” Dr. Jones wrote that after 
claimant’s gluteal tendon repair and IT band release she had improved function but 
persistent lateral hip pain with hypersensitivity, and suspected it represents some 
residual gluteal tendinopathy. He could not rule out possible nerve hypersensitivity 
related to her surgery or initial injury. His suspected diagnosis was gluteal tendinopathy 
leading to recurrent or persistent episodes of bursitis. Potential treatment options 
included short-term and long-term options, including platelet rich plasma (PRP) 
injections or percutaneous needle tenotomy (PNT). The record indicates claimant 
decided to try PNT, with the understanding that there was no guarantee it would fix her 
problem. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 75) 
 
At claimant’s next appointment on October 29, 2020, she presented for right 
gluteal PRP injection. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 77) It is unclear whether the prior record indicating 
she wanted to try the PNT was simply an error, or if the decision changed. In any event, 
prior to the procedure the area was evaluated with ultrasound, which showed some 
evidence of “acute tendon inflammation and chronic tendon thickening of the distal 
gluteal tendons near the greater trochanter.” (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 77) Following the injection, 
she was instructed on a gradual increase in exercise/strengthening, and instructed to 
begin a course of physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 77-78) Claimant testified that she paid 
$800.00 out-of-pocket for the injection. (Tr., p. 42)  
 
When claimant returned for follow up on November 23, 2020, she reported no 
significant changes in her symptoms following the PRP injection and physical therapy. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 79) While she noted limited improvement, she continued to have pain. (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 80) Dr. Jones stated that some people have a more delayed symptomatic 
improvement and there was still a chance she would get some benefit. He encouraged 
her to stay consistent with her therapy exercises and continue to work on gluteal 
strengthening, core, and functional mechanics.  
 
There is a note from Dr. Jones dated December 9, 2020, indicating he spoke to 
an attorney who had been working on claimant’s workers’ compensation case. (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 82) He recorded that they discussed his suspicion that claimant’s current lateral hip 
pain is still related to her prior injury and previous surgery, particularly with the 
hypersensitivity in the area. They discussed that there could still be some chance for 
improvement, although it is less likely as more time passes. Finally, he notes that he left 
it with claimant that she could call back if she would like to consider further treatment 
options, which could include PNT or amnion fix type injection to the area, although the 
success of those options is somewhat unknown as they are not commonly done in a 
patient with a history of the prior surgery claimant had. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 82) 
 
Following the phone conversation, Dr. Jones signed a “Statement of Dr. Daniel 
Jones” on December 11, 2020. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) The statement indicates that 
claimant continues to suffer from pain and discomfort in her right hip more than two 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 10 
 
years since the original injury. In Dr. Jones’ opinion, her current pain and discomfort in 
her right hip and need for treatment are a result of the original 2018 work injury and 
related care. He further stated that his treatment has been an attempt to relieve her pain 
and discomfort, and they were considering additional options to provide her with relief. 
Dr. Jones also opined that since claimant had been suffering with the condition for more 
than two years, it is likely that she is left with some level of permanency. However, he 
declined to provide an impairment rating at that time as she had not completed all 
treatment he may provide. Finally, he stated that he does not believe her pain is a result 
of any preexisting arthritis, as her MRI “looks good and she has minimal arthritis in her 
hip.” Rather, he opined that her pain and discomfort is more likely than not associated 
with the original injury and surgery. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) 
 
At defendants’ request, claimant attended an independent medical evaluation 
(IME) with Wesley Smidt, M.D., at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons (DMOS). The 
IME took place on May 20, 2021. (Def. Ex. B, p. 2) Dr. Smidt reviewed claimant’s 
treatment history. Claimant advised that while she had a history of low back pain, she 
did not have any prior injuries to the right hip. At the time of the IME, claimant’s 
complaints were pain and sensitivity over the lateral aspect of the right hip. (Def. Ex. B, 
p. 3) She also complained of pain that radiates down the outside part of her leg, 
sometimes past her knee. She noted pain with “power walking” or extended walking 
throughout the day, especially with over 10,000 steps in one day. She continued to bowl 
and golf, but reported discomfort with those activities and additional pain if the area is 
bumped. She advised that the pain was essentially the same as prior to surgery.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Smidt noted tenderness over the lateral aspect of 
the hip over a fairly wide area. Claimant had no pain with range of motion, and normal 
strength. She moved about the exam room without guarding or discomfort. Dr. Smidt 
took x-rays, which showed changes that can be seen with trochanteric bursitis, with 
irregularity of the bone over the greater trochanter and lateral aspect of the proximal 
femur. He noted more boney formation and irregularity at the surface of the right hip 
than the left, and increased bone formation in the area of the greater trochanter at the 
insertion of the gluteus medius and minimus tendons. Finally, he noted mild narrowing 
of the joint space, particularly medially of the right hip joint. He noted that the left hip 
joint was normal. (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) 
 
Dr. Smidt provided responses to several questions posed by defendants. His 
diagnosis for the November 12, 2018 work injury was “right hip greater trochanteric 
bursitis with partial tear of the gluteus medius insertion.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 4) He opined 
that the work injury was the substantial factor in the need for the surgery Dr. 
Westermann performed. He further opined that the diagnosis for the treatment claimant 
received at the Steindler Clinic is that of persistent greater trochanteric bursitis, with 
healed gluteus medius tendon, and that diagnosis was the substantial factor is causing 
the need for her treatment at Steindler. Dr. Smidt opined that no further treatment was 
warranted for claimant’s persistent greater trochanteric bursitis, given that the gluteus 
medius tear had healed, and she had multiple series of physical therapy and injections, 
including PRP injection, without benefit. As such, he would consider claimant to have 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 11 
 
reached MMI on November 23, 2020, after her follow up with Dr. Jones following the 
PRP injection. Dr. Smidt was not asked about the need for permanent restrictions. 
 
Finally, Dr. Smidt provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides. Using 
Table 17-33, he assigned a 2 percent whole body impairment rating for chronic 
trochanteric bursitis, noting that she does not have an abnormal gait, which would be a 
3 percent rating. (Def. Ex. B, pp. 4-5) She does have a limited gait and pain with gait, 
especially with longer distance or duration. However, Dr. Smidt opined that a 2 percent 
rating was more appropriate. 
 
Claimant later had an IME at her attorney’s request with Sunil Bansal, M.D. That 
IME took place on July 30, 2021, and Dr. Bansal’s report is dated September 6, 2021. 
(Cl. Ex. 2) Dr. Bansal reviewed medical records, including records pre-dating the work 
injury that discuss claimant’s degenerative changes in her lumbar spine. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 
3-7) He noted her subjective symptoms at that time included lower back and right hip 
pain, and that going up stairs was difficult for her hip. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15) She does not 
have difficulty putting on her shoes or socks. Certain activities such as power walking 
aggravate her pain. She continues to golf, but must use a cart rather than walking the 
course. She also complained that her neck was still stiff at times. 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Bansal noted some tenderness in her neck and 
lower back. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 15-16) With respect to her right hip, he noted tenderness to 
palpation over the greater trochanter and trochanteric bursitis. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 16) He also 
noted an accentuation of pain with internal and external rotation of the hip, but full range 
of motion. Finally, he noted an antalgic gait. His diagnosis of the injuries sustained in 
the incident on November 12, 2018 was right gluteus medius partial tearing and greater 
trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS). (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 17) He opined that the fall at work 
was the cause of the GTPS, and noted that the condition can be mistaken for common 
causes of hip pain, including osteoarthritis of the hip, lumbar spine referred pain, and 
pelvic pathology. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 17-18) However, he noted that the ability to put on her 
socks and shoes is a useful question in differentiating GTPS from hip osteoarthritis, 
because patients with GTPS will not have difficulty with that task. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18) 
 
With respect to impairment, Dr. Bansal provided a 3 percent whole person 
impairment rating related to the trochanteric bursitis, using table 17-33 of the AMA 
Guides. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18) For maintenance, he recommended intermittent trochanteric 
bursal steroid injections. He further noted that a TENEX procedure was recommended, 
and explained that that procedure is “essentially an ultrasound-guided percutaneous 
needle tenotomy. It is indicated for tendinopathy, such as gluteal tendinopathy, and 
therefore wholly applicable to her injury-related condition.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18) Finally, Dr. 
Bansal recommended restrictions of avoiding multiple stairs and climbing, rare kneeling 
or squatting, and no prolonged walking greater than 30 minutes at a time. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
19) 
 
The parties disagree whether claimant sustained a permanent injury to her hip as 
a result of the November 12, 2018 injury. Defendants argue that based on Dr. 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 12 
 
Westermann’s opinion, the work injury caused no permanent impairment, and 
claimant’s ongoing hip symptoms are related to pre-existing arthritis.  
 
Claimant testified that at her last appointment with Dr. Westermann on May 14, 
2020, he did not tell her anything about her arthritis causing her ongoing symptoms. 
(Tr., pp. 40-41) Claimant has never treated for hip arthritis prior to the work injury, only 
arthritis in her lower back. (Tr., p. 41; Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1-5) All prior records related to 
claimant’s hip injury reference mild to moderate arthritis, including the MRI results. 
Additionally, Dr. Westermann’s statement after claimant’s appointment on May 14, 
2020, was that her condition appeared to be “a continuation of her prior work comp 
injury will have her assessed for tenex procedure on the repaired tendon.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
69) All treatment recommendations were aimed at claimant’s repaired tendon, not an 
arthritic condition. In fact, as Dr. Bansal explained, a TENEX procedure is “essentially 
an ultrasound-guided percutaneous needle tenotomy. It is indicated for tendinopathy, 
such as gluteal tendinopathy, and is therefore wholly applicable to [claimant’s] injury-
related condition.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18) It does not make sense for Dr. Westermann to 
recommend a procedure to treat claimant’s tendon injury if he truly believed her 
symptoms were due to arthritis. Additionally, it is unclear what medical records Dr. 
Westermann reviewed prior to responding to the June 26, 2020 letter, but none of the 
medical records in evidence indicate claimant ever had hip complaints prior to the work 
injury, or a preexisting arthritic condition in her hip that was only “temporarily” 
aggravated by the work injury.  
 
The only medical records in evidence that pre-date the work injury indicate 
claimant had preexisting arthritis causing low back pain and sciatica, which is pain 
radiating down the back of her right leg. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1-5) There are no records 
indicating claimant had preexisting hip pain or pain radiating down the side of her right 
leg, over the IT band, as was true after the work injury. The records support claimant’s 
testimony, that prior to the work injury she never had right hip pain. (Tr., p. 37) To the 
contrary, Dr. Westermann’s opinions as expressed in the June 26, 2020 letter are not 
supported by the remainder of the evidence. 
 
In addition, Dr. Jones, Dr. Smidt, and Dr. Bansal all agree that the work injury on 
November 12, 2018 and related treatment is the cause of claimant’s ongoing hip 
condition. Each doctor has indicated that claimant’s pain is the result of tendinopathy 
and bursitis due to the torn gluteus medius tendon and related surgery. None of these 
three physicians found claimant to have any significant arthritic condition in her right hip 
that would be the source of her ongoing symptoms. Given the evidence as a whole, I 
find that the November 12, 2018 injury resulted in a permanent injury to claimant’s right 
hip. All treatment claimant has received for her right hip since the date of injury has 
been causally related to the work injury.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Jones on September 27, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 83) She 
continued to report right hip pain, and indicated she did not feel that she got significant 
relief with the PRP injection, as it “never really kicked in.” On physical examination, she 
continued to have full range of motion and strength, with tenderness to palpation over 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 13 
 
the region of the greater trochanter. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 84) Dr. Jones recommended claimant 
try some home exercises over the next couple of months, and provided a trial of some 
topical patches and gel to try. 
 
Claimant testified that the PRP injection did help for a little while. (Tr., p. 43) She 
also testified that it is her understanding that additional, similar procedures may provide 
her with long-term relief in the future. (Tr., pp. 74-75) With respect to her current 
condition, claimant testified that she is often in pain. (Tr., p. 56) It hurts to sit certain 
ways; for instance, if she crosses her legs she feels a pulling sensation. At times she 
feels like something is pinched, and other times she feels like someone is ripping her 
skin. She has a constant ache, which can get worse depending on how she moves or 
how long she has been sitting. The undersigned personally observed claimant to be 
shifting in her seat and appearing visibly uncomfortable after about one hour of 
testimony. Claimant also testified that she cannot walk for extended periods of time and 
has difficulty getting up and down off the ground. (Tr., p. 57) She rated her pain at a 3 or 
4 most of the time, although if her hip is bumped or pushed the pain increases. Claimant 
also sleeps with a CPAP machine, which is on the right side of her bed, and as such 
she is used to sleeping on her right side. (Tr., p. 58) However, she often cannot sleep 
on her right side anymore due to her hip, which makes sleeping difficult as she cannot 
get comfortable. Claimant testified that the hydrocodone she takes to help with her back 
pain helps her hip somewhat, but it does not help the feeling of pressure when she lays 
on her hip. (Tr., pp. 58-59)  
 
With respect to her right leg pain, claimant testified that prior to the hip injury, she 
only had pain down the back of her leg. (Tr., p. 59) However since the hip injury, she 
has had pain down the side of her leg, and the pain is more from moving or touching it 
or from something bumping it. 
 
Claimant testified that after the work injury, she did continue to work as a 
preschool teacher for Community Action, but often would have some difficulties. (Tr., p. 
59) Usually by the end of the day she would be in a lot of pain from being up and down 
with the children, and she was very cautious of anything being on her right side, which 
would cause her to distance herself from the children at times. (Tr., pp. 59-60) Prior to 
surgery, claimant did not miss work due to her injury, but she frequently left work as 
early as she could due to pain. (Tr., p. 60) When she returned to work after the surgery, 
she still went home early once or twice per week, but not as frequently as she did prior 
to surgery. 
 
Claimant’s employment at Community Action was terminated by the employer on 
November 13, 2020. (Def. Ex. G, pp. 26-27) In the termination letter, it is indicated that 
claimant was terminated for a number of reasons, including “egregious violation of Head 
Start Policy, CACFP rules, and USDA regulations.” (Def. Ex. G, p. 28) Specifically, 
claimant served the children pizza produced by an outside company for lunch on 
October 21, 2020, which is a violation of federal rules and Head Start policy. The letter 
also indicates claimant was insubordinate to her immediate supervisor on October 28, 
2020, when she replied to an email request to complete a required newsletter with 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 14 
 
“Sorry, no time.” (Def. Ex. G, pp. 28, 33-34) The letter also cites to three separate 
reprimands in 2019, and concerns raised in her annual evaluations in 2018, 2019, and 
2020. (Def. Ex. G, p. 28) At the time of claimant’s termination, she was working full time 
and earning $19.54 per hour. (Def. Ex. G, pp. 30-31)  
 
Since her termination from Community Action, claimant has worked as a 
substitute teacher for the Keokuk School District, and has worked as a part-time 
occasional minister for Bethany UCC Church in Tioga, Illinois. (Tr., pp. 52-53) She is 
paid $220.00 by the church each time she fills in as minister, and over the summer of 
2021 she did it three times. (Tr., p. 53) She is also a volunteer at her personal church, 
where she is an elder and is also on the governing board, and used to serve as a 
trustee. She and her husband also volunteer with Meals on Wheels and serve meals 
every Friday. (Tr., p. 56) 
 
 With respect to her substitute teaching, at the time of hearing she was subbing 
two or three days per week. (Tr., p. 54) Claimant testified that she applied for two 
permanent positions with the school district in the spring of 2021, but was not 
interviewed for either. Claimant explained that she believes the reason she was not 
interviewed is twofold. First, she had to change her teaching license to a substitute 
license when she went to work for Head Start, because it is not a state-accredited 
school so she was not able to maintain a teaching license while working there. (Tr., pp. 
54-55) She is able to change it back to a full teaching license with a letter of intent from 
a principal, but believes this is part of why she is was not interviewed. (Tr., p. 55) 
Second, she testified that since almost all of her experience is in preschool, and 
specifically at Head Start, she does not have as much experience with technology or 
teaching upper classroom levels. While she is learning now through subbing, she is not 
as familiar with some of the technology used in classrooms today, which impacts her 
ability to secure a full-time teaching job above the preschool level. (Tr., p. 56)  
 
With respect to claimant’s ability to work, she testified that she has had to 
“rethink” what she is able to do since her injury, as she cannot do all the things she 
could before. (Tr., p. 61) For example, she does not believe she can return to teaching 
preschool, as it is too difficult to get on the floor and play with the children. She does not 
feel that she can teach preschool the “right” way without the ability to physically be on 
the floor with them. (Tr., pp. 61-62) She testified that there was a preschool opening that 
she would have been offered, but she declined even the offer to substitute as she did 
not believe she was physically capable of doing the job properly. (Tr., p. 61) Claimant 
believes that if she was still able to teach preschool, she would have more job 
opportunities, since that is where most of her experience lies. (Tr., p. 62) That being 
said, claimant admits she does not have any doctor-imposed work or activity restrictions 
related to her hip injury, other than Dr. Bansal’s recommendations. (Tr., pp. 71-72) 
Additionally, claimant is still able to golf and bowl regularly, and also plays pickleball. 
(Tr., p. 73) She testified that she does limit herself in terms of climbing, kneeling, stairs, 
squatting, and prolonged walking, consistent with Dr. Bansal’s recommendations. (Tr., 
pp. 75-76) 
 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 15 
 
Claimant’s job description from Community Action for her role as Head Start lead  
teacher is included in evidence. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 20-21) Under essential duties is it 
required that teachers eat with children at a child-sized table. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
Additionally, the physical demands of the job include sitting on the floor and in low 
chairs; stooping, kneeling, crouching, bending, and crawling; the ability to stand, walk, 
run, and climb or balance; and regularly lifting/moving up to 50 pounds and occasionally 
100 pounds. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 21) Based on claimant’s testimony regarding the difficulties 
she had when she returned to work following her injury, as well as her current abilities 
and limitations, I find it is unlikely that she can return to working as a preschool teacher. 
While claimant initially returned to work making the same or greater salary, she was 
subsequently terminated from employment, and at the time of hearing was earning less 
than she was at the time of injury. Claimant’s permanent hip injury has decreased her 
earning capacity in that she is no longer able to teach preschool. Claimant is motivated 
to return to work, as demonstrated by her work substitute teaching and her attempts to 
secure a full-time teaching job. As claimant gains additional experience with technology 
and teaching at higher grade levels, it is possible she will find full-time work in the 
future. However, based on her situation at the time of hearing, I find claimant has 
sustained a 40 percent loss of earning capacity as a result of the work-related injury. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is 
based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it 
need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa 
App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 16 
 
 
The first issue to determine is whether claimant’s November 12, 2018 work injury 
resulted in permanent disability. Defendants argue that based on Dr. Westermann’s 
opinion, the injury caused no permanent impairment, and claimant’s ongoing hip 
symptoms are related to pre-existing arthritis. Claimant contends that the work injury did 
leave her with permanent disability, based on her testimony and the remainder of the 
evidence. The preponderance of the evidence supports claimant’s argument. Dr. 
Westermann is the only physician who opined that claimant’s current, ongoing 
complaints are related to arthritis. Further, he has only expressed that opinion in 
providing essentially “yes or no” answers to questions posed by the defendants. His 
change in opinion is not credible, especially considering the treatment he 
recommended, a TENEX procedure, is designed to treat claimant’s repaired tendon, not 
an arthritic condition. None of the medical records in evidence support the conclusion 
that claimant had a significant arthritic condition or pain in her right hip prior to the work 
injury. Claimant has met her burden to prove her work injury resulted in permanent 
disability. 
 
 
Since the injury resulted in permanent disability, the next issue to determine is 
the nature and extent of disability claimant has sustained. An injury to the hip is an 
unscheduled injury and thus considered an injury to the body as a whole. Defendants 
argue that claimant’s recovery is limited to the impairment rating pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v). Claimant argues that she is entitled to industrial disability. 
 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
Before 2017, permanent partial disability to an unscheduled body part caused by 
a work injury was “compensated by the industrial disability method which takes into 
account the loss of earning capacity.” Gilleland v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 
404, 407 (Iowa 1994) (citing Mortimer, 502 N.W.2d at 14-15). With the 2017 
amendments, the legislature carved out an exception to this general rule and created a 
mandatory bifurcated litigation process on the issue of permanent disability under 
certain circumstances. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 8 (now codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v)). The statute now articulates an exception and the circumstances 
triggering the bifurcated litigation process as follows: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 17 
 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee's 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee's earning 
capacity caused by the employee's permanent partial disability. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).  
Thus, the 2017 amendments changed the statute so that its text expressly 
incorporates the agency’s review-reopening process to create a mandatory bifurcated 
litigation process when certain criteria are met. See, e.g., Garcia v. Smithfield Foods, 
File No. 1657969.01 (Arb. February 16, 2022). Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), 
review-reopening is a process by which a determination of compensation is revisited 
due to a change in the claimant’s condition. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387, 391–95 (Iowa 2009) The bifurcated litigation process created in section 85.34(2)(v) 
allows a claimant to seek a new agency determination of permanent disability using an 
industrial disability analysis when the defendant-employer terminates the claimant’s 
employment after the initial agency award or approval of the parties’ agreement for 
settlement. Presumably, this is because the defendant-employer’s discharge of the 
claimant after the award or agreement for settlement creates a potential change in the 
claimant’s condition that could trigger reopening the determination of permanent 
disability. See id.  
Defendants argue that because claimant returned to work with Community Action 
at the same or greater earnings following the work injury, her permanency benefits, if 
any, are limited to the functional impairment ratings pursuant to section 85.34(2)(v). 
Defendants state that had claimant not violated Head Start policy, resulting in her 
termination, she would have continued to earn those wages at the time of hearing. 
Additionally, defendants argue that claimant is not entitled to industrial disability based 
on termination of employment because there is no existing award or agreement for 
settlement in this case. Defendants argue that the proper interpretation of the statue 
requires an award or agreement for settlement to occur prior to the termination of 
employment, which then triggers the claimant’s right to review reopening under section 
85.34(2)(v).  
Defendants’ arguments are not convincing. The Commissioner considered the 
amendments to section 85.34 in Martinez v. Pavlich, Inc., File No. 5063900 (App. July 
30, 2020). In Martinez, the claimant voluntarily quit employment with the defendant-
employer and accepted a position with a different employer at higher pay. Id. While the 
nature of the employment separation differs from the one in this case, Martinez is 
nonetheless guiding. Id. The Commissioner considered how the provisions at issue in 
this case should be construed and found: 
[W]hen the two new provisions . . . are read together, as they are set forth 
in the statute, it appears the legislature intended to address only the 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 18 
 
scenario in which a claimant initially returns to work with the defendant-
employer or is offered work by the defendant-employer at the same or 
greater earnings but is later terminated by the defendant-employer. 
Id. (emphasis added). In other words, if an injured worker returns to work for the same 
employer and earns the same or greater wages than he or she did on the date of injury, 
the injured worker’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits is limited to the 
functional loss unless or until the injured workers’ employment relationship is terminated 
by either the injured worker or the employer. Id. Since the Martinez decision, a number 
of arbitration decisions have concluded similarly. See, e.g., Raley v. Securitas Security 
Services, File No. 5067169 (Arb., March 26, 2021); Turner v. NCI Building Systems, 
Inc., File No. 1652235.01 (Arb., Feb. 24, 2022); Ocampo v. New Fashion Pork, File No. 
20012252.01 (Arb., March 4, 2022). 
 
Defendants’ argument that an award or agreement for settlement must occur 
prior to the termination of employment in order to trigger the right to review reopening 
actually supports the Commissioner’s interpretation of the statute. In order for the 
bifurcated litigation process to apply, there must first be an award or agreement for 
settlement, so there is something to reopen in the review reopening procedure. In cases 
such as this, where the employee is terminated or voluntarily leaves employment prior 
to an award or agreement, there would never be a scenario in which industrial disability 
would be appropriate. This could lead to unfair and illogical results in many cases. 
 
Additionally, the fact that claimant initially earned the same or greater wages 
when she initially returned to work is not convincing. The Commissioner has determined 
that logic and fairness dictate that the post-injury “snapshot” of claimant’s salary, wages 
or earnings should occur at the time of the hearing, just as industrial disability is 
measured as the evidence stands at the time of the hearing. Vogt v. XPO Logistics 
Freight, File No. 5064694.01 (App., June 11, 2021) Performing the comparison based 
on a claimant’s initial return to work could also lead to unfair and illogical results. Id.  
In this case, the defendant employer terminated its employment relationship with 
claimant on November 13, 2020. At the time of hearing, claimant was not receiving the 
same or greater salary, wages, or earnings as she received at the time of the injury. As 
such, claimant is entitled to an industrial disability evaluation.  
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee’s age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer’s offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
Based on claimant’s testimony regarding her current abilities and limitations, I 
found it is unlikely that she can return to working as a preschool teacher. While she did 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 19 
 
continue to work as a preschool teacher for some time after the injury, it was not without 
difficulty. She credibly testified that after the injury, she was often in pain by the end of 
the day and would frequently leave work as early as possible. Additionally, she testified 
that currently, she does limit herself in terms of climbing, kneeling, stairs, squatting, and 
prolonged walking, consistent with Dr. Bansal’s recommendations. She does not believe 
she is physically capable of teaching preschool any longer, as she cannot do the job 
properly with those limitations. Because her past experience is primarily limited to 
teaching in a preschool setting, claimant had not been able to secure permanent work 
at the time of hearing. Claimant is motivated to return to work, as demonstrated by her 
work substitute teaching and her attempts to secure a full-time teaching job. As claimant 
gains additional experience with technology and teaching at higher grade levels, it is 
possible she will find full-time work in the future. However, based on her situation at the 
time of hearing, I found claimant has sustained a 40 percent loss of earning capacity as 
a result of the work-related injury. This is equal to 200 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits. 
 
The final issues to determine involve payment of medical expenses and 
claimant’s IME. Claimant seeks medical expenses from her treatment at Steindler 
Orthopedic Clinic following defendants’ denial of ongoing treatment for her work injury. 
Defendants argue that claimant is not entitled to the expenses for the unauthorized 
care, as she has not shown the care was beneficial in improving her condition. Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010). However, 
under Iowa law, once defendants denied compensability for ongoing medical treatment, 
they lost the right to choose the medical providers for that care during the period of 
denial. “[T]he employer has no right to choose the medical care when compensability is 
contested.” Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 204. Further, when compensability is contested, 
“the employer cannot assert an authorization defense in response to a subsequent 
claim by the employee for the expenses of the alternate medical care.” R. R. Donnelly, 
670 N.W.2d at 197-198. 
 
 
Ultimately, therefore, defendants are precluded from asserting an authorization 
defense as to any treatment during the period of denial, and defendants lost the right to 
control the medical care claimant sought during the period of denial. Brewer-Strong, 913 
N.W.2d at 247; Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 204. As such, claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement for the treatment she received at Steindler during the period of the 
denial, as reflected in claimant’s exhibit 5. 
 
Finally, claimant seeks reimbursement for her IME with Dr. Bansal, pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39. The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted 
that the Iowa Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code 
section 85.39 in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 
(Iowa 2015) (hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 
5044716 (Appeal December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the 
expenses associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, 
the process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 20 
 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). 
 
In this case, the employer sought an impairment rating from Dr. Westermann on 
January 6, 2020, and a second rating from Dr. Smidt on May 20, 2021. Claimant’s IME 
with Dr. Bansal took place on July 30, 2021, and his report was issued on September 6, 
2021. Defendants did not provide any argument to suggest claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement or that Dr. Bansal’s fees were unreasonable. Because Dr. Bansal’s IME 
took place subsequent to the defendants’ ratings, claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of his full IME fee in the amount of $3,637.00, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. (Cl. 
Ex. 6, 26) 
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant two hundred (200) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing on the stipulated date of January 6, 2020, at the 
stipulated rate of four hundred ninety-five and 34/100 dollars ($495.34). 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
 
Defendants are responsible for all reasonable and causally related medical care 
with respect to claimant’s right hip/right lower extremity injury, including but not limited 
to treatment claimant received at Steindler Orthopedic Clinic. 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant in the amount of three thousand six 
hundred thirty-seven and 00/100 dollars ($3,637.00) for payment of Dr. Bansal’s IME 
report, pursuant to Iowa Code §85.39. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this _____28th ___ day of March, 2022. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

WILLIAMS V. COMMUNITY ACTION OF SOUTHEAST IOWA 
Page 21 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nicholas Pothitakis (via WCES) 
Charles Blades (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
