Case Number: 5063847
Case Title:  MOORE, LESLIE V. CONAGRA FOODS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Moore, Leslie-5063847.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 21-0339 
Filed May 25, 2022 
 
 
CONAGRA FOODS, INC. and OLD REPUBLIC INS. CO. 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
 
vs. 
 
LESLIE MOORE, 
 
Defendant-Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Jeanie K. Vaudt, Judge. 
 
 
 
An employer appeals a judicial review order affirming an award of workers’ 
compensation.  AFFIRMED. 
 
 
Kent M. Smith of Smith Mills Schrock Blades P.C., West Des Moines, for 
appellants. 
 
Benjamin R. Roth of Fulton, Martin & Andres, P.C., Waterloo, for appellee. 
 
 
Considered by Tabor, P.J., and Greer and Ahlers, JJ.

 
2
TABOR, Presiding Judge. 
 
 
ConAgra Foods, Inc. (ConAgra) appeals two findings by the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commission: (1) that Leslie Moore sustained a permanent 
impairment to his hip and lower back resulting from an injury on the job and (2) that 
the work-related injury led to a forty-percent industrial disability.  Considering the 
commissioner’s credibility determinations and applying the deferential standards 
of review, we affirm both findings. 
 
I. 
Facts and Prior Proceedings 
ConAgra hired Moore in 2001 and continues to employ him as a production 
technician.  In June 2016, while on the job, Moore felt a “pop” while twisting to lift 
a stack of boxes to place on a machine.  He recalled immediate pain to his left hip 
from the movement.  Moore reported the injury to a supervisor and filled out an 
incident report.  After returning from vacation, Moore’s hip pain persisted.  So he 
decided to see the company doctor, David Kirkle.  Dr. Kirkle examined Moore’s hip 
and detected signs of arthritis.  The doctor released Moore for work without 
restrictions while recommending naproxen, an anti-inflammatory drug, for his pain 
and stiffness. 
 
Moore returned to his job the next day and was notified by a human 
resources representative that ConAgra no longer considered his injury to be work 
related.  Two months later, Moore saw his orthopedic doctor, Roswell Johnston, 
for an evaluation of his left hip.  Moore explained the June work incident and the 
sharp stabbing pain he felt.  Dr. Johnston examined Moore’s hip, finding that it did 
not show any signs of arthritis.  Dr. Johnston diagnosed Moore with a strain to his 

 
3
sartorius muscle, which is a superficial anterior thigh muscle.  The doctor advised 
Moore to avoid activities that would aggravate his condition. 
 
Moore returned to work, but his hip pain did not go away.  On top of that, 
his back started to cause him problems.  Because of this, he saw a provider at his 
primary care clinic.  The provider proscribed naproxen and physical therapy.  
Compliant, in late 2016 and into early 2017, Moore attended physical therapy, 
which helped alleviate his pain.  But the relief was short lived.  Moore returned to 
the primary care clinic with similar back pain.  Moore also missed significant time 
from work in February and March 2017 because of that pain.  Later in 2017, Moore 
returned to physical therapy, complaining of left hip pain.  The pain was severe 
enough that he missed work in August and early September 2017.  Back on the 
job, Moore’s symptoms emerged again.  Moore received lumbar facet injections 
for the pain in late September, early November, and mid-January 2018.  The 
repeated treatments corresponded to increased pain from working.  Moore also 
received radiofrequency ablation in February 2018. 
 
Then in May 2018, Moore petitioned for workers’ compensation benefits, 
alleging he sustained injuries to his hip and back at work.  At the arbitration hearing, 
Moore testified that, up to the hearing date, he was receiving care for his hip and 
back pain and also undergoing physical therapy.  Both Moore and ConAgra 
solicited expert opinions for the hearing.  ConAgra offered an opinion from 
Dr. Charles Mooney, who found no permanent impairment related to Moore’s hip 
or back.  Dr. Mooney also recommended no additional care or work restrictions for 
Moore.  In contrast, Moore provided an independent medical examination from 
Dr. David Segal, who found that Moore had a nineteen-percent permanent 

 
4
impairment.  Moore also offered the opinion of Dr. Johnston who believed that 
Moore’s work injury was a substantial factor in causing his hip issues and agreed 
with Dr. Segal’s impairment finding. 
The deputy commissioner ruled that (1) Moore proved an ongoing 
impairment to his hip and low back caused by the work injury and (2) his 
impairment merited an award of forty-percent industrial disability.  ConAgra 
appealed the arbitration decision; the workers’ compensation commissioner 
affirmed.  Upon judicial review, the district court decided substantial evidence 
supported the commissioner’s finding of permanent impairment and the industrial 
disability award was not irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  ConAgra now 
challenges the judicial review decision. 
II. Scope and Standards of Review 
The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, chapter 17A of the Iowa Code 
(2018), governs our review.  See Iowa Code § 86.26; Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  “Under the Act, we may only interfere with the 
commissioner’s decision if it is erroneous under one of the grounds enumerated in 
the statute, and a party’s substantial rights have been prejudiced.”  Meyer, 710 
N.W.2d at 218 (citing Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)).  In workers’ compensation cases, 
the district court serves as an appellate court correcting any legal error by the 
commissioner.  See Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 
(Iowa 2002).  And in reviewing the district court’s ruling, we apply the chapter 17A 
standard to decide whether we reach the same result as that court.  Clark v. Vicorp 
Rests. Inc., 696 N.W.2d 596, 603 (Iowa 2005). 

 
5
But the standard of review varies depending on what aspect of the decision 
is challenged.  See Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 255–56 (Iowa 
2012).  For ConAgra’s causation claim, we limit our review to whether the 
commissioner’s finding is supported by substantial evidence when the agency 
record is viewed as a whole.  See Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f); Cedar Rapids Cmty. 
Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844–45 (Iowa 2011) (“Medical causation 
presents a question of fact . . . .  We will therefore only disturb the commissioner’s 
finding of medical causation if it is not supported by substantial evidence.”). 
“Evidence is substantial if reasonable minds could accept it as adequate to reach 
the same findings.”  Tim O’Neill Chevrolet, Inc. v. Forristall, 551 N.W.2d 611, 614 
(Iowa 1996).  The commissioner is charged with weighing the evidence, and we—
as the reviewing court—“liberally and broadly construe the findings” to uphold that 
decision.  Finch v. Schneider Specialized Carriers, Inc., 700 N.W.2d 328, 331 
(Iowa 2005).  When reviewing the commissioner’s findings, we examine whether 
the evidence supports the findings made, not whether the evidence would support 
a different finding.  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218. 
For the industrial disability claim, we must decide whether the 
commissioner’s finding was “[b]ased upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable application of law to fact that has clearly been vested by a provision 
of law in the discretion of the agency.”  See Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(m); see also 
Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 856–57 (Iowa 2009).  “[W]e 
recognize that the commissioner is routinely called upon to make such 
assessments and has a special expertise in the area that is entitled to respect by 

 
6
a reviewing court.”  Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 527 (Iowa 
2012). 
III. 
Analysis 
 
ConAgra brings two claims: (1) the district court wrongly decided substantial 
evidence supported the commissioner’s causation and permanency findings and 
(2) the district court should have determined that the commissioner’s industrial 
disability finding was irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. 
A. Substantial Evidence  
ConAgra argues that the record lacks substantial evidence to support the 
commissioner’s decision that Moore’s symptoms after August 2016 were causally 
related to his work injury two months earlier.  The employer alleges that Moore’s 
medical records instead document “an ongoing personal condition that was not 
permanently aggravated or ‘lighted up’ by the minor work injury.”  ConAgra points 
to Moore’s previous treatment for his knees, as well as his reports of lower back 
pain and earlier chiropractic treatment.  ConAgra argues that the commissioner 
did not explain why Moore’s “pre-existing back treatment was immaterial.” 
But ConAgra’s argument misses the mark for three reasons.  First, Moore 
injured his hip at work.  By contrast, he received treatment earlier for his knees 
and back.  Second, the commissioner identified Moore’s pre-existing knee and 
back problems but noted no record of Moore experiencing hip pain or ongoing back 
discomfort until the work injury in June 2016.  And based on the expert testimony 
of Dr. Segal and Dr. Johnston, the commissioner found support for the connection 
between Moore’s sensation of a “pop” in his hip and persistent pain in his hip and 
groin area.  Ultimately, the commissioner held that the “evidence supports Moore’s 

 
7
preexisting low back condition was aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted 
up’ by the work injury, and that the work injury also caused him to develop a 
permanent impairment to his hip.”  See Nicks v. Davenport Prod. Co., 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (Iowa 1962) (clarifying that worker’s pre-existing condition at time of injury 
is not a defense against a compensation claim). 
Third, the employer’s characterization of Moore’s work injury as “minor” was 
contradicted in the record.  Before June 2016, Moore had received non-invasive 
treatment for his back.  After the work injury, Moore received injections and 
radiofrequency ablation.  Moore also testified that the pain he endured after the 
work injury was “horrible” and “not even close to the same amount of pain” as he 
experienced before the injury.  The deputy commissioner found Moore to be a 
credible witness, “considering his eye contact, demeanor, and consistency in his 
statements and testimony.”  It is the commission’s role “to determine the credibility 
of the witnesses.”  Arndt v. City of Le Claire, 728 N.W.2d 389, 394–95 (Iowa 2007).  
And the “reviewing court only determines whether substantial evidence supports a 
finding according to those witnesses whom the commissioner believed.”  Id. 
(cleaned up).  We accept the commissioner’s assessment of Moore as a credible 
witness; and, in turn, look to his testimony to bolster the bottom line: his work injury 
aggravated any pre-existing back condition.1 
                                            
1 ConAgra asserts that Moore never missed work following the June 2016 injury.  
But the commissioner made a different finding, crediting evidence that Moore 
missed four months because of his work injury.  We defer to the commissioner’s 
fact finding and consider Moore’s time off work as confirming the severity of his 
injury. 

 
8
Finally, ConAgra asks us to weigh the relative credibility of the medical 
experts.  But such weighing is outside our mission.  Rather, it is within the “peculiar 
province” of the commission whether to accept or reject an expert opinion.  Pease, 
807 N.W.2d at 845.  “The courts, in their appellate capacity, are not at liberty to 
accept contradictory opinions of other experts in order to reject the finding of the 
commissioner.”  Id. at 850 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  The 
deputy commissioner was persuaded by the opinions of Dr. Johnston and 
Dr. Segal.  Both doctors believed Moore’s hip complaints were causally related to 
his work injury, and that Moore sustained permanent hip impairment as a result of 
that injury.  The deputy commissioner rejected the contrary view of Dr. Mooney—
ConAgra’s retained expert, noting that Dr. Johnston and Dr. Segal had “superior 
training.”  Because the commission’s credibility determinations are well supported 
in the record, we do not disturb them.  See Forristall, 551 N.W.2d at 614. 
Substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s determination that 
Moore’s hip and back pain is causally related to his work injury. 
B. Industrial Disability  
 
ConAgra next claims the industrial-disability award of forty-percent was 
irrational, illogical, and wholly unjustifiable because Moore worked full time with no 
change in his employment and with no loss of earnings.  But Moore did not need 
to show an actual reduction in his earnings to prove an injury-caused reduction in 
earning capacity.2  See St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 653 (Iowa 
2000). 
                                            
2 For injuries occurring after July 1, 2017, if an employee eligible for compensation  

 
9
 
In assessing an industrial-disability award, the commissioner considers “all 
the factors that bear on the claimant’s actual employability.”  Larson, 763 N.W.2d 
at 857 (cleaned up).  These factors include “age, education, qualification, 
experience, and inability due to injury, to engage in the employment for which the 
claimant is fitted.”  Thilges v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 528 N.W.2d 614, 616 (Iowa 
1995).  At the time of the arbitration hearing, Moore was fifty-nine years old.  He 
had a high school education and had worked for ConAgra for two decades.  While 
he kept his job as a production technician, he reported intermittent pain from 
performing his duties.3  He also testified that ConAgra did not allow employees to 
work with any physical restrictions: “you had to be at a hundred percent to be at 
your job.”  The commissioner also considers a claimant’s functional impairment in 
determining the extent of industrial disability.  Westling v. Hormel Foods Corp., 810 
N.W.2d 247, 253 (Iowa 2012).  Here, the commissioner credited Dr. Segal’s 
assignment of a nineteen-percent permanent impairment rating.  Considered 
together, these factors validate the commissioner’s determination that Moore’s 
employability suffered because of his hip injury. 
 
Because the commissioner considered the proper factors in assessing 
Moore’s industrial disability and because the reduction in earning capacity 
                                            
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than 
the employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall 
be compensated based only upon the employee’s functional 
impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the 
employee’s earning capacity.   
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v).  The parties agree that this legislative change does not 
apply to Moore. 
3 Moore testified that after three days of working twelve-hour shifts at ConAgra, he 
spends the fourth day recuperating at home because his body is “sore.” 

 
10 
assigned by the commissioner is supported by substantial evidence, we decline to 
reverse the award.  See Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 
299, 307 (Iowa 2005).  As the district court reasoned, the commissioner’s forty-
percent industrial disability award is not so “out of plumb” with the facts here as to 
render it irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  See Myers v. F.C.A. Servs., 
Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 357 (Iowa 1999). 
 
AFFIRMED. 
 
