Case Number: 22700804.01
Case Title:  FORGET, WENDY V. POLK COUNTY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Forget Wendy-22700804.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
WENDY FORGET, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
            File No. 22700804.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                          
POLK COUNTY, IA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
Head Notes: 1108.5; 1402.30; 1402.40;  
 
Defendant. 
  :                             1801; 1803; 2501; 2502  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Wendy Forget filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Polk County, Iowa, self-insured employer, for an alleged 
work injury date of June 29, 2022. The case came before the undersigned for an 
arbitration hearing on September 20, 2023. Pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, 
with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded 
without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 12, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through H. During the course of the hearing, 
defense counsel offered an additional exhibit, to which claimant’s counsel objected. The 
objection was sustained, and the exhibit was not admitted. Defendant filed an Offer of 
Proof on October 25, 2023, with the proposed exhibit attached, for purposes of a 
potential appeal. The proposed exhibit is not considered as part of this decision. 
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf. Claimant’s husband, Norman Forget, also 
testified on her behalf. Melanie Devine and Brandi Dittmer testified on behalf of the 
employer. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
September 20, 2023. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on October 27, 2023, 
and the case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-22  10:37:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment on June 29, 2022; 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits; 
3. 
Whether claimant is entitled to permanent disability benefits; 
4. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; and 
5. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 52-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
13) She has been married to her husband, Norman Forget, for 28 years. (Tr., p. 14) 
They have four adult children. (Tr., pp. 14-15) The youngest two are twins, and lived 
with claimant and her husband in June 2022. (Tr., p. 22) 
 
It became clear over the course of claimant’s testimony that she has some 
memory issues. She often could not recall conversations or events, and had trouble with 
timelines and dates, making some of her testimony a bit confusing and somewhat 
unreliable. That being said, there was nothing about claimant’s demeanor at hearing 
that caused the undersigned to question her sincerity. Poor historians can be credible 
witnesses. I do not believe claimant was attempting to mislead or being intentionally 
dishonest at any time.  
 
To the contrary, claimant’s husband was a very reliable witness and a good 
historian. Mr. Forget was sequestered and was not present for claimant’s testimony. 
(Tr., p. 13) However, he was able to fill in some of the blanks in claimant’s testimony 
when her memory failed. I find him to be a highly credible witness. As such, my findings 
of fact will include testimony from both claimant and her husband, in order to present a 
more complete picture. I also find both of the defendant’s witnesses to be credible and 
will use their testimony as well in presenting my findings of fact. 
 
Claimant began working for Polk County as a jail service aide in 2008. (Tr., p. 15) 
Her job duties included monitoring inmate workers, and working in the property room, 
laundry room, and kitchen. (Tr., pp. 15-16) Her job required the ability to lift up to fifty 
pounds. (Defendant’s Exhibit A, p. 2) Claimant’s work schedule was Tuesday through 
Saturday, from 7:30 a.m. until 3:30 or 3:45 p.m. (Tr., p. 16) 
 
When the COVID-19 pandemic struck, the Polk County Jail implemented several 
precautionary measures. Claimant testified that she would start every morning spraying 
16 different pods in the jail with an electrostatic sprayer used to disinfect. (Tr., p. 16) 
This included the COVID pods, medical, and all processing and property rooms. In 
addition, there were protocols implemented when dealing with laundry exchanges and 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 3 
 
feeding procedures, including use of personal protective equipment (PPE) and 
disposable dinnerware. (Def. Ex. F, pp. 57-58)  
 
In June of 2022, claimant primarily worked with two other Polk County 
employees, Filipe and Mayel. (Tr., pp. 16-17) Her responsibilities at the jail also 
included working with inmates who were positive for COVID-19. (Tr., p. 17) In June, 
both Filipe and Mayel were diagnosed with COVID-19, although there are varying 
accounts as to who contracted it first. (Tr., pp. 18-19) Claimant testified that when Filipe 
returned to work, he was still coughing and sluggish. (Tr., p. 20) Within three or four 
days of his return, claimant began to experience COVID-19 symptoms. (Tr., pp. 19-20)  
 
Claimant testified that she first called in sick to work on Friday, June 24, 2022 
and Saturday, June 25, 2022, due to symptoms of COVID-19. (Tr., pp. 20-21) Her 
symptoms at that time included coughing, dizziness, sweating, lack of appetite, fever, 
vomiting, weakness, balance issues, and ear and throat pain. Claimant testified that on 
June 24, 2022, her husband Norm was not sick and did not have any symptoms of 
COVID-19. (Tr., p. 22) Claimant also testified that her two sons who lived with her at 
that time, Christian and Joel, were not sick and did not have any symptoms of COVID-
19 at that time either. Her older son, Tyler, who does not live with her, was sick about 
six weeks prior to claimant, possibly with COVID-19, but he was not tested. (Tr., pp. 22-
23)  
 
Claimant testified that after she started to experience COVID-19 symptoms, her 
husband Norm had two or three days of coughing, but recovered quickly. (Tr., p. 22) 
Norm testified that his symptoms started on Saturday, the day after claimant’s 
symptoms started, and he did eventually test positive for COVID-19. (Tr., pp. 73-74) He 
agreed that his symptoms only lasted a few days. (Tr., p. 73) He denied experiencing 
any symptoms or being diagnosed with COVID-19 prior to claimant’s symptoms.  
 
Claimant also testified that her son Joel became sick with COVID-19 about a 
week after her. (Tr., p. 26) Norm testified that Joel got sick four or five days after 
claimant. (Tr., p. 74) He also agreed that neither Joel nor Christian were sick prior to 
claimant becoming ill. 
 
Claimant saw Emily Johnson, PA-C, at Unity Point Southglen on Tuesday, June 
28, 2022. (Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-2) The record states claimant presented with fever, 
chills, nasal congestion, cough, dyspnea, and vomiting for the past two days. (Jt. Ex. 1, 
p. 2) Symptoms were worsening. The record then states “Known sick contacts or 
COVID-19 exposures: son with COVID and husband recently ill.” The record states 
claimant reported a negative home COVID test on Sunday and Monday, with a positive 
home test that day. A COVID-19 PCR test was administered, and claimant was sent 
home with prescriptions, including Paxlovid, for her symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) 
 
With respect to the “known sick contacts” portion of the record, claimant testified 
that she did not recall being asked if anyone had recently been sick. (Tr., p. 24; See 
also Def. Ex. C, pp. 15-17; Deposition Transcript, pp. 43-45; 51-52) She testified that 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 4 
 
she told PA-C Johnson that she had more than likely gotten COVID-19 at work. Norm 
testified that he was with claimant at the appointment on June 28, 2022. (Tr., p. 75) He 
did recall PA-C Johnson asking about known COVID contacts. He testified that at the 
time of the appointment, which was a Tuesday, he had already been sick and 
recovered. (Tr., p. 76) As stated previously, Norm began to have symptoms on 
Saturday, June 25, and his symptoms only lasted a couple of days. With respect to the 
comment about a son with COVID, Norm testified that was referring to their son Tyler, 
who was sick about six weeks prior.  
 
Lieutenant Melanie Devine testified on behalf of the employer. (Tr., p. 87) Lt. 
Devine is currently the second watch lieutenant for the Polk County Sheriff’s Office. In 
June of 2022, Lt. Devine was claimant’s lieutenant at the jail. (Tr., p. 88) Lt. Devine 
testified that claimant emailed a first watch sergeant in June with her positive COVID-19 
test, and included a picture of her positive at-home test, as well as a second positive 
test she identified as belonging to her son. (Tr., pp. 96-99) Claimant had no recollection 
of sending the email. (Tr., p. 54) Lt. Devine believed the email was sent within ten days 
of June 28, 2022, after claimant tested positive for COVID. (Tr., pp. 98-99) She also 
confirmed that the email also contained “the documented evidence of [claimant’s] 
COVID-positive test from urgent care,” which would have been June 29, 2022. (Tr., pp. 
99-100) She also recalled that the email included claimant’s son’s negative COVID test 
from the prior Sunday. (Tr., p. 100)  
 
At the conclusion of testimony, defense counsel offered the email discussed 
above as an exhibit. (Tr., p. 121) Claimant’s attorney objected, as she had not been 
provided with a copy of the email prior to hearing. The objection was sustained, as 
claimant had no recollection of the email and it had not been disclosed prior to hearing. 
(Tr., pp. 121-122) As noted above, defendant filed an Offer of Proof on October 25, 
2023, with the proposed exhibit attached, for purposes of a potential appeal. The 
proposed exhibit is not considered as part of this decision. 
 
Claimant returned to Unity Point on July 7, 2022 and saw Nicole West, ARNP. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) The record notes a nine-day history of positive COVID testing. Claimant 
continued to complain of cough, congestion, shortness of breath, fatigue, and body 
aches. The record also notes claimant was positive for nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, and diarrhea. She had stopped taking the Paxlovid. She testified that she was 
prescribed an incentive spirometer for shortness of breath and told to continue 
symptomatic treatment. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8)  
 
Brandi Dittmer testified on behalf of defendant. Ms. Dittmer works for Polk 
County Risk Management as a claims analyst, handling workers’ compensation and 
liability claims for the county. (Tr., p. 101) Ms. Dittmer testified that when the COVID-19 
pandemic began, the county elected to provide 10 days of COVID-19 leave to all 
employees who contracted the illness. (Tr., pp. 101-102) That policy was in effect until 
December 31, 2022. (Tr., p. 102) Once the 10 days of leave were used, if the employee 
was not released to return to work, Ms. Dittmer would call the employee, and if that 
employee could not provide a contact outside of work who they were directly exposed to 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 5 
 
with COVID, she automatically accepted the claim as work related. (Tr., p. 104) If the 
employee did identify a contact outside of work, the claim was denied. 
 
Ms. Dittmer testified that when claimant was unable to return to work after the 
initial 10-day leave, she spoke to claimant, who did not identify anyone at home who 
had COVID. (Tr., p. 105) As such, her claim was accepted as compensable, and she 
was referred to Occupational Health for treatment. At that time, Ms. Dittmer had not 
seen the medical records from Unity Point Southglen. (Tr., p. 106) 
 
Claimant saw Robert Kruse, M.D., at MercyOne Occupational Health on July 11, 
2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 17) Claimant reported the same symptoms to Dr. Kruse, and noted 
she could not drive herself to her appointment that day due to a lack of energy. She also 
noted a recent increase in vomiting. She reported being prescribed Paxlovid, but said 
she stopped taking it after two days due to a funny taste in her mouth and feeling worse. 
Dr. Kruse’s record indicated that claimant told him the injury occurred while at work. He 
also notes claimant reported that her son was not feeling well on June 28, and she 
tested positive on June 29. Dr. Kruse ordered a chest x-ray, and preliminary results 
were normal. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 21) He diagnosed acute COVID-19, complicated by the risk 
factor of current tobacco use. Dr. Kruse recommended supportive treatment, such as 
acetaminophen and cough medications. He kept her off work and scheduled her to 
return in one week for reevaluation. 
 
Later that same day, claimant saw her primary care physician, Chris Jensen, 
M.D. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 40) His record notes that claimant had not been seen in the past two 
years. At that time, claimant reported close contact with coworkers and inmates who 
had COVID, and she reported coming down with COVID on June 28. She reported that 
her breathing was not back to baseline, and her cough had not improved. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
41) She advised that she had a chest x-ray through workers’ compensation that was 
negative, and had a return appointment scheduled in a week. Dr. Jensen recommended 
prednisone and albuterol, and told her to follow up in two weeks. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 42) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Kruse on July 20, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22) She reported 
increased vomiting on July 16 and 17, and difficulty keeping food down due to 
indigestion and vomiting. She also described chest pain that was worse when coughing 
and with deep breaths, along with shortness of breath while walking. Dr. Kruse noted 
claimant’s extensive smoking history, and claimant advised she had quit smoking at that 
time. Dr. Kruse performed a 12-lead EKG, which showed some abnormalities, so he 
recommended a CTA of the chest to rule out pulmonary emboli. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 26) He 
also recommended omeprazole as she likely had gastritis due to vomiting. Her lungs 
were clear to auscultation and moving air appropriately, and he noted less coughing 
than previously. He started her on methylprednisolone and advised her to return in one 
week.  
 
The chest CT scan was done the same day, July 20, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) 
There was no evidence of pulmonary embolism, but there was a subpleural 5 mm 
nodule in the right middle lobe with a benign appearance. 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 6 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Kruse on August 3, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 30) At that time, 
claimant reported ongoing chest congestion, vomiting, shortness of breath, sweats, and 
cough. Claimant also reported not being able to eat much and having to take naps due 
to tiredness. Dr.  Kruse noted that claimant’s chest CTA showed no pulmonary emboli 
and was without infiltrates or effusions, and her pulse oximetry was 99 percent on room 
air. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 34) Objectively, he did not observe any signs of COVID other than a 
prior positive test. He notes that he was provided surveillance, which he stated “appears 
to show a different physical capacity than what [claimant] describes.” He opined that 
claimant’s subjective signs and symptoms outweighed her objective findings on 
examination, and he did not believe there was any reason for her to remain off work at 
that point. He recommended she return to regular duty, and continue using 
acetaminophen and Mucinex as needed for symptom control. Finally, he noted the small 
nodule on her lung, and advised she follow up with her primary care provider due to her 
smoking history. He stated the nodule appeared “benign and unrelated to COVID-19.”  
He provided a zero percent impairment rating, and placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI). He released her from care and released her to return to regular 
duty work. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 35-36) 
 
Defendant did not produce the surveillance shown to Dr. Kruse of claimant, and 
did not offer it as an exhibit at hearing. Claimant provided a video clip from her home 
Ring camera, dated August 1, 2022, which shows claimant in front of her house, 
bending down to apparently pull a weed, standing back up, and reentering the house. 
(Cl. Ex. 10) Claimant is visible for about ten seconds in the footage. Based on 
claimant’s ongoing symptoms at the time, and the only video footage of claimant in 
evidence, I find claimant was not yet at MMI when Dr. Kruse released her from care. 
 
That same day, August 3, 2022, claimant returned to Unity Point Southglen 
Urgent Care. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10) The record notes claimant was released to return to work 
but did not feel she was able to do so. She advised she had been trying to reach her 
primary care physician but had been unsuccessful. She reported shortness of breath, 
and noted she had a CTA ten days prior that was negative. She was diagnosed with 
long COVID, and a D-dimer test was positive, so another chest CT was ordered. (Jt. Ex. 
1, pp. 11-12)  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Jensen on August 4, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 45) She reported 
coughing fits, and occasional vomiting and diarrhea. She said she was being harassed 
about being off work, and said she was currently off her psychiatric medications and 
working on getting back in with her psychiatrist. She reported using albuterol nebulizer 
once or twice per day, and a metered dose inhaler three to four times per day. She 
reported increased anxiety and depression. He noted she had another chest CT 
scheduled for later that day. 
 
After examination, Dr. Jensen indicated his suspicion for pulmonary embolism 
was fairly low. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 47) He recommended Breo, continuing albuterol, and a 
referral to pulmonology. He “wondered” if she had some COPD. With respect to COVID, 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 7 
 
he noted “have to consider diagnosis of long COVID. We will follow her closely.” He 
recommended claimant completely quit smoking, and get back to see a psychiatrist for 
her anxiety and depression. He recommended claimant remain off work for the next two 
weeks.   
 
The chest CT was completed on August 4, 2022, which again showed no 
evidence of acute pulmonary thromboembolic disease. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 12-13) The prior 
pulmonary nodule was noted, along with several additional sub-6 mm solid pulmonary 
nodules, but none were suspicious. Claimant was advised to follow up with her primary 
care physician. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) 
 
Claimant’s petition was filed on August 12, 2022. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) 
Paragraph 3 lists June 29, 2022 as the date of injury. Paragraph 4 states the injury 
occurred due to “COVID-19 exposure and contraction while conducting work duties.” 
Paragraph 5 lists respiratory, pulmonary, nervous and neurological systems, 
mental/psychological, and body as a whole as the parts of the body affected or 
disabled. On September 9, 2022, defendant filed an answer. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) Paragraph 
3 was admitted. Paragraph 4 was admitted “to the extent that this is the injury alleged.” 
Paragraph 5 was admitted “to the extent that these are the body parts claimant asserts 
are affected or disabled. It is admitted that claimant contracted COVID-19. The 
remainder of paragraph 5 is denied.” 
 
On August 18, 2022, claimant returned to see Dr. Jensen. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 52) She 
continued to complain of shortness of breath. She complained that stress from work 
was causing mental health issues, and she had been to see psychiatry and was started 
on several medications. She reported the vomiting had improved. At that time, she was 
smoking three or four cigarettes per day and vaping. She reported drinking two to three 
vodkas per day. Dr. Jensen noted that her liver enzymes were elevated with a dilated 
common bile duct, and he recommended she wean and stop drinking. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 52-
53) He referred her to hepatology. She was to continue to follow with psychiatry for her 
depression and anxiety, and he estimated she would need to be off work for three 
months. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 53) He recommended she quit smoking and referred her for a 
pulmonology consultation.  
 
Dr. Jensen authored a note “to whom it may concern” excusing claimant from work for 
three months. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 58) According to a memo authored by Lieutenant Melanie 
Devine, Polk County Jail, when she received that note she called claimant to advise the 
note would not work, and she needed the note to list her restrictions and explain why 
she could not work. (Def. Ex. G, p. 59) On August 22, 2022, Dr. Jensen authored 
another note that states: “Patient under my care. Please excuse from work for 3 
months. She has difficulties with COVID and mental health. Please do not hesitate to 
contact my office with any questions or concerns.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 59) Lt. Devine’s memo 
indicates that she again advised claimant that the second note from Dr. Jensen would 
not work. (Def. Ex. G, p. 59) She advised that she needed the note to list specific 
restrictions or guidelines as to what was keeping her from work. The memo states that 
Lt. Devine spoke to claimant’s husband on August 24, 2022, who advised there was a 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 8 
 
private investigator outside his home taking picture for over two hours. (Def. Ex. G, p. 
60) 
 
 
Dr. Jensen authored a third note dated August 29, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 60) That 
note states: 
 
Patient had had a number of complications after illness with COVID. She 
has shortness of breath, cannot walk upstairs, has fatigue, vomiting, and 
cannot eat. She is unable to work at this time. If clinical notes would help, 
we certainly [sic] be more than willing to provide those. She has been 
referred to pulmonology. 
 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 60) Lt. Devine’s memo states that on August 29, 2022, she received the 
doctor’s note and FMLA paperwork. (Def. Ex. G, p. 60)  
 
 
On August 31, 2022, claimant filed a petition for alternate medical care. (Cl. Ex. 
5, pp. 11-12) Paragraph 3 alleges a date of injury of June 29, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 11) 
Paragraph 5 lists the body parts affected or disabled, which are the same as listed in 
the arbitration petition. Paragraph 6 states the injury caused the need for care to those 
body parts, and paragraph 7 states that the care offered by the employer has not been 
reasonably suited to treat the injury or condition without undue inconvenience to the 
claimant. Paragraph 8 states that the basis for claimant’s dissatisfaction is defendant’s 
interference with claimant’s medical treatment, resulting in a breakdown of patient-
physician relationship, and failure to authorize care for claimant’s ongoing, significant 
COVID-19 symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 12) Paragraph 9 seeks authorization of ongoing 
medical treatment with Dr. Jensen.  
 
 
On September 2, 2022, Dr. Kruse authored a letter to Ms. Dittmer, in response to 
questions she posed in a prior letter to him. (Def. Ex. H) The first question asked 
whether there were any objective findings to support claimant’s subjective complaints of 
chest congestion, vomiting, shortness of breath, sweats, coughing, fatigue, and inability 
to eat. (Def. Ex. H, p. 62) Dr. Kruse stated that claimant did not have objective findings 
regarding any of the subjective complaints listed. Her chest x-ray was normal, and her 
CT scan showed no pulmonary emboli and was without infiltrates or effusions. Her 
pulse oximetry was 99 percent on room air at her last visit, and there was no significant 
weight loss noted.  
 
 
The second question asked whether claimant’s subjective complaints were 
consisted with her physical abilities as demonstrated on the surveillance videos. Dr. 
Kruse stated that claimant’s subjective complaints were not consistent with her physical 
functional abilities as demonstrated on the surveillance videos from July 21-22, 2022. 
He stated that she was observed in surveillance talking on the phone in complete 
sentences, smoking a cigarette, bending over to grasp vegetation, and walking holding 
bags in her bilateral hands without observed difficulty. Dr. Kruse stated that the video 
surveillance “directly conflicts with [claimant’s] subjective complaints of coughing, 
fatigue, and shortness of breath.”  

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 9 
 
 
 
The third question was whether claimant’s subjective limitations, including “an 
inability to drive,” were consistent with the video surveillance. (Def. Ex. H, p. 63) Dr. 
Kruse stated that claimant “subjectively stated that she was unable to drive to the 
appointment and then is observed in surveillance video operating her personal vehicle 
and entering and exiting the vehicle without any difficulty.” He opined that her subjective 
limitations were not consistent with her demonstrated physical abilities observed in the 
surveillance videos. 
 
The fourth questions asks whether claimant requires further medical treatment 
for her COVID-19 diagnosis, and the fifth asks whether it was still Dr. Kruse’s opinion 
that claimant can return to work without restrictions. Dr. Kruse noted that a longer 
course of recovery is expected in COVID-19 patients with preexisting comorbidities or 
who experienced hospitalization or medical complications. He also noted that data 
suggests that patients with less severe disease, who were never hospitalized, have 
often reported “prolonged and persistent symptoms.” He then stated that claimant does 
not likely require further medical treatment for her COVID-19 diagnosis. Finally, he 
stated that it was still his opinion that claimant could return to work without restrictions. 
 
 
Defendant filed an answer to the alternate care petition on September 12, 2022. 
(Cl. Ex. 5, p. 13) The answer admitted paragraph 3. Paragraph 5 was admitted “to the 
extent that these are the body parts claimant asserts are affected or disabled.” 
Paragraphs 6 through 9 were denied.  
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Jensen on September 12, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 61) 
Claimant reported feeling slightly better, and said she had been able to pull weeds and 
vacuum. Her breathing was stable, and her mood improved after restarting medication. 
She was still unable to work, and had been diagnosed by psychiatry with bipolar 
disorder, generalized anxiety, and possible post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). She 
had seen hepatology and had an extensive work-up. MRCP (magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography) had been ordered. She reported some left lower quadrant 
abdominal pain and feeling like she was not emptying her bowel. In addition, she was 
having diarrhea.  
 
 
On examination, Dr. Jensen noted claimant’s pulse oximetry was 94 percent on 
room air. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 63) His assessment was COVID-19 with possible COPD, and he 
noted claimant had been referred to pulmonology. He recommended she continue to 
follow with psychiatry for her bipolar and generalized anxiety disorder. He also noted 
she had a recent urinary tract infection (UTI), and that the MRCP was pending with 
hepatology. Finally, with respect to her abdomen, a left lower quadrant x-ray was 
nonobstructive. (Jt. Ex.3, p. 64) He recommended fluids, fiber, and MiraLax. She was to 
follow up in six weeks. 
 
 
A hearing on the alternate care petition took place before Deputy Commissioner 
James Christenson on September 13, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 6) His decision was issued the 
same day. Deputy Christenson found that defendant accepted liability for a work-related 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 10 
 
injury on June 29, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 14) In his findings of fact, Deputy Christenson 
noted that claimant testified she was unable to drive herself to her first appointment with 
Dr. Kruse, but after that she returned to driving. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 14-15) He also noted that 
defendant had claimant put under surveillance on July 22, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 15) The 
surveillance showed claimant driving to a Casey’s convenience store, walking with 
grocery bags, smoking, and sitting in her backyard talking to another person. Claimant 
testified that at the time of the alternate care hearing, she was not sure if Dr. Jensen 
had seen the results of her CT scan or reviewed Dr. Kruse’s records. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 16) 
She testified that she did not believe she could return to work due to difficulty breathing, 
and she said that she had lost 15 pounds since her COVID diagnosis. 
 
 
Deputy Christenson found that claimant had not carried her burden to prove the 
care offered by defendant was unreasonable. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 17) There was no evidence 
that Dr. Jensen had reviewed Dr. Kruse’s medical records or performed his own testing 
on claimant prior to making his recommendations for care. As such, the petition for 
alternate medical care was denied.  
 
 
Claimant saw Jason Mohr, D.O., a pulmonologist at the Iowa Clinic, on October 
5, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 93) Dr. Mohr’s record states that claimant was there for evaluation 
of dyspnea, or shortness of breath. She said she experienced dyspnea when going up 
two flights of stairs, but was fine on flat ground and had no difficulty carrying objects. A 
chest x-ray taken that day was normal. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 92) Dr. Mohr reviewed the prior CT 
scan from August and noted no significant emphysematous changes and the nodules 
were small. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 95) He did note that she was high risk due to her smoking 
history, but her pulmonary function at that time was normal with no evidence of 
obstruction. He recommended she work on smoking cessation, and told her to follow up 
in four months for the nodules.  
 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Jensen on October 24, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 66) At that 
time, she advised she was getting better. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 67) She had seen pulmonology 
and was told she did not have a problem. Her moods were good, and she said she had 
a new job at the post office “throwing packages” from 4:00 a.m. until noon. She was 
supposed to return to work at the jail on November 2, and noted she was extraordinarily 
anxious about returning. She continued smoking about half a pack per day. Dr. Jensen 
advised to continue to follow up with pulmonology as directed, and again recommended 
she stop smoking. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 69) He told her to follow up with her psychiatric provider 
to see if she should avoid returning to work at the jail due to her anxiety. She was also 
told to follow with hepatology for her elevated liver enzymes and it was recommended 
she avoid alcohol. She was to follow up with Dr. Jensen in four months. 
 
 
Claimant did not see Dr. Jensen again until June of 2023, discussed further 
below. There are no records in evidence to indicate that claimant ever returned to her 
psychiatric provider to confirm whether she could return to work. Dr. Jensen indicated 
claimant was to return to work on November 2, 2022, unless her psychiatric provider felt 
otherwise. Since claimant did not follow up with her psychiatric provider, I find that she 
was released to return to work as of November 2, 2022, and reached MMI on November 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 11 
 
1, 2022. Therefore, she is entitled to temporary total disability benefits from June 29, 
2022, through November 1, 2022. 
 
 
On November 7, 2022, claimant sent an email in which she resigned from her job 
at Polk County Jail. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 19) Her email lists several grievances, including her 
medical treatment with Dr. Kruse and his statement that if she can “drive and pull a 
weed” she can return to work. She also noted displeasure at having been the subject of 
surveillance. Claimant testified that she loved her job at Polk County. (Tr., p. 43) She 
said that the last straw that led to her resignation was “everybody calling me harassing 
me, threatening to write me up, and then me being followed.” After her resignation from 
Polk County, she started the job at the post office. 1 (Tr., p. 42) She only worked there 
for two weeks, and had to quit due to the physical requirements of the job. She testified 
that with her breathing, she could not do it.  
 
 
Claimant testified she worked as an assistant manager at Dollar General starting 
in April or May of 2023. (Tr., p. 46) She worked there for about two months. She 
testified that she stopped working at Dollar General because they wanted her to unload 
trucks, which she was not capable of doing due to dizziness, sweats, and shortness of 
breath. (Tr., pp. 44-45)  
 
 
Claimant was hospitalized for sepsis in June of 2023. (Tr., p. 46) At the time, she 
was still working at Dollar General. (Tr., pp. 45-46) She saw Dr. Jensen on June 12, 
2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 86) The record indicates she was there for follow up after being 
hospitalized with pyelonephritis (kidney infection). She was admitted after fainting. She 
reported no chest pain or shortness of breath at that time. Her main complaint was 
balance issues. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 87) Dr. Jensen referred claimant to physical therapy. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 89) 
 
 
Claimant attended physical therapy on June 21, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 90) The 
record notes she presented with “significant balance deficits secondary to sepsis.” The 
plan was for claimant to attend physical therapy three times per week for four weeks. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 91)  
 
 
Claimant followed up with Dr. Jensen on June 29, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 82) She 
reported slowly improving. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 83) She indicated struggles with routine things 
like cleaning the sink, but said her shortness of breath was stable and she had no chest 
pain. She was to continue with physical therapy and remain off work. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 85) 
Her next follow up was on July 17, 2023, at which time she continued to report 
dizziness. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 79-80) She indicated worrying about being alone and passing 
out due to persistent dizziness. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 80) She also indicated financial stressors, 
and her kids stressing her out. She had not recently seen psychiatry or been to 
counseling, and had discontinued taking her psych medications when she stopped 
working at Polk County. Dr. Jensen recommended she continue with physical therapy 
                                                                 
1 Claimant testified that she was hired at the post office prior to her resignation from Polk County, but did 
not actually physically start working there until after her resignation. (Tr., p. 42) 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 12 
 
on strength and stability, and added an order for vestibular rehab. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 81) He 
kept her off work for another week, at which time he suspected she would be able to 
return. 
 
 
On July 21, 2023, she saw Dr. Jensen with a sore throat, ear pain, and cough, 
along with mild shortness of breath. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 77) She was diagnosed with an upper 
respiratory infection with bronchospasm and prescribed medications accordingly. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 78) Her next visit took place on July 28, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 73) At that time she 
admitted to Dr. Jensen that she had not been taking care of herself. She said she had 
been dizzy on and off which she attributed to not sleeping, and said she had not been to 
see her psychiatrist recently. She did not want to return to her job at Dollar General and 
was looking for a new job, which had been stressful. Claimant’s lab results indicated 
she had E. coli, for which she was prescribed antibiotics. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 76) It is also 
indicated that her liver tests were six times normal, and it was recommended that she 
stop drinking alcohol completely and return to hepatology.  
 
  
 
Claimant attended two independent medical evaluations related to her alleged 
work injury. The first took place on June 28, 2023, with Joseph Chen, M.D. (Def. Ex. E, 
p. 37) Dr. Chen’s report notes that claimant’s husband accompanied her to the 
examination, and provided many of the specific details as claimant could not remember.  
 
 
Dr. Chen reported that claimant told him she tested positive for COVID-19 after 
being around two coworkers who had also been positive. She denied any of her family 
members tested positive prior to her testing positive, and her husband confirmed that he 
tested positive after claimant.  
 
 
Dr. Chen reviewed the medical records through October 24, 2022. He noted that 
Polk County stopped providing additional medical treatment after claimant’s visit with 
Dr. Kruse on August 3, 2022. (Def. Ex. E, p. 40) He also noted that claimant resigned 
her position in November 2022 due to “dissatisfaction with Risk Management 
conducting surveillance on her.” (Def. Ex. E, p. 44) At the time of Dr. Chen’s IME, 
claimant continued to work at Dollar General. (Def. Ex. E, p. 44) 
 
 
Dr. Chen’s clinical findings included claimant’s complaints of shortness of breath, 
dizziness, and anterior chest pain. (Def. Ex. E, p. 45) Claimant advised she did not 
recall ever returning to Dr. Mohr for follow up regarding her lung nodules. She said Dr. 
Mohr told her that the nodules were from “coughing a lot due to COVID-19.” Claimant 
said that she and her husband used to take their dogs for one to two mile walks, but 
now she is limited in walking in the grocery store and uses a shopping cart due to 
dyspnea. She noted her recent hospitalization for sepsis, and reported that she has had 
persistent tachycardia since her COVID diagnosis, with her heart rate in the 100-115 
range. She reported sleeping about 6 hours per night and taking a 1.5 hour nap each 
day. She reported right sided chest pain, shortness of breath, and dizziness. She said 
even cleaning the three toilets in her house increases her dyspnea. She noted a 20-
year history of anxiety, and said she had not returned to see her psychiatrist recently. 
 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 13 
 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Chen noted a high blood pressure and pulse of 
112. (Def. Ex. E, p. 46) Claimant said she was nervous for the appointment. Later in the 
examination she indicated she had recently stopped taking her blood pressure 
medications. (Def. Ex. E, p. 47) The remainder of Dr. Chen’s physical exam was 
essentially normal. He also had claimant complete several health status measures as 
part of her evaluation, and calculated her responses. His interpretation indicated poorly 
managed anxiety symptoms, which was consistent with his clinical impression of 
claimant. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 47-48) 
 
 
Dr. Chen provided responses to several questions posed by defendant. The first 
asked what steps can be taken to determine where or how a patient contracted the 
COVID-19 virus. (Def. Ex. E, p. 48) Dr. Chen stated that best practices included self-
reported tracing of known ill contacts among family members and close acquaintances 
at home and/or work. The second question asked if Dr. Chen could state within a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty that claimant contracted COVID from an 
exposure at the Polk County Jail. Dr. Chen was not able to state within a reasonable 
degree of medical certainty that claimant contracted the virus from an exposure at the 
jail. He pointed to claimant’s history, which appeared to contain some discrepancies 
regarding whether she had sick contacts at home, although he notes claimant’s 
husband denied anyone else was sick before claimant tested positive. Dr. Chen stated 
that most individuals contracted COVID through family members who tested positive 
and were either asymptomatic or unable to maintain self-isolation in the home. He 
stated that unless there was “a known outbreak of COVID-19 among her coworkers 
and/or a known cluster of large numbers of illness at the Polk County Jail for which her 
administrators were trying to mitigate,” claimant’s diagnosis of COVID-19 more likely 
than not occurred at home or sporadically.  
 
 
The next question involved long COVID, and Dr. Chen opined that claimant had 
not been diagnosed with any sequela injuries including long COVID or any other 
exacerbation or material aggravation of any underlying condition as a result of 
contracting COVID. He stated that claimant had several subjective symptoms that were 
consistent with either her abrupt self-directed withdrawal from antidepressant 
medications, persistent tobacco use, or longstanding generalized anxiety. (Def. Ex. E, p. 
49) Dr. Chen opined that claimant reached MMI from her COVID illness on August 4, 
2022,  as Dr. Kruse noted. This accounted for a five to six week period for claimant’s 
subjective symptoms to resolve or for objective testing abnormalities to be identified. 
However, all of her objective medical and pulmonary studies had been normal. As such, 
he opined that claimant’s symptoms appear to have arisen from her self-reported work 
stressors, or 20-year history of anxiety and more recent diagnosis of bipolar disorder. 
 
 
Dr. Chen did not believe claimant required any additional treatment for COVID-
19, but he did recommend she return to Dr. Jensen for her blood pressure, and to 
psychiatry for her anxiety. Dr. Chen opined that claimant had no permanent partial 
disability and assigned a zero percent impairment rating related to COVID-19, and did 
not believe she required any permanent restrictions due to the COVID diagnosis. (Def. 
Ex. E, p. 50)  

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 14 
 
 
 
Claimant had a second IME at her attorney’s request with Paul Conte, M.D., 
which took place on August 3, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 20) Dr. Conte reviewed claimant’s 
history with her, in which she again denied that anyone in her home had been 
diagnosed with COVID prior to her own diagnosis. (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 20-21) At the time of 
his exam, claimant was not working, but was looking for work and indicated she was in 
discussions with a company about being a property manager. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 21) 
 
 
Claimant’s main complaint at the time of Dr. Conte’s exam was feeling unsteady 
walking. She indicated that she had to hold onto a handrail when using stairs, and was 
unable to ride an escalator or anything that involved a change in height or direction. She 
described problems with instability and dizziness and noted feeling unstable. (Cl. Ex. 8, 
pp. 21-22) She also said she was able to drive, but not any significant distance due to 
fatigue and a feeling that she sometimes gets tunnel vision. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 22) She 
indicated she was able to work on a computer and denied any difficulty reading the 
screen. She was not taking any psychiatric medications at the time, and indicated her 
anxiety had resolved since leaving work.  
 
 
Dr. Conte answered several questions posed by claimant’s attorney. (Cl. Ex. 8, 
pp. 23-25) The first question involved permanent functional impairment. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 
23) Dr. Conte noted that claimant had COVID-19 based on her exposure at work. (Cl. 
Ex. 8, p. 24) He opined that work was more likely than not the place of her infection, 
which led to subsequent infection of her husband and son. He stated that claimant met 
several criteria for long COVID syndrome, given her prolonged illness following COVID 
and the “sequelae of symptoms that she continues to suffer from.” He stated that long 
COVID has been associated with both COVID illness and vaccination, and the two 
combined have been found to have more of an association with long COVID than either 
one alone. He also noted that the medication Paxlovid, which claimant took briefly after 
her diagnosis, has been associated with significant side effects in up to 10 percent of 
patients taking the medication. Dr. Conte noted that claimant has “largely gotten over” 
her pulmonary symptoms, but has issues with gait and station, difficulty ambulating up 
and down stairs, escalators, or anything with a change in elevation. He found no frank 
weakness or changes in her sensation or proprioception. She complained of some 
tunnel vision but had no frank complaints of visual loss or changes. 
 
Using the Guides to Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Conte 
provided an impairment rating based on the criteria for rating impairment of station, gait, 
and movement disorders. He opined she was a Class I rating, with one to nine percent 
impairment of the whole person. Class I “describes a patient who can rise to a standing 
position, walks but has difficulty with elevation of grades, stairs, deep chairs and long 
distances.” He opined that claimant met those criteria. Given that her symptoms were 
“fairly mild,” and that she was young and otherwise healthy to compensate for them, he 
assigned a five percent whole body impairment rating. 
 
 
With respect to the remaining questions, Dr. Conte opined that claimant’s COVID 
infection was related to her exposure at work, and was a substantial causal factor in her 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 15 
 
impairment. He noted that her subsequent treatment for the illness and her own 
underlying health conditions make her somewhat susceptible to the impairments noted, 
but he stated that the COVID infection was a substantial causal factor in her illness and 
subsequent persisting symptoms. He opined that the medical treatment she received 
had been appropriate and reasonable, and all imaging and testing done was 
appropriate and necessary. For future treatment, Dr. Conte stated that claimant has a 
continuing need for inhaled bronchodilators on an as-needed basis. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 25) He 
stated that she did not have any other underlying damage to her lungs based on her CT 
scan and follow up with pulmonology, so he thought it was unlikely she would need 
additional medical care related to pulmonary issues as long as she continued to 
maintain nonsmoking status. He stated that her issues with gait and station seemed to 
be stable, and he would not expect them to worsen, unless she were to progress to 
have a frank neurological illness associated with the previous COVID infection or 
Paxlovid treatment. In that case, she may need additional medical care as a result of 
her injuries.  
 
 
Dr. Conte opined that claimant has reached MMI. He stated that based on his 
review of the medical records, her symptoms were stable and did not significantly 
change or improve after November of 2022. As such, he placed her at MMI “at or about 
that date.” With respect to restrictions, Dr. Conte stated that claimant “probably” should 
not work in situations that would provoke any pulmonary symptoms, due to both her 
smoking history and the COVID infection with her need for intermittent bronchodilators. 
He also stated that she is generally in good health, but a job that required a lot of 
climbing, standing, lifting, or change of position between different levels such as stairs 
or escalators would not be in her best interest. He did not have any specific restrictions 
or limitations, but he felt those recommendations were “prudent and reasonable given 
her functional status.”  
 
 
Claimant’s deposition was taken on July 27, 2023. (Def. Ex. C) At that time, she 
had been working as a property manager at North American for about two weeks. (Def. 
Ex. C, pp. 12-13; Depo. Tr., pp. 32-33) Her job mainly involved sitting at a computer. 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 13; Depo. Tr., p. 33) She testified that her only difficulties with her job 
come from times she has to show properties, if she needs to use stairs or walk long 
distances. In those cases, she had problems with shortness of breath. At the time of 
hearing, claimant testified that she continues to have problems with balance, tunnel 
vision, and shortness of breath. (Tr., p. 51) 
 
 
 
At the time of hearing, defendant denied compensability of claimant’s alleged 
work injury. Claimant’s counsel stated at hearing that she was advised two weeks prior 
to hearing, via the hearing report, that the claim was being denied. (Tr., p. 5) Claimant 
argues defendant is judicially estopped from denying the claim, based on the 
acceptance of liability at the prior alternate care proceeding. Defendant argued that new 
information came to light after the alternate care proceeding, justifying the change in 
position. (Tr., pp. 6-7) As discussed further below, I find that defendant is judicially 
estopped from denying liability of the claim. As such, I find that claimant sustained a 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 16 
 
compensable injury arising out of and in the course of her employment on June 29, 
2022. 
 
 
With respect to permanent disability, Dr. Kruse and Dr. Chen both provided zero 
percent impairment ratings. Dr. Conte provided a five percent rating, based on “gait and 
movement disorders.” (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 24) The problem with Dr. Conte’s rating, however, is 
that it does not appear he was aware of claimant’s hospitalization and subsequent 
treatment for sepsis, which occurred less than two months prior to his examination. 
Nothing in Dr. Jensen’s records attribute claimant’s balance/gait issues to her prior 
COVID-19 infection. Rather, the records suggest that these issues only developed after 
her hospitalization for sepsis, which was related to a kidney infection, not COVID. The 
physical therapy record in evidence states she was there for “significant balance issues 
secondary to sepsis.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 90) Based on the medical evidence as a whole, I find 
that claimant has not proven her gait and balance issues are causally related to the 
work injury. As such, Dr. Conte’s rating based on those issues is not compensable. 
Claimant has not proven entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for consideration is whether claimant sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of her employment. Defendant argues that claimant has not met 
her burden to prove that she contracted COVID-19 at work. Claimant argues that 
defendant is judicially estopped from denying the claim, and in the alternative, that 
claimant has met her burden to prove the injury arose out of and in the course of 
employment. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 17 
 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  
Judicial estoppel prohibits a party from asserting a position or argument contrary 
to a position or argument it has successfully advocated before a court or administrative 
agency in a prior legal proceeding. Winnebago Industries, Inc. v. Haverly, 727 N.W.2d 
567, 573 (Iowa 2006) The main objective of applying judicial estoppel is to protect the 
integrity of the judicial process by preventing deliberately inconsistent and potentially 
misleading assertions from being urged in succeeding tribunals or proceedings. Id. 
Because judicial estoppel is intended to protect the integrity of the fact-finding process 
by administrative agencies and courts, it may properly be raised by courts, even on 
appeal, on their own motion. See Tyson Foods, Inc. v. Hedlund, 740 N.W.2d 192 (Iowa 
2007)   
A fundamental feature of judicial estoppel is the requirement of proof that the 
inconsistent position has been successfully asserted in a prior decision. Wilson v. 
Liberty Mut. Group, 666 N.W.2d 163, 166 (Iowa 2003) (quoting Vennerberg Farms, Inc. 
v. IGF Ins. Co., 405 N.W.2d 810, 814 (Iowa 1987)) In this case, there was a hearing on 
claimant’s petition for alternate medical care on September 13, 2022. Deputy 
Christenson found that defendant had admitted liability for the injury. The decision was 
not appealed, and this became final agency action.  
Where defendants admit liability in an alternate care hearing, thus preserving 
their right to choose the medical care during the pendency of the case, and that 
admission has been accepted by this agency, they are bound by that admission and are 
barred from later changing that position. Winnebago Industries, Inc. v. Haverly, 727 
N.W.2d 567 (Iowa 2006). There is an exception, however, if there is a significant 
change in the facts after the admission of liability. Id. at 575. Such new evidence could 
justify an employer’s change in position. 
Defendant argues that it was not in possession of the June 28, 2022 medical 
record listing claimant’s “known exposures” at the time of the alternate care hearing, 
based on Ms. Dittmer’s testimony. However, according to Lt. Devine, that medical 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 18 
 
record was included in the email claimant sent along with pictures of both her and her 
son’s positive at-home tests. (Tr., p. 99) Additionally, there is no question that medical 
record was available to defendant at any time after claimant filed her workers’ 
compensation claim. Iowa Code section 85.27(2). Based on Lt. Devine’s testimony, the 
June 28, 2022 medical record, which appears to be defendant’s sole basis for the denial 
of liability, was in defendant’s possession prior to the admission of liability during the 
alternate care proceedings. Either way, it was available to defendant through 
investigation of the claim pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. As such, defendant is 
judicially estopped from adopting a position on this issue that is inconsistent with its 
previously adopted position in the earlier administrative proceeding. Winnebago 
Industries, Inc. v. Haverly, 727 N.W. 2d 567 (Iowa 2006). 
Despite finding that defendant is judicially estopped from denying liability on the 
ground that it did not arise out of and in the course of employment, in the alternative, I 
find that claimant did meet her burden to prove causation. Defendant and her husband 
both testified that neither Norm nor their son Joel was diagnosed with COVID until after 
claimant began showing symptoms on June 24, 2022. By the time claimant tested 
positive for COVID on June 28, Norm had begun to show symptoms, which explains the 
statement in the June 28 medical records. It is more unclear exactly when their son Joel 
became ill, but Lt. Devine testified that claimant emailed a picture of her son’s negative 
test from Sunday, which would have been June 26, 2022. The greater weight of 
evidence supports claimant’s position that her injury arose out of and in the course of 
her employment. As such, she has sustained a compensable work injury. 
The next issue to determine is claimant’s entitlement to temporary total disability 
benefits. I found that claimant had not yet reached MMI when Dr. Kruse released her 
from care on August 3, 2022. When claimant saw Dr. Jensen on October 24, 2022, he 
stated she was to return to work on November 2, 2022. However, he left it up to her 
psychiatric provider as to whether her time off work would be extended. There is no 
indication claimant returned to her psychiatric provider, and no evidence she was taken 
off work longer by any medical professional. As such, I found that she reached MMI on 
November 1, 2022, and was released to return to work on November 2, 2022. 
Therefore, claimant is entitled to temporary total disability benefits from June 29, 2022, 
through November 1, 2022, at the stipulated rate of $742.19. 
Defendant has claimed entitlement to a credit against any award of temporary 
benefits, based on sick pay and holiday pay that claimant received during this time. 
(Def. Brief, p. 13) Claimant did not dispute this credit. (See Hearing Report) As such, 
defendant is entitled to a credit against temporary total disability benefits for the sick pay 
and holiday pay claimant received during the period of temporary disability. 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant’s injury caused permanent 
partial disability, and if so, the extent of her entitlement to benefits. Dr. Kruse and Dr. 
Chen both provided zero percent impairment ratings. Dr. Conte provided a five percent 
rating, based on “gait and movement disorders.” (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 24) However, I did not 
find Dr. Conte’s rating reliable, as it does not appear he was aware of claimant’s 
hospitalization and subsequent treatment for sepsis, which occurred less than two 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 19 
 
months prior to his examination. The weight to be given to an expert opinion may be 
affected by the accuracy of the facts the expert relied upon, as well as other 
surrounding circumstances. Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853.  
Nothing in Dr. Jensen’s records attributed claimant’s balance/gait issues to her 
prior COVID-19 infection. Rather, the records suggest that these issues only developed 
after her hospitalization for sepsis, which was related to a kidney infection, not COVID. 
The physical therapy record in evidence states she was there for “significant balance 
issues secondary to sepsis.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 90) Based on the medical evidence as a 
whole, I find that claimant has not proven her gait and balance issues are causally 
related to the work injury. As such, Dr. Conte’s rating based on those issues is not 
compensable. Claimant has not proven entitlement to permanent partial disability 
benefits.  
The next issue involves payment of medical expenses and claimant’s IME. 
Claimant’s exhibit 11 contains the medical expenses for which claimant seeks 
reimbursement. Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for medical bills unless 
claimant shows that they were paid from his or her own funds. See Caylor v. Employers 
Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). Where 
medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did not contribute, the 
claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 
N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the commissioner did not err 
in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical expenses paid through 
insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of any employer 
contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 
2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323.   
Defendant stipulated that the listed expenses were causally connected to the 
medical condition upon which the claim of injury was based. (See Hearing Report). 
Defendant provided no further argument on this issue in its brief. I found that claimant 
proved a compensable injury. Therefore, defendant is liable for the medical expenses 
contained in claimant’s exhibit 11. Defendant shall reimburse claimant for her out-of-
pocket expenses, and is responsible for any remaining balances with the providers or 
liens submitted on behalf of claimant’s health insurance provider. 
With respect to claimant’s IME, defendant argues it is not liable for 
reimbursement of Dr. Conte’s IME because no employer-retained physician gave an 
impairment rating prior to Dr. Conte’s IME. (Def. Brief, p. 18) To the contrary, Dr. Kruse 
provided a zero percent rating on August 3, 2022, and Dr. Chen provided a zero percent 
rating on June 30, 2023. Dr. Conte’s report is dated August 14, 2023, after both of the 
employer-retained physicians issued their zero percent ratings. Therefore, pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39, claimant is entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Conte’s IME in 
the amount of $5,400.00. (Cl. Ex. 12, pp. 35-36) 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 20 
 
The final issue to determine is costs. Assessment of costs is a discretionary 
function of this agency. Iowa Code § 86.40. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion 
of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 
876 IAC 4.33. Given that the IME fee was awarded under section 85.39, the only cost 
claimant seeks for reimbursement is the filing fee, in the amount of $103.00. (Cl. Ex. 12, 
pp. 33-34) Claimant was generally successful in her claim. As such, I use my discretion 
to award claimant costs in the amount of $103.00. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant temporary total disability benefits, at the stipulated 
rate of seven hundred forty-two and 19/100 dollars ($742.19), commencing June 29, 
2022 through November 1, 2022. 
 
 
Defendant shall be entitled to a credit under Iowa Code section 85.38(2) for 
payment of sick pay and holiday pay, as stipulated by the parties. 
 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.  
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s medical bills consistent with this decision. 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s IME bill in the amount of five thousand four 
hundred and 00/100 dollars ($5,400.00). 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred three 
and 00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ____22ND __ day of May, 2024. 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

FORGET V. POLK COUNTY, IA 
Page 21 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
McKayla Augustine (via WCES) 
Meghan Gavin (via WCES) 
Julie Bussanmas (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
